















































Hansard: April 19, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 851 
 April 19, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of residents concerned about the 
abuse and exploitation of children. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Wadena, Kuroki, Quill Lake, and Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning 
on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the exorbitant 
increases to long-term care fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are 
all from the city of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition from citizens of this province that are very 
concerned about the increase in the long-term care services. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed again by constituents of the Deputy 
Premier’s. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding long-term care homes. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 

long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Springside 
and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the increase in fees for long-term care. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on behalf 
of people concerned about the exorbitant increases in long-term 
care fees. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with constituents opposed to possible reduction to services to 
the Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at the current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as lab, public health, home care, 
long-term care services available to the users from the 
Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Craik and Girvin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too this morning 
have a petition in regards to people who are outraged by the 
gouging that the NDP (New Democratic Party) government is 
inflicting upon those that are most vulnerable in our society. 
 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people of Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about exorbitant fee 
increases for long-term care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners are from Yorkton. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition from citizens concerned about the increase in 
long-term care homes. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Yorkton and 
Jedburgh. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are opposing the increases to the 
senior citizens’ fees. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
. . . from residents of Saskatchewan concerned about the crop 
insurance increase premiums and the prayer reads as follows. 

And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take out money out of crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premiums rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is from Luseland and Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Clerk: — The following petitions for private . . . (inaudible) . . . 
are hereby presented by members and laid on the table as 
follows: 
 

By Mr. Peters, of the Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan in the province of Saskatchewan; 
 
By Ms. Jones, of the Sunnyside Nursing Home in the 
province of Saskatchewan; and 
 
By Ms. Hamilton, of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
are hereby read and received as addendums to previously tabled 
petitions of this session being sessional papers no. 18, 22, 24, 
and 31. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my opportunity and pleasure to introduce another group of 
students who have . . . who are visiting the Assembly from the 
constituency of Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
From Biggar Central School we have 27 students in the east 
gallery. They are accompanied by teachers Tanya Roesch and 
Mel Tryhuba; and their chaperones are Karen Itterman, Helen 
Delainey, and Larry Foster. 
 
I’m hoping, as I’m sure all members are hoping, that they will 
enjoy the proceedings this morning. We never know how rowdy 
question period is going to be but we want you to enjoy and 
learn from the proceedings. 
 
I also have the opportunity to meet with the class following 
question period for a photo and also a time to visit and they can 
ask me questions about what occurred. So would all members 
please join me in welcoming the grade 11 students from Biggar 
Central School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I take — I wasn’t sure if you were going to, Mr. Speaker — I 
take great pleasure in introducing to you and through you to 
members of the Legislative Assembly, a number of the 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

 

hard-working staff from the family justice services branch of 
Saskatchewan Justice. 
 
These people work in the maintenance enforcement office. Rod 
Crook is the executive director — where is he, is he there; there 
he is — the executive director of courts and civil justice 
division. Lionel McNab, is the director of family justice 
services branch, which includes maintenance enforcement. I 
think in particular, Mr. Speaker, members will have dealt with 
Mr. McNab on a number of occasions, and he’s always, as you 
know, been most helpful in solving problems faced by those 
who are not being paid by the other parent of their children. 
 
Maintenance enforcement by its very nature generates many 
questions and contact from both payers and custodial parents, 
and the staff provide excellent service to the public as well as 
the offices of members of the legislature and members of 
Parliament. The office guarantees that it will get back to MLAs’ 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) offices within 24 hours, 
Mr. Speaker, which may be better than some of our ministers. 
The majority of the time, an employee of the branch calls back 
within two to four hours. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, please join me in . . . and members also in 
welcoming these hard-working members of the maintenance 
enforcement staff. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join the minister in welcoming those people here this morning. I 
think all of us as MLAs, on many occasions, have people from 
our constituency contact us with concerns and the part that the 
minister mentioned, I think, is very much appreciated and we’re 
very aware that the response is always very quick and very 
efficient. We appreciate the work that you do in this province 
for all those people that need that support. And welcome to the 
House this morning. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, three guests that are sitting in the west gallery. David 
Acoose and Lorna Standingready, who are constituents of mine 
and on top of that, Mr. Speaker, they’re also very good friends. 
And accompanying them today is their daughter Donna. 
 
So I’d ask all the members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce to the House two constituents of mine 
that are from the town of Craik. They’re sitting in your 
Speaker’s gallery, Kim Ehman and Nora Bakken. 
 
Kim has started a very important project dealing with bullying 
in schools and workplaces which I’m going to elaborate a little 
more in my member’s statement. And Nora is here giving her 
support today. And I would just like to welcome them here and 

I hope the members will join me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Women of Distinction 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
night, the Minister Responsible for the Status of Women, the 
member for Saskatoon Idylwyld, joined me and several hundred 
others at the 21st annual YWCA (Young Women’s Christian 
Association) Women of Distinction Awards banquet at the 
Centennial Auditorium in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this event is twofold. First, it raises 
money to support the Y’s crisis housing. And last night, the 
shelter received $35,000 for this crucial work. Second, the 
evening is dedicated to recognizing and celebrating the 
accomplishments of outstanding women in Saskatoon. 
 
Thirty remarkable women were nominated and 12 were named 
women of distinction in their field. The recipients: for lifetime 
achievement, Joan Lidington; the young woman to watch, 
Tannis Hancock whose story deserves a statement by itself. In 
science and technology and the environment, both Marie Ann 
Bowden and Petea Bonham-Smith received recognition. For her 
work in health, well-being, and spirituality, the award went to 
Dr. Esther Stenberg. In education, Eunice Begg; for culture and 
heritage, Eleanor Shia; for social activism, Joan Beatty; the 
woman entrepreneur, Carol Shirley; sports and fitness, Joan 
Germain; arts, Marilyn Whitehead; and the women in the 
professions, Karen Heise. 
 
Our congratulations to all nominees and recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night, my 
wife Gail and I also attended the annual Women of Distinction 
Awards dinner in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this annual awards 
dinner and ceremony honours those women who have gone 
above and beyond in their efforts to make their communities 
better places to live and to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but notice that there was a hint of 
sadness at the awards ceremony last night as all those attending 
were deeply concerned about the future of the YWCA shelter 
for women and children which has been threatened with closure 
because of the NDP government’s reluctance to continue their 
share of its funding for the shelter. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce the winners from last 
night’s awards: for arts, Marilyn Whitehead; for community 
development and social activism, Joan Beatty; for culture and 
heritage, Eleanor Shia; for education and lifelong learning, 
Eunice Begg; for entrepreneur, Carol Shirley; for health, 
well-being, and spirituality, Dr. Esther Stenberg; for lifetime 
achievement and working with the elderly, Joan Lidington; for 
science, technology, and environment, Marie Ann Bowden and 
Petea Bonham-Smith were each honoured in this category; and 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

for sports and fitness, Joan Germain; for women in the 
professions, Karen Heise. And because we believe in growing 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a category that is one of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s personal favourites, young woman to 
watch, which was won by Tannis Hancock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of House to congratulate this 
very special group of Women of Distinction. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Circle Project Children’s Centre Grand Opening 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have the privilege and the honour of being present 
and participating in the grand opening of the Circle Project’s 
Children’s Centre. Centres of this natures are a reflection of a 
community coming together to create an environment that is 
healthy and safe for all of its members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a high percentage of children attending the centre 
are from low-income, transient, single-parent families. A 
whopping 75 per cent of these are involved in employment 
related, educational, or special assessed needs activities. 
 
Responding to this situation in 1997, the Department of Social 
Services partnered with the Circle Project’s Child Care Centre 
to provide child care services to families in transition and 
agreed to block fund the centre $3,700 per month to provide a 
minimum of 10 child care spaces. In 2001, this was increased to 
$4,100. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the centre has begun to plan for a further increase 
of 65 licensed spaces and is presently on a waiting list for 
additional funding for this extension of services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 23 community members and agencies have 
pledged their support through funding and voluntary activities 
to bring the Circle Project’s Children’s Centre to where it is 
today, and there’s a great list of the funders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll skip to the point that the centre itself is a beautiful 
structure, the first commercial straw built building in Western 
Canada, and no amount of huffing and puffing is going to blow 
it down. I know this to be so because I was just one of the 
legion of volunteers that helped to put up the walls. 
 
A special congratulations to the board of directors; president, 
Bob Cantin; to the executive director, Anne Perry; and all the 
many supporters of the Circle Project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Annual Fundraiser 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Wednesday night a great event took place in the city of 
Weyburn. This great event was our annual fundraiser for the 
Saskatchewan Party. We had a sell-out crowd of enthusiastic 
supporters. What was really good was that we even had to set 
up more tables. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in Weyburn-Big Muddy are desperately 

seeking a change in government and are eager and willing to get 
involved to make this change happen. 
 
Many of the people attending were astounded and dismayed at 
the lack of care, concern, and compassion being shown to the 
pioneers of this province by the NDP’s decision to increase the 
fees for long-term care. For many this is the last straw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most commonly asked question this evening 
was, when is the next election? Mr. Speaker, people want to be 
involved and to have the opportunity to elect the Saskatchewan 
Party in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy and across 
the province because they want a party that has a plan for this 
province and a party that cares for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Receives Donation 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Dennis 
Dunlop, CTV’s (Canadian Television Network Limited) general 
manager for Saskatchewan presented a donation, a cheque of 
$180,000 to Peter MacKinnon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Would the member start over again, please. Order, please. 
Would the member start over, please. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dennis Dunlop, 
CTV’s general manager for Saskatchewan, presented a 
donation, a cheque of $180,000 to Peter MacKinnon, president 
of the University of Saskatchewan, for the construction of a 
high-tech computer research laboratory. 
 
CTV’s donation will make a substantial contribution towards 
the infrastructure for the mobile computing laboratory. Once 
completed, graduate students and faculty researchers in 
computer science will have opportunities to advance the 
knowledge about wireless access to computers and other smart 
devices. This will lead to the creation of the next generation of 
computer applications which will support the nomadic uses of 
the future . . . users of the future. 
 

The computing environments of the future will spread 
everywhere: not only in desktop computers and lap-tops, 
but also on palm-tops, cell phones and other personal 
computing and communication devices, 

 
explained Jim Greer, head of the computer science department. 
Greer further stated: 
 

People will interact with these mobile devices in all 
imaginable contexts: in vehicles, in meetings, on public 
transport, while shopping, relaxing, eating, cooking and so 
on. CTV’s donation represents the first step towards 
realising these possibilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is great news for the future and something that 
I’m proud to raise in this House today because it demonstrates 
once again that Saskatchewan is succeeding. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

 

Kim Ehman Produces Films on Bullying 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly rise in the 
House today to talk about a remarkable constituent of mine, 
Mrs. Kim Ehman from Craik. This lady has now written, 
directed, and produced two educational films about the effects 
of bullying in our schools and workplaces. 
 
Kim’s recently completed second film, entitled Seven Scenes, 
shows students at the Craik School acting out a variety of 
bullying behaviours. Each scene includes both the negative and 
positive encounter with pauses between allowing Mrs. Ehman 
to talk with her students about what they have seen. Her aim is 
for kids and adults to treat each other with respect and kindness. 
 
She believes the film will help victims of bullies cope better in 
real-life situations. Kim says, hopefully it affects people to 
consciously change and do the right thing instead of going 
along with the group; I teach them to think with their heart, not 
with their head. 
 
Mrs. Ehman has received a lot of positive feedback for efforts 
to stop school bullying through a positive educational 
experience with students. Her involvement in this project is 
complete from front to back including her own financing of 
these projects with absolutely no funding from any group or 
government. 
 
Even more remarkable is her ability to complete and conduct 
this project as well as maintain her work as a dental assistant, a 
CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) instructor, and mother of 
four children. 
 
Clearly this is a person who is doing all she can to curb a 
growing social problem. We can all learn by her example. On 
April 29, Mrs. Ehman will be holding a presentation including 
her latest film at the Davidson High School in Davidson. She’s 
also . . . did many presentations throughout Regina here and 
different schools throughout the province too numerous to 
mention right now. 
 
I would ask . . . I would now ask that all members of the 
Assembly join me in congratulating Mrs. Kim Ehman. Thank 
you, Kim, for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Best Wishes for Author Seymour Lipset 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
more than 50 years ago Professor Seymour Lipset, then of 
Columbia University in New York City, published what was 
then the first objective, thorough academic study of the Douglas 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government — 
the government that was, as the book jacket said, the only 
government with avowed socialist goals to have come to power 
in Canada or the United States. 
 
This book, Mr. Speaker, is called Agrarian Socialism and in 
fact is also the best history of the province still available. The 
book was revised and updated in 1968. 
 
And I mention, Mr. Speaker, Professor Lipset’s book for two 

reasons. One, although the book is a fine work of objective 
scholarship, but is a sympathetic study of the aims of the CCF 
and indeed, Mr. Speaker, the aims of farmers in Saskatchewan. 
He dedicated this book to his father who said . . . and it says 
that he had the same dreams as the farmers of Saskatchewan — 
that is, Mr. Speaker, dreams of an egalitarian, co-operative, 
compassionate society. 
 
It was a book that called attention . . . called the attention of the 
observant North American public to this small pocket of the 
continent we still like to call Canada’s social laboratory. And 
considering the fact that several million Americans today have 
no health insurance, Mr. Speaker, it might be a good idea if a 
new Mr. Lipset came to make a return visit. 
 
But primarily, Mr. Speaker, I raise this issue because I hear 
from an old friend and current colleague of Professor Lipset’s 
that he’s not well and wishes to be remembered to the province 
which, in a way, he presented to the rest of the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read this book when I first came to the province 
and it enlightened me then; it’s relevant today. It remains the 
book that best explains the province to ourselves and to the 
world. I know he’s very proud of his Saskatchewan connection, 
Mr. Speaker. We are proud of our connection to him and I ask 
all members to join me in passing on our thanks and our 
thoughts to Dr. Lipset and his family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Long-term Care Rates 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party provided a number of real 
live examples of how the NDP’s increase in long-term care 
rates were hurting Saskatchewan seniors. Many will be left with 
not enough income to cover basic necessities of life, like 
prescription drugs and clothing. Many still have spouses in their 
own homes who will be left without enough income to look 
after their personal expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not wealthy people and the NDP is 
taking away virtually every dollar in income that they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has had another day to think about 
this very bad decision that they’ve made. Will you do the right 
thing, Mr. Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member place his question 
once again so it can go on record and speak through the 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask the Premier if he would consider restating the fees at 
the rate that they were before? Will the Premier consider 
cancelling this exorbitant fee that he’s imposing on 
Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s unfortunate 
that the member opposite once again whips up concerns of 
people. What I ask that people do if they’re in the situation 
where they’re involved in having one member of their family 
involved in long-term care, they should phone the number at the 
Department of Health to get the explanation of how this works. 
 
We have it set up in a way that deals with the issues that the 
member raises opposite. What I would say is that in this budget 
we have increased the long-term care portion by $10 million to 
$337 million. I ask the member opposite, what is your plan? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the Minister of Health 
restate that last sentence, speaking through the Speaker so it can 
go on the record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member 
opposite, what is the plan of the Saskatchewan Party as it deals 
with long-term care because there are choices to be made? 
 
In the budget that we have for Health, which this year was 
increased by $129 million, we’ve had to make some choices. 
And what I would say to that member opposite: what kind of 
choices would you make? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let it go on the 
record that the Saskatchewan Party would roll back the fee to 
today’s fees. We would not increase fees. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read another letter 
from a senior in Estevan: 
 

My husband has been in long . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a letter from 
another senior in Estevan: 
 

My husband has been in long-term care for almost four 
years. He suffers from Alzheimer’s disease. I cared for him 
at home as long as I possibly could. When he could no 
longer walk, there was no choice. I was forced to find a 
place for him in a nursing home. No landlord would be 
allowed to raise his rent by 100 per cent as this latest 
budget has done. Is it because those residents are 
defenceless and too weak and ill to take a stand against this 
outrage? No doubt that is why the government feels it can 
act in this shameless way. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit he has made a mistake? 
Will the Premier stand in this House today and stop this attack 
on Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is well 
known as the dairy queen of privatization. And we do not 
believe in privatization on this side of the House. And so what I 

would say to that member is, do we re-examine our budgets in 
this particular year so that we look at . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our plan is to 
continue with subsidizing almost three-quarters of the cost of all 
long-term care in this province. That costs $337 million. The 
average cost this year is about $50,000. 
 
What we have done in this budget is we have asked some of the 
people who have a little more income to contribute more 
towards this particular cost in our system. Because when we 
look at the whole of our health system, we need the dollars in 
some other places, and that’s what we have to do. So what we 
are doing here as government is making choices and making 
very careful choices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s pretty obvious . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member will start 
over. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s pretty obvious that the government is running out of ideas 
and a pretty tired government when they start taking an attack 
like they have on the seniors of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read another letter from a Saskatchewan 
senior. And I quote: 
 

In attacking this segment of the population the government 
is targeting a group of people who is incapable of fighting 
back. Being elderly, sick, and in many cases out of the 
mainstream, they become an easy target for grasping 
politicians to balance their budgets. 
 
Most of these people have worked hard, saved their money 
to provide independence in their old age, and hope to pass 
on a few dollars to their families or their favourite charities. 
These new fees will destroy these dreams of a lifetime. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is this really what the NDP wants, to destroy the 
dreams of a lifetime? Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit that 
he made a mistake? Will the Premier cancel this attack on 
Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are in 
favour of tax cuts and today they’re talking about let’s increase 
the costs. Now are they talking about increasing the costs right 
up to 100 per cent subsidy in this area? Because what we have 
done is we have protected the low-income people, the people 
that can’t afford the long-term care. 
 
We’ve asked those people who can afford to pay some of the 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

 

cost to pay a portion of it. We didn’t ask them to pay 100 per 
cent of the cost, we asked them to pay a portion of it. And even 
at the top end those people are receiving a subsidy for this 
particular service. 
 
And I guess what I would ask the members opposite, what is the 
plan that they have so that we can tell the people of 
Saskatchewan? My understanding is that they are strongly 
emphasizing privatization of our health care system so that the 
more dollars you have the faster you get to these services and 
the faster you get into some of our hospitals and other places. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, here’s another letter from a 
Saskatchewan senior. And I quote: 
 

October 1, 2002 could spell doomsday for the seniors of 
our province. That’s the day the government plans to 
increase the fees of residents in long-term care up to 148 
per cent. I am talking about our spouses, our parents, and 
our grandparents who have been the backbone of 
Saskatchewan and who, in most cases, cannot speak out for 
themselves. 
 
It’s a sad day when the people being affected are the people 
at the stage of their life where they have the least ability to 
fight it, or even understand the proposed changes. (This 
government who professes to care for the elderly) . . . Is 
this a government who professes to care for the elderly? I 
don’t think so. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if this government that professes to care for the 
elderly . . . why are they taking virtually every cent — last cent 
— of these people’s income, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the 
members opposite table copies of every letter that they’ve read 
yesterday and today so that I can arrange for the officials in the 
Department of Health to provide the proper information to all of 
these people so that they understand how the system works. 
Because I’m getting the distinct impression . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m getting the distinct 
impression that people are being misled as to how the system 
works and that is exactly the thing we don’t want to happen. 
 
We want people to understand that we have a system that will 
provide for them in their old age and in other times when 
they’re in need and we will only ask them to contribute if they 
can afford to contribute. We won’t push them for their income 
as a part of what we need except in those situations where they 
can afford it; and we need to have the information and the 
names of all those people. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you direct them to file these 
letters so I can see them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not 
only am I and my colleagues receiving letters, faxes, e-mails 
and phone calls from seniors and their children, but we’re 
getting the copies of the same letters that are being sent to the 
Premier and his colleagues — many, many letters. I’ve 
responded to some this morning. 
 
Seniors and their children are concerned that they’re not going 
to be able to make ends meet when the increased long-term care 
fees take effect in October. They’re not going to have enough 
money to live on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll tone down the rhetoric and we’ll just ask the 
Premier. Will he recognize that it is more noble to admit that 
he’s made a mistake and to fix it, than to stand by something 
that is going to be an attack on seniors throughout the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Will the Premier stand in the House today, do the right thing, 
and repeal the increase that he is calling for, for long-term care 
on October 1 of this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the course of this debate 
and discussion around the long-term care fees, it is my 
observation that members of the opposition have provided 
inaccurate information in this House and, I fear, inaccurate 
information to seniors across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the context of this debate, the members of the 
opposition have not yet declared their own position around the 
subsidization of long-term care. It is clear in what the Minister 
of Health has shared with this House that this government is 
committed to subsidizing the support of long-term care for our 
seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time, it is time that the party opposite came 
clean on this. Are they going, in their platform and policies 
around health, to continue the subsidization of long-term care 
for Saskatchewan seniors? Or are they going to take the 
approach, which is recommended by a number of their 
members quite publicly, to move to a privatized health care 
system. 
 
It is time, Mr. Speaker, for that opposition to stop misleading 
people of Saskatchewan and state their policy clearly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
should there be any doubt in the Premier’s mind, the 
Saskatchewan Party is committed to rolling back any long-term 
fee increases that his government would impose upon the 
seniors of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, make no doubt about it — the Saskatchewan Party 
respects seniors. We care about them. We would not impose a 
fee that would take 90 per cent of every dollar they earned to 
pay for their long-term care, leaving them no money 
whatsoever for food and for medication, making demands on 
their children that are absolutely unfair and wrong. 
 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, our position is public and we stand by it. That is 
the position of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I ask the Premier once again, will he be noble, will he do the 
right thing and announce that he is repealing the proposed rate 
hikes for long-term care set to go into effect on October 1? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . I ask the Leader of the Opposition if 
he for once would do the right thing. Standing in this 
legislature, as other members have, suggesting that seniors are 
going to be left without food in this province is absolutely 
ridiculous. It’s absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today he stands, today he stands and he said he 
would roll back any proposed increase that would affect the 
more wealthy of our seniors who are in long-term care. Well, 
fair enough, fair enough. 
 
Now that’s an interesting position for the Leader of the 
Opposition to take, when he went around the province in the 
last election saying he was going to freeze funding to health 
care. That’s what he said in the last election. 
 
Now what would that have meant, Mr. Speaker? Well in 1999 
the budget of the Department of Health, if I recall, was $1.6 
billion — $1.6 billion. In this budget, Mr. Speaker, the budget 
for the Department of Health is $2.3 billion, including a $10 
million increase to long-term care. 
 
I ask the Leader of the Opposition, through you, Mr. Speaker, to 
come clean. How is it he can go around the province talking 
about freezing the funding to health care, talk about 
privatization of health care, talk about tax cuts, and yet commit 
now to spend more? How can that be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in Australia 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the same NDP government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, 
order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this same NDP government and this 
same Premier that just pled poverty to the point where they 
have to attack seniors to save $7 million on a $6 billion budget, 
that same Premier is currently involved — that same party is 
currently involved — in a $40 million stock market play in 
Australia with taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporation, and it’s about this $40 million stock 
market play on the Australian stock market in a company called 
Austar Communications. Will the minister tell the House: 
how’s that investment going? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few 
comments to make with respect to the member opposite, the 
member from Swift Current, and his daily attack on the Crown 
corporations, the operations of those Crowns, the people who 
work within those Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what that member is attempting to do is discredit the 
operations of those Crowns and the people who run them, who 
manage them and make the profits that were returned to the 
General Revenue Fund to provide for health care and for 
education and for highways. 
 
And we know where he’s headed, Mr. Speaker. And we know 
why he’s making this daily attack in this legislature. It’s 
because they want a position that, God forbid they ever become 
government, that they could liquidate those assets to pay for all 
the goofy promises that are made by members of that 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken a position that we are going to use 
these Crowns to support this province, the people of this 
province, and the programs that are delivered through the 
money that comes as a result of those operations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
One of SaskTel’s biggest investment gambles is in a company 
called Austar Communications. Austar is a regional 
telecommunications company that trades on the Australian 
stock market. SaskTel swapped its $40 million investment in a 
New Zealand telecommunications company for shares in Austar 
Communications in 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible for SaskTel inform 
the legislature, how much money did Austar Communications 
make last year? How’s that investment going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a forum, and 
it’s called the Crown Corporations Committee, where all of the 
investments of the Crowns become a matter of discussion and 
public scrutiny, and that’s appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday and the day before, this member trotted 
out an issue with respect to an investment made by SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and I want to speak to 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He attacked the president of SGI, who is a well-known public 
servant who has served this province very well, Mr. Speaker, 
and chastising that president of that corporation, and that 
corporation, for not bringing to his personal attention a 
transaction, one of 5,700 that that corporation made in the year 
2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that investment was part of a $9.5 billion worth of 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

 

transactions that, by the way, in that fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, 
netted for that corporation, to provide services for this province, 
$30 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know why that minister, the 
House Leader, is standing up and not letting the minister 
responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) answer. The reason is, is because the news is 
terrible. For a government that says it needs to gouge seniors 
and the sick for $7 million, the news is very bad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP acquired 13 million shares in Austar, Mr. Speaker. 
They were worth $4.60 a share; today they’re trading for 17 
cents, Mr. Speaker. And the taxpayers of this province, thanks 
to that minister and the minister responsible for CIC and the 
NDP, have lost today, realized a loss of $6 million. 
 
The question to the Premier is this: where is this government’s 
priorities? How can they possibly justify gambling and losing 
millions of dollars on the Australian stock market and then 
coming back to Saskatchewan and picking the pockets of the 
sick and the elderly, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, as I was 
saying, obviously, Mr. Speaker, again, the expert over there is 
absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The facts are this, Mr. Speaker. That investment did not lose 
one single penny, Mr. Speaker. Through the prudent investment 
of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, what they did is they sold shares 
enough to recover on their investment, Mr. Speaker, and if they 
sell one more share, it’s profit for the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker — profit. Something those people do not 
understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order. 
 

Utilization of MRIs 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I understand why the government 
is not anxious to take my question. 
 
They have paid $7 million to buy MRIs (magnetic resonance 
imaging). But those test . . . those machines stand idle most of 
the week. They only operate one-third of the time. Meanwhile 
patients like Susan Schmidt are put on 12-month waiting lists. 
And if they go out of the province to get an immediate MRI, 
they’re on their own in terms of paying. 
 
Why can the government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Why can the government not have the MRIs 
operating more of the time? 
 

They recently got $30 million from the federal government for 
the purchase of new high-tech medical equipment. The minister 
used the money to buy beds. Now he wants to gouge nursing 
home residents who have spent a lifetime paying taxes so 
they’d be cared for in their old age. 
 
What hope can the minister give patients today that they won’t 
be caught in the same trap as Susan Schmidt? Does he have a 
secret agenda to force all patients to pay for their own service as 
the only way they will get care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are appreciative of the 
federal government money for medical equipment over the last 
two years. There’s no money available this year. 
 
But one of the concerns that we have is that the federal 
government has not participated — those Liberals that that 
member sticks with — have not funded up to the promise that 
they made back in 1966 and subsequently. So the money that 
we spent was spent on those things which the professionals in 
the field across the province identified as priority needs. 
 
And the beds are beds that are extremely important for the 
nursing staff and others. It saves work. The majority of the 
money was spent on very important radiological equipment 
which serves the province of the province . . . or the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
spent $7 million on MRI machines. They operate a third of the 
time. People are put on 12-month waiting lists to get an MRI. 
They leave the province, they pay a thousand bucks to get an 
MRI. They get a bad diagnosis. The Minister of Health tells 
them: you’re on your own, I’m not going to help you. 
 
Why can’t we have the MRI machines operating more than a 
third of the time? Why are patients having to pay for their own 
MRIs out of the province? This is two-tier medicine at its worst. 
This is a diabolical Catch-22. Will the minister get this system 
operating right? Will the MRIs operate more than a third of the 
time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I assume the member 
opposite is referring to the fact that they operate during the 
daytime and not during the evening and not during the night. So 
he’s talking about a 24-hour day. 
 
So practically those MRIs are working to their capacity with the 
staff complement that we have. We are recruiting more people 
to work in that particular area. And we also recognize that the 
professional people who are involved in using the MRI as a 
diagnostic tool want to make sure that it’s used for that purpose 
and not for people who end up needing it for self-diagnosis or 
other kinds of things. We are working together with the 
professional people to make sure that these things are used to 
their full capacity. 
 
I ask that member to use whatever influence, however small it 
is, to work with the federal Liberals and get them back on track 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

through the Romanow Commission, through whatever way, so 
that they can participate as a Liberal government in providing 
funding for all Canadians so that we can have the best health 
system in the world for all Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Why is the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
have a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Would the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast state her point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, while the Minister of Health 
was responding to a question from the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, I very clearly heard the member for 
Estevan call the Minister of Health Dr. Kevorkian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me there is a certain level of civil 
discourse to be expected in this House even during heckling. 
Mr. Speaker, although the member did not say it from her feet, I 
would ask you to rule it out of order and request an apology 
from the member. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there has been, for a number of days, a considerable amount of 
hollering back and forth on the floor. 
 
I sit two chairs away from the member from Estevan and did 
not hear those words used, although I have heard Dr. 
Kevorkian’s name taken in this House a number of times on 
both sides of the House. 
 
Part of the discussion back and forth and hollering, Mr. 
Speaker, is at times done non-verbally by the member actually 
from Saskatoon Southeast using . . . flipping the bird to 
members on this side of the House which is also, Mr. Speaker, 
not exactly parliamentary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the exuberance of the moments a number of 
things are said, but I did not hear the words, Dr. Kevorkian, 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly. Members of the 
Assembly ought to be advised that it’s impossible for a Speaker 
to make a ruling on something that will not go on the record in 
this House. 
 
Nevertheless the fact that the member raised the issue itself, 
brings to mind that there are occasionally comments that are 
made across the Chamber that are perhaps unparliamentary and 
ought after, on second thought, not to have been said. 
 
So I would just like to leave that with the members — that 
thought that they really ought to be quite respectful of the 
concept that they’ve been elected here as hon. members, and 
that our behaviour and our speech in this House should reflect 
that. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Enforcement of Canadian 
Judgments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution 

des jugements canadiens 
 

The Speaker: — Just before I recognize the minister, I would 
just ask everybody to come to order. Order, please. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Enforcement of 
Canadian Judgments Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly will recall that in 1997 
this Assembly passed The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Act to provide for the regularization of enforcement of money 
judgments between provinces and territories in Canada. 
 
Since that time a number of other provinces have passed similar 
legislation — Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick, 
Newfoundland and Labrador, British Columbia, and Nova 
Scotia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this Bill was introduced into this Assembly, 
the Uniform Law Conference of Canada has made further 
advances in this area to extend uniform legislation to address 
non-money judgments as well. 
 
The existing Saskatchewan Act does not address the issue of 
non-money judgments, but rather than making several 
amendments to the existing Act to add non-money judgment 
provisions, it’s simpler to repeal the existing Act and replace it 
with a new Bill that combines both money and non-money 
judgments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I refer to non-money judgments, this is 
meant to include judicial orders such as injunctions and specific 
performance that are made by courts of another province. It will 
also include orders that operate to define certain rights and 
relationships such as adult guardianship orders or orders that are 
purely declaratory in nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of this House will be particularly 
interested to learn these changes will also provide a method of 
increasing enforceability of restraining orders among provinces 
and territories. A national family law committee has indicated 
its support for this initiative, as interprovincial enforcement of 
restraining orders has been a chronic problem in family law 
matters. The practical burden of requiring parties to re-litigate a 
matter to seek the same type of restraining order when one party 
or the other moves to another province is often so large as to 
defeat legitimate enforcement efforts. 
 
I’d note, Mr. Speaker, that the Act will not apply to judicial 
orders that are already the subject of enforcement procedures 
between provinces and territories, such as maintenance orders 
or foreign probate orders or fines or penalties under provincial 
criminal legislation. 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

 

It’s also important to note that the definition of judgment under 
the new Act will not include orders of administering tribunals 
with respect to non-monetary relief. The only non-monetary 
judgments that will be enforced will be orders made by courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the central purpose of this enhanced Bill is to 
avoid a need for disputes to be re-litigated in their entirety in 
order to be enforced between provincial and territorial 
jurisdictions in Canada. With these amendments in place, it’s 
this government’s intention to proceed with proclamation of 
this Bill in the fall of this year, once the appropriate rule 
changes to the Court of Queen’s Bench have been made by that 
court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to move second reading of An 
Act respecting The Enforcement and Registration of Canadian 
Judgments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 26, The Act — let me just turn this over here — respecting 
the Enforcement and Registration of Canadian Judgments, Mr. 
Speaker, is an Act that, after listening to the minister and having 
our Justice critic look at it, looks like it makes very good sense. 
It’s a Bill that talks about money, non-money disclosure, and so 
it’s . . . it just deals a lot, as the minister said, with maintenance, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think as we go through the Bill . . . we’ve sent it out to a 
number of . . . a couple of people that we thought would be of 
interest . . . it of interest to. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re still 
waiting to hear from their response. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate until 
we hear the response from the people that we’ve sent it out to, 
but on surface, it looks like a real good Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(11:00) 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
When maintenance enforcement opened in 1986, it was 
estimated that 85 per cent of custodial parents were not 
receiving regular maintenance payments. Maintenance 
enforcement now collects money on close to 80 per cent of the 
10,000 files registered with their office. 
 
During the first five years of operation, between 1986 and 1991, 
maintenance enforcement collected $10 million. In the fiscal 
year ended March 31, 2002, Mr. Speaker, the office collected 
over $30 million or over $2.5 million per month for the 
residents of this province. 
 
The federal government recently did a survey of all Canadian 

maintenance enforcement programs. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
understanding that this survey, which will be released this 
summer, shows that Saskatchewan has the very best collection 
of any province or jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill makes a number of changes to assist the 
maintenance enforcement office in carrying out its mandate. A 
new remedy that this Bill provides to the director will apply to 
respondents who attempt to evade their responsibilities by 
funnelling income through a corporation. 
 
The amendments we are proposing today will allow the director 
to enforce the maintenance order against that corporation where 
the respondent is its sole shareholder. 
 
If the respondent owns that corporation with other family 
members, but the court finds that the respondent controls the 
corporation, again, the maintenance order can be enforced 
against the corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also makes enhancements to a remedy 
that was added to this Act in 1996 — driver’s licence 
withholding. The Act currently requires the maintenance 
enforcement office to serve the respondent with two notices of 
its intention to suspend the respondent’s driver’s licence. 
 
Since 1996, maintenance enforcement has issued 3,966 first 
notices or warnings and 2,515 final notices and has suspended 
1,861 driver’s licences from non-payers, mainly self-employed 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, driver’s licence withholding has been 
tremendously successful. The amendments we’re proposing 
today will remove the requirement for serving a second notice 
by personal service and allow the director to direct SGI to 
suspend a respondent’s driver’s licence or withhold it from 
renewal after 30 days notice is served on the respondent by 
ordinary mail or any other prescribed means. 
 
The proposed amendments also provide other minor 
enhancements to the Act by authorizing the director to enforce 
maintenance agreements that are filed directly with the office, 
allowing the director to demand and the court to order the 
disclosure of information respecting the status of the dependent, 
the relationship of the respondent to any person or corporation, 
and identifying information including a photograph. 
 
Also streamlining the process for out-of-province garnishments, 
allowing garnishments to be served on the respondent by 
ordinary mail, and on the garnishee by fax, or on either by other 
. . . done by any other prescribed means. 
 
The amendments also respond to issues raised by respondents 
and their employers by allowing the respondent to apply to the 
court to revoke or change a continuing garnishment where the 
order on which it is based is decreased by the court, but the 
claimant refuses to serve an amended garnishment to reflect the 
correct amount payable. And ensuring that garnishees who 
voluntarily comply with the garnishment are not at risk of 
having to pay that money again to the respondent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to recognize the work of the 
maintenance enforcement office, many of whose members are 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

here today. And I am pleased to move second reading of an Act 
to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
enforcement of maintenance orders has been a problem for a 
long period of time. In particular it’s been a problem with 
out-of-province respondents to this issue — either people from 
out-of-province coming into Saskatchewan or people from 
Saskatchewan going out of province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there needs to be a solution for that. And I know 
that across Canada solutions are being worked on, and in part it 
is being successful. But only in part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deal . . . the idea of making corporations 
responsible though needs to be dealt with very carefully. When 
a sole individual is the complete owner of a business, then 
perhaps it is clear as to whether or not the person involved is 
trying to avoid responsibility for making their payments by not 
bringing into their own personal direct benefit salary or assets 
that could be garnisheed and leaving those sitting with the 
corporation. 
 
However, in cases where there are multiple owners of a 
corporation, I think we need to be very careful in that area in 
bringing forward this kind of legislation to ensure that the civil 
rights and privacy of the other shareholders are dealt with 
properly and are recognized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this particular case, the Bill deals with some very complex 
matters and needs some time to be reviewed to make sure that it 
is being dealt with properly. 
 
Also the idea of garnishees, Mr. Speaker, being done through 
fax or other electronic means. I wonder, how does this comply 
with the Acts that we have currently before the House dealing 
with the transfer of electronic information and commerce? 
 
Are these two particular Acts going to be compatible when 
we’re assuming that the person at the other end under these 
Acts has received this information and has accepted it? How do 
we know, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So does this Act and the new Act that is before the House . . . 
are they in agreement? Do they work together or is there a 
conflict there, Mr. Speaker? Again that’s something that needs 
to be looked at. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time, to give the interested parties an 
opportunity to review the legislation and understand, in light of 
the minister’s comments today, what the implications are, I 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 

Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Health to introduce his 
officials and, if he wishes, make a brief statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am very pleased 
to have with me today a number of people and I will introduce 
them: the deputy minister, Glenda Yeates; and Dan Florizone 
behind her, and then Rod Wiley behind her. 
 
Dan Florizone is assistant deputy minister working with the 
health districts and the new regional health authorities. Rod 
Wiley, at the back, is the executive director of finance and 
management services. 
 
To Dan Florizone’s left is Bert Linklater, and he’s executive 
director of district management services. And right behind me, I 
have Mick Grainger, who’s assistant deputy minister primarily 
involved with the human resources and various labour issues. 
 
And to my right, I have Lawrence Krahn, assistant deputy 
minister as it relates to many areas, but medical services and 
things like that. And then behind him, I have Roger Carriere, 
who’s the assistant executive director for community care. 
 
In the back, I have John Paul Cullen, who’s assistant to the 
deputy minister; George Peters, executive director of population 
health; and Lauren Donnelly, who’s the executive director of 
acute and emergency care. And I think that’s the whole crew. 
 
And I will . . . What I would say is that this has been a 
tremendous year of hard work for the Department of Health and 
all of the civil servants who have been part of our development 
of the action plan after we received Mr. Fyke’s report about a 
year ago. And I think the simple thing I would want to say is 
thank you — thank you on behalf of all of the people of 
Saskatchewan. You’ve done a very good job. And we have 
many more things to do. And I know that all of the people of 
Saskatchewan will work together with us as we implement the 
action plan for Saskatchewan Health. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and minister, particularly I would like to as 
well join with you in welcoming the Department of Health 
officials, deputy minister and associate deputy ministers, and all 
and sundry other individuals of different positions. 
 
I would first of all, minister, thank you for providing me with a 
flow chart. I would ask if I could have a new one because by the 
time it went through a couple of fax machines it’s almost 
illegible, but that’s no hurry. I mean thank you very much. I do 
appreciate that it was faxed over. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before we begin, this is a new 
session of the legislature and this is the first time that we’ve had 
to begin Health estimates. And I think the minister and the 
officials know that we certainly spend a fair amount of time on 
Health estimates. The whole expenditures of the Department of 
Health are very significant and I think it's incumbent on us to 
make sure that we review and discuss the issues and priorities in 
a very thorough way. And I know the minister concurs with that 
general theme. 
 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

 

As well I would like to talk in very general terms to start things 
off, if you like, and then talk about some specifics and we’ll 
work our way through the days and weeks ahead and more and 
more specifics. And I hope that that goes well for all of us as we 
try to understand not only ourselves what is going on, but I 
think we have an obligation to the greater public that watch this 
and follow it in Hansard. So that questions sometimes may be 
pretty obvious to ourselves who are pretty intimately linked to 
the health care system but quite often the people out there who 
are also interested in what’s happening in the health care field 
are most interested in the questions and the responses to them. 
So I wanted to set the stage a little bit, if I could, in that 
direction. 
 
I too would like to recognize and acknowledge the work that 
has gone on the health field and certainly specifically the 
Department of Health, but also to all agencies and organizations 
in health care not only in Saskatchewan but across Canada right 
now. It’s a time of tremendous change, tremendous discussion 
about the issues that are surrounding health. And I think that it 
would be fair to say right across this country the whole issue of 
health care not only is the most significant issue that citizens 
indicate in polling as the primary issue, but I think the whole 
health care system recognizes that the time has come for some 
honest discussion and debate and consideration of all of the 
challenges and issues facing health care right across this 
country. 
 
And I know members opposite in the government as well as 
ourselves over here in opposition are most interested in 
following the work that Mr. Romanow is doing in the national 
health care commission. And I think that perhaps that this may 
have some pretty fundamental ramifications for how we deliver 
the public health care system in Canada. And we look forward 
to not only his report but also I believe that the fifth of the six 
Senate reports are out and those as well issue some real 
challenge and thought-provoking direction that I think is 
important. 
 
Mr. Minister, first of all, I have sort of a routine question that I 
want to understand. It’s my understanding that your department 
or your office as the minister has directed to the Department of 
Health and Department of Health officials that we are not to 
engage our direct inquiries about health issues from the official 
opposition. Myself as the Health critic or members of our 
caucus have been directed not to address any questions to the 
department or their officials for clarification as they come up, 
and that they should instead be directed through your political 
office. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if my understanding of that is 
correct? And if it is, then why that decision has been made in 
the Department of Health’s instance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Mr. Chair, 
that question raises a question about how traditional 
parliamentary democracy works. And in the legislature the 
Minister of Health is responsible for the Department of Health 
and the tradition is that all inquiries would come through the 
minister’s office from other members of the legislature. And 
that’s the tradition that we hold to. 
 
It’s also of benefit for all of the people who work within the 

Department of Health because then they know that the answers 
and information that’s provided has been vetted by the 
appropriate people within the department and make sure that it 
does go on to the members of the legislature, so that people are 
working with information that they know has been approved 
through the system. But that’s a long tradition of parliamentary 
democracy, but that is how this works. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But if that is 
the case then it isn’t uniformly applied across your government 
because from my colleagues in other critic areas, indicate that it 
is very much an individual decision by individual ministers to 
make that decision or not. Because in some instances, members 
are able to discuss issues with department officials directly. 
And my colleagues in other critic areas say that that is most 
helpful because quite often it not only speeds up the timeliness 
of it, but it also is less formal and you can speak to the people 
that are actually responsible for the specific issue. 
 
So I guess that your argument that this is sort of some great 
parliamentary tradition certainly is not universally followed. 
And I’m wondering if you would reconsider in light of the fact 
it isn’t standard across the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well my position is — as a lawyer and as 
somebody who is part of accountability structures and how they 
work — is to say that maybe I should talk to my colleagues 
about the traditions of parliamentary democracy and the 
responsibility of ministers and ministers’ offices and how that 
works, and how that makes sure that the discussions take place 
with appropriate information as prepared by the departments 
and then . . . the information then does become the 
responsibility of the minister. 
 
So if I’m a traditionalist or if I’m somebody who follows the 
traditional rules of accountability, then I’m proud of that and 
that’s how we will work in the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Minister. It certainly 
is within your purview to decide how the operations of your 
department are going to work. 
 
I was merely pointing out where I thought a system could work 
where individuals from this side of the House, and certainly 
myself, would benefit by the direct relationship on certain 
issues. Because by the time that it gets vetted through your 
office, quite often the timeliness gets lost to some extent. 
However I recognize the position that you’re taking. 
 
Mr. Minister, today it probably will come as no surprise to you, 
given the last couple of days, questions, and issues, where I 
probably will start at least, in terms of specific terms today. I 
want to talk about the whole issue surrounding the long-term 
care system in our province and make sure that the full amount 
of information that is important and necessary for people to 
understand the system is going to be put on the record. 
 
And I would like to start, Mr. Minister, by talking about the 
long-term care system in general. Mr. Minister, as you are 
aware, is that the district . . . and now regional and we’re into 
the transition, but we’ll talk about the action plan and the 
changing structure another day. 
 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

But at this stage, the district health boards are responsible for 
maintaining and providing long-term care services, and these 
services are by and large consistent across the provinces. There 
certainly is an ongoing program of renewal of facilities and 
capital projects that are going on, and so there is various 
degrees of facility significance and structure and timeliness. 
 
Some of the new structures — and I’ve had the opportunity 
over the last three years that I’ve been the Health critic to tour a 
great many of them — and there is a significant discrepancy 
between the very newest facility and the structure and 
organization of those facilities. And the minister in the 
department, I’m sure, would recognize that there are other 
facilities that are in need of renewal and refurbishing and in 
some cases, indeed, complete replacement. 
 
As well, there’s been some significant change in terms of how 
services are provided and what environment. And more and 
more we see, particularly in smaller communities, where the 
facilities are part of an integrated facility where there is 
long-term care facilities and then there are varying levels of 
acute care services that are also delivered out of this facility and 
perhaps even some office spaces for primary health care 
providers and things of that nature. So that structure is pretty 
varied. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I would like to give you the opportunity 
to talk about the long-term care structure, the very specialized 
and fairly modern and new concepts in long-term care delivery 
— with the Eden kind of model, with the, you know, the 
subdivided facilities that have communities or neighbourhood 
kind of concepts — to those facilities that are longer and older 
and more represent or look similar to what a hospital or acute 
care facilities have been like, to the integrated health services 
and health facilities that there are across the province. 
 
Would you outline the general organization and structure and 
facilities of the long-term care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would like to thank the member for the 
open-ended question about the long-term care system because I 
think that we in Saskatchewan can be quite proud, and I know 
our government is proud, of the money that we do put into 
long-term care, which in this year’s budget is increased by 10 
million to $337 million. 
 
The total cost of the long-term care system is at $337 million, 
with another $108 million contribution from the residents, 
which for a total of about $445 million. And effectively, the 
province and the citizens of Saskatchewan provide for the 
elderly about three-quarters of the cost of long-term care in the 
province. 
 
We have 8,900 residents in 158 facilities. And these are spread 
right across the whole province. And the people who are in 
long-term care are very heavy care patients, primarily level 3 
and level 4 patients. And they go through a standardized 
assessment which is pretty well the same right across the whole 
province and people are assessed according to their need. And 
they receive the opportunity to live in the long-term care 
facilities based on this assessment of their need. 
 
There is a single entry point, so that in a community all of the 

facilities work together. And there is a common assessment, for 
example in Regina, and then people are assigned to the various 
long-term care facilities that are here. But I think the important 
thing to recognize is that these are based on need. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
acknowledged and recognized and provided some general 
numbers that talked about the cost of providing long-term care. 
Could you outline what the annual or monthly fee is per 
long-term care bed, first of all; and second of all, could you 
provide a range because I would suspect that that number might 
be an average. But what’s the high and the low end of numbers 
that make up that average? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The present system, the rates that are in 
place right now, the minimum fee is $828 a month and the 
maximum rate is $1,561 a month. And there is a formula based 
on your income. If you’re at the minimum amount, and that’s 
about a third of the 8,900 residents are at the minimum rate, that 
they end up paying that full amount. 
 
But no matter what amount of income you have, you still will 
have a minimum sort of extra income beyond the costs for your 
room and board, your food, for all of your care, for all of these 
things, of $166 a month. So that’s the present rate structure 
right now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — I’m sorry, Minister, I probably worded the 
question badly. I was looking at what the actual cost to deliver 
the program is. There must be . . . You indicated, I believe, 
something that the overall fees represent 75 per cent or 
something of the actual cost. 
 
What is the cost of providing a long-term care bed per month, 
irrespective of who pays for what portion of it, and what is the 
top and bottom end of that range? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Based on last year’s information, the cost 
per bed for per month is approximately $4,018 for an annual 
cost of about $48,210. Our best estimates for this year, which 
we’ve just now started for the last three weeks, will be that that 
will bump up to about 50,000 a year — somewhere between, 
well between 48,200 and 50,000. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, to arrive at those numbers, there 
must be figures available as to what constitutes the cost drivers 
in coming up with that final number. You know, are there, you 
know, nursing wages, the capital cost of the facility, the 
depreciation, the amortization, utility costs. 
 
I hope I’m explaining myself in terms of how does that 4,800 or 
$4,018 a month . . . Does the department have a breakdown as 
to how, what are the contributing line items that, and the 
amounts of those line items, that would result in a total of the 
$4,018 a month? Does the department have those figures 
available? 
 
(11:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You are right about the fact that this 
includes many, many factors. And I guess what I would say is 
that there are operating costs and then there are the non-salaried 
costs. So right now in our system, salary and employee benefit 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

 

costs represent about 80 per cent in this particular field of the 
total operating costs and non-salary costs operate about . . . 
represent about 20 per cent. So that would be the buildings and 
things like that. So the fees that the residents pay go for all . . . 
for operating costs. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, would it be 
possible to receive the detailed breakdown of what the cost 
analysis is for the monthly cost? You said generally 80/20 in 
terms of the salary and non-salary. I mean, what I’d like to 
know is, is there a model that says that for, you know, the 
requirements under the Act to provide a registered nurse 
facility, you know, the maintenance people, the staff people, 
those sorts of things? 
 
I’m guessing that somewhere there must be a detailed line item 
kind of a breakdown in order to come up with those numbers. I 
mean, you just don’t grab them out of the air. Somewhere 
there’s got to be a financial statement or something that results 
in these numbers coming together. If that is there somewhere, 
would it be possible to receive a copy of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On a province-wide basis, the funding 
goes out globally to the health districts, and so the questions 
that I think you’re asking are probably facility-specific and you 
could go to the 158 facilities across the province and gather 
that. But what we’ve done is say, well, this is an average based 
on the amount that we actually fund globally to the health 
districts based on what they see as their needs on a year-to-year 
basis. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So as the department minister, I guess you 
just are assuming that the district numbers are right, and that 
they are operating the systems in the best way possible and that 
it’s a simple acceptance of their numbers, and then saying, 
okay, this is what comes together. 
 
Has the department then done any kind of an analysis to see . . . 
You know, it sounds like $4,018 a month is a huge number for a 
monthly service. Has the department done any work to say, you 
know, look, what are the cost drivers and the critical 
components in this, and is there any way that there could be 
some cost savings that could be arrived at in this $4,018, rather 
than just accepting them blindly as being the most effective and 
efficient way of delivering the cost and then passing on . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to the residents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — . . . health district . . . (inaudible) . . . audit 
and so that the audit level. There’s also obvious ones with the 
consultants and people who work with the various agencies 
around the province. 
 
I think that the biggest part of the cost relates to employees and 
employee benefits. And those are things that are negotiated on a 
province-wide basis, and so that we have a pretty good handle 
on that kind of a cost issue. 
 
We also know and can see, I think, in the various regional 
health districts, when they look at their own facilities, that if it’s 
. . . sometimes some of the smaller facilities have a higher cost 
per patient than some of the larger ones because they have to 
spread some of the central service part of an institution across a 
fewer number of residents. 

So on a province-wide basis, there are some variations around 
that. And what I’ve, you know, given you is sort of a estimate 
of the cost across the whole system. 
 
Is it an area that we’re looking at? I would say that we are 
looking at every area in health because we have to make sure 
that we’re making the most effective use of the dollars that we 
have. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, as well, does 
the department do any analysis of waiting times? You indicated 
that there’s a pretty standardized acuity of need system across 
the province in terms of access to a long-term care bed facility. 
 
Does the department . . . or do you ask the local districts, sort of 
look and say, in this district there might be less pressure on the 
acuity of need and there’s more waiting lists or there’s greater 
waiting lists? Has the department done an analysis about the 
appropriateness of availability of beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The question of waiting lists is primarily 
dealt with within the health districts. But that information is 
shared as part of the health plans and at other points. 
 
I know from my own visits around the province that some areas 
have longer waiting lists and obviously more demand. And 
often it comes about because of the mix of housing available for 
people. 
 
I mean, a good example is Moose Jaw, where they have a mix 
of housing from Sask Housing, sort of assisted living to 
personal care homes to the long-term care homes. And there’s a 
good mix there of available housing and so that the waiting lists 
are quite manageable there. 
 
And they have a, obviously, a single entry point application 
form for people so that they kind of know who are the next 
year’s residents in the long-term care. And so they’ve been able 
to do a good job of management. 
 
I think Weyburn also has a similar situation. Saskatoon and 
Regina, there are more challenges because there aren’t quite as 
many tools available in the . . . it’s sort of in the whole range. 
And so that is a challenge and that’s where a number of projects 
have come forward, whether it’s the Sask Housing projects or 
whether it’s some of the newer personal care homes that we do 
see. 
 
I think that in this particular area of waiting lists, it’s important 
to talk about how the single entry point and common 
assessment program for people’s entry into the long-term care 
program has been very successful. This system has allowed for 
common assessment. People are trained in providing the 
assessment. The medical information, the social information, all 
these things are common and standardized so that when the 
committee that gets together to work about who goes into which 
facility and when, they’re able to do it from a common base of 
information. 
 
And that success, I think, has meant that we have a better 
handle on the waiting lists. Sometimes in some communities 
they’re a little bit longer — well, clearly longer — than we 
would like, and those are areas then where we have to go and 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

see, well, what are the resources that we can bring to that 
particular community to help out. So it’s part of an ongoing 
strategy. 
 
What I would say is our action plan with the regional health 
authorities will allow us to have even better information and 
better sharing of that information within a regional health 
authority but also on a province-wide basis, so that we can 
answer some of the questions that you were raising about, well 
how are we analyzing the costs of various facilities and the cost 
to the total system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I would assume that in 
that analysis, that looking forward at the demographic trends in 
a region or a district are also part of the planning process that is 
happening by the districts. 
 
Minister, to go to the question that you had sort of answered 
when I posed the costs question before. You indicated that the 
minimum fee under the existing structure is $828 a month and 
then it’s plus 50 per cent of income over $994, and it’s capped 
currently at $1,561 a month leaving a minimal disposable 
income of $166 a month. 
 
Minister, I wonder have you . . . has the department done any 
study about what are the demands on clients and seniors for that 
$166 a month? I understand that there are varying numbers of 
fees in different districts that would include things like, you 
know, sort of a shared common cost: disposables, rubber 
gloves, those sorts of things. Some seniors will require personal 
hygienic products; in addition to that, they require prescription 
drugs. 
 
And anecdotally at least, a number of families have told me that 
these other things can amount very significantly to 2 or 3 to 
$400 a month over and above what the calculated rate for the 
actual long-term care fee is. 
 
And I’m wondering, Minister, has the department done any 
study of what are the demands on those incidentals or other 
things that aren’t covered in the basic fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As it relates to these extra costs that are 
there, the department in fact did do a survey last year and found 
that there’s a . . . these extra supply costs are about 50 to $75 a 
month on average. So when you say on average, it’s obvious 
there would be some that would be higher and some that would 
be lower. 
 
What I would like the, you know, the public to know is that if 
there are challenges in that particular area, on a case-by-case 
basis, the department does sit down with people and try to 
figure out how to manage some of these things, because it does 
become a worry for older people and for their families. And the 
department is able to see, well, are there some other kinds of 
support that we have in the overall system that would deal with 
some of these particular problems. 
 
So that’s the important message, I think, for everybody — is 
that they are very concerned about making sure that matters are 
dealt with on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So, Minister, is what you’re saying that if 

an individual’s case is such that their fees are substantially more 
than this average, what is the process for that individual to 
apply to have these fees waived or what’s the program? 
 
I mean, I don’t think seniors in this province are aware that 
there’s a program. And so I would like to know what it is and 
how it’s advertised and what benefits are available through it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the regulations that relate to long-term 
care, there is a specific clause that allows for people to have 
their fees recalculated based on some of these kinds of costs. 
And so that is submitted to the institution or the health district, 
or you can submit it directly to the Department of Health 
long-term care unit because, ultimately, they are assessed 
centrally for the whole province. 
 
And so the telephone number that I kindly gave you yesterday 
is the direct access to that whole process. Or if you’ll . . . if 
people prefer to deal with the individuals that they’ve been 
working with in their town or in their facility, those people 
would be able to get the information about how to do a review. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So does this program then waive the 
minimum fee of $828 or adjust that downward for individuals 
who are in particular need? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I want to make it absolutely clear to the 
public that the 828 will always be paid. Now, practically, 
through our old age security system basically people over age 
65 have that amount of money through the various national 
programs that we have. 
 
If for some reason they’re under age 65 and are in one of these 
facilities and don’t have those funds, then Social Services will 
pay it if they can’t afford it. And so, practically, at the low end 
of the scale, there isn’t anybody that will ever be pushed out 
because they can’t pay the $828. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — That’s fine, Minister. But what happens if 
someone’s other costs are greater than the $166 that they are 
theoretically left with from these middle amounts? What is in 
step . . . in place then if their actual extra costs are $300? Who 
makes up the extra $134? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We have a system in place that cover 
exactly the question that you’re talking about. And there’s a 
drug plan special support, if it’s drug costs that are an issue. We 
also have supplementary health benefits that are available, if it’s 
some of those kind of health costs. And basically, the people 
that are reviewing the matter and working with it will work with 
both the Department of Health and the Department of Social 
Services to deal with these kinds of cases where people are on 
the low-income scale. 
 
The Speaker: — Why — order — why is the member on her 
feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. With 
leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Sitting in your gallery are Scott Meek, and Deidrie Keir from 
Deep Indigo Productions of Scotland. Accompanying them 
today are Susanne Bell, director of programs and services for 
SaskFILM. 
 
They’re scouting Canada for potential locations for a television 
movie that I understand will be a sweeping family drama, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Meek and Ms. Keir will be meeting with producers, visiting 
the sound stage, and extensively scouting rural areas, maybe 
even the Wood River area, Mr. Chair. 
 
So I ask all members to welcome Mr. Meek and Ms. Keir to the 
province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I too would like to 
welcome our guests from Scotland, and certainly refer them to a 
beautiful part of the world in middle Saskatchewan — 
Melfort-Tisdale would be a great place for a movie. So make 
sure you come up into that area. 
 
Thank you, very much . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member from Regina South says that there’s some bad actors 
over here, but we don’t have a monopoly on that, I assure you. 
 
Mr. Minister, what . . . the program, then, for the people who 
are in the unhappy circumstance of actually having greater costs 
than what they have income, or greater than the 166 margin that 
they’re left for these discretionary items, if you like — and you 
indicated there’s things that they can be done on the pharmacy 
side because a significant portion of increased costs very often 
are pharmaceuticals and things of that nature — in this formula, 
is there any consideration given to these people to have some 
discretionary money? The kind of money that you use to buy 
your grandchild a birthday gift or a Christmas present; the kinds 
of things that maybe are personal, to get your hair done, those 
sort of basic things, Mr. Minister. Or is this thing a very tight 
thing that makes you essentially use up all your resources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As it relates to these particular things that 
you’ve raised, basically the amount is available to deal with 
most of these kinds of things. If there are challenges, there is a 
review process that is, I think, very individualized. It relates to 
that particular person and they can work with the department. 
 
Sometimes, you know, people will not totally agree with what 
the assessment is, but most of the time there isn’t a problem. I 
guess what I would emphasize is that in any of the discussions 
about changes in fees, the people that you’ve been talking about 

now would not be affected at all — there’s no change at all in 
this whole area. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll get to those 
other folks right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you’ve said in statements you’ve made 
that about one-third of the current recipients of long-term care 
services will not be affected by any of these new proposed fee 
increases and that approximately two-thirds will be. 
 
Minister, everyone that makes more than $994 a month will be 
affected, is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. So you’ve also characterized 
that these fees are for 120 rich people. Certainly two-thirds of 
the people in this province wouldn’t be . . . or that are receiving 
long-term care fees are not going to be categorized as rich 
people. 
 
Minister, as the formula works now, that we talked about 
earlier, the basic fee of $828 a month is then . . . currently 
anything over $994 a month is included at 50 per cent of the 
income over that amount and the whole process is capped at 
$1,561 a month. 
 
Under this new program, you certainly have left a great deal 
less for the people to remain in their own hands for this 
discretionary income. Because you’ve gone from 50 per cent of 
the income over $994 and you’re now taking 90 per cent of that 
income. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
So that for anybody that’s making more than $994, their rates 
have been rejigged from the 50 per cent of the money they’ve 
had left to 90 per cent of the money they have left. And I would 
think that someone that’s making, for example, $1,000 a month 
could hardly be categorized as a rich person. And granted 
because of this new structure, the fee increase is only something 
like $2.40 a month, but I’d like to move somewhere where I 
think is a more reasonable number. 
 
If a person is making $2,000 a month, and I would like you to 
make sure that these numbers are correct. At $2,000 a month 
currently that individual would pay $1,331 a month for their 
fees based on the old formula. 
 
At the new formula of 90 per cent of their income over $994 a 
month, they would now have to pay $1,913.40 a month — a 
monthly increase of $562.40, $6,748.80 a year more, or a 36.73 
per cent increase. 
 
Now I wonder, Mr. Minister, do you consider someone that’s 
making $2,000 a month a wealthy person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think maybe if the member 
could send us over his calculations, because these don’t quite 
add up. 
 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My colleague 
points out to me . . . I’ll certainly send a sheet over, but I got 
some wrong on this. I also need my prescription renewed on my 
glasses, because I got on the wrong row here. 
 
Two thousand dollars a month would be $1,331 a month under 
the current structure; 1,733.40 under the new structure — an 
increase of $402.40. And that would be $4,828 in total a year — 
a 30.23 per cent increase. 
 
Is someone making $2,000 a month and facing a 30 per cent 
increase, would that individual be considered a rich person in 
your estimation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well what I would say is that terms like 
rich and poor are relative terms and . . . But what we know is 
that in Canada, for our seniors, we have provided a method 
whereby they have sufficient income to provide for themselves 
in the long-term care facilities. 
 
And what this has done here is it means that a person who has 
the lowest income has a discretionary amount of $166. This 
person, actually, who is putting all of their income in there, will 
have a discretionary income of about $266 a month. So it’s 
about $100 a month more after paying for all of their living 
expenses, all of their care expenses. And the citizens of the 
province are subsidizing the rest of the cost of that person at a 
very substantial cost to all of us in society. 
 
And so what we have been doing with this particular program is 
basically saying that those people should be paying a substantial 
share of their income, in the same way that the lower-income 
people are paying a substantial share of their income. And if 
you philosophically disagree with that, I can accept that. 
 
But we, on this side of the House, are saying there are certain 
times and certain places where we are going to ask for the 
sharing of the dollars so that we can afford our total system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Philosophically, in terms of the principle 
about sharing in terms of long-term care, there’s two 
components that clearly are in the costs of long-term care. 
$4,018 a month is not a simple housing allowance, if you like, 
minister and I think everybody would recognize — no one or 
few people pay $4,000 a month for simple housing expenses — 
that there is certainly a very significant level of health care 
provision in these facilities. 
 
And so we sit and say is it appropriate for seniors to contribute 
something towards the cost of this whole program because it’s 
not just a health program; it is a housing program. And I think 
philosophically right across this country, there certainly has 
been a recognition as that a senior or someone, not necessarily 
senior, but anybody requiring long-term care should pay a 
component of the cost of delivering that service because it’s a 
housing cost. It has to do with room and board, if you like, a 
roof over your head, you know, a warm bed at night and decent 
meals and all those other things. 
 
And nobody’s arguing with you, Minister, that that 
philosophically is appropriate. Right across this country, there 
are appropriate fees for long-term care and I think that it’s 
recognition that there is this component of housing in long-term 

care. 
 
But it also is true, Minister, over the last ten years, there’s been 
a trend so that the people that are going into these institutions 
have a great deal of health challenges. It’s not just simply a 
housing program, because if it was simply housing, you could 
be in another program of independent living and living at home 
or whatever you like. 
 
The people that go into these facilities, because of the 
evaluation and the assessment process that you talk about, 
require a great deal of heavy care as a result of diminishing 
health, not just as a recreational spot — that this is now a good 
place to go and live. Few seniors go into long-term care 
facilities that are not faced with a significant amount of health 
challenges. 
 
So when you say that we’re now expecting people to take this 
basic amount, plus 90 per cent of everything else that they have 
coming in and then out of that . . . because they’re not going to 
be at the subsidized level once they get at $2,000 a month. 
These other programs about saying we’re going to help you 
meet the needs for prescriptions and those sorts of things are not 
going to likely apply to these individuals. 
 
And so if they have a situation where, I grant it, because of their 
circumstance they may have an extra $100 to work with, but 
their costs could actually be significantly higher than that. And 
so they’re going to have to start bleeding off of their resources 
in order to meet those challenges. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while philosophically we’re not in agreement 
that it should be a shared responsibility, the problem is, is 
you’re taking everything under this plan and we think that that’s 
inappropriate. 
 
And when you look at other jurisdictions, it certainly stands out 
as a comparison to our neighbours. Somewhere, Mr. Minister, I 
have this. In Alberta for example, who you always throw 
accusatory remarks about how cold-hearted they are in Alberta, 
their maximum cost that I received over the Internet is $991 a 
month for a private room. That’s their maximum. In Manitoba, 
next door to us on the other side, it’s $1,806. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we never argued about this point when you 
were talking $1,561 a month. And that was raised only a couple 
of years ago by a former colleague, who was associate minister 
at that time. And because even that increase was modest and 
related to the increased costs, we didn’t complain about that at 
all, Mr. Minister. 
 
Our problem here, Mr. Minister, is this is an unreasonable rate 
increase and I think that you should reconsider it. Will you do 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well what I would emphasize to the 
member is that we have 75 per cent support of the total system 
for long-term care, and it’s $337 million. And so we have 
looked very carefully at where we can get some more money. 
 
I’d also like to emphasize the fact that with the maximum fee 
that we will be charging, we are still going to have the third 
highest maximum fee in the country. And in Nova Scotia, their 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

 

maximum fee, which is $5,085.60. And in New Brunswick, it’s 
$4,020. 
 
And so I guess what I would say to the member is that we 
provide support for the overall system. We also work with 
people at whatever income level. And I want to make it 
absolutely clear that you are talking about $2,000 income for a 
single person. So if in fact it’s a couple that would probably be 
$4,000 a month or some variation of that. 
 
But we work with the people to make sure that the spouse or 
partner who’s outside of the facility can survive and make the 
appropriate adjustments to deal with a lot of those kinds of 
issues. 
 
And so for the person who is in the long-term care facility, 
virtually all of their needs are met and a big chunk of it includes 
the sort of assisted care that they need. 
 
And what we are asking is that the people that are on the bottom 
end of the scale should be treated in the same way — as far as 
income — should be treated on the same way as those people 
up to an income of $52,000. And every person who earns more 
than the $998 will have more discretionary income left at the 
end than that person who’s under $1,000. 
 
So what we’ve got is a system whereby we provide support of 
$337 million and we income test those people who go into the 
system. And those people who have the income to pay more, we 
ask them to pay more. 
 
What I also emphasize very strongly is if you go 90 miles south 
of here, you not only income test for Medicare, you asset test. 
And you don’t get a dollar until you’ve actually gotten rid of all 
of your assets. Then you get your support. 
 
We’re not there. We’re not going there. We are trying to ask the 
people of the province to provide some more dollars into the 
system from their income so that they can help as we deal with 
all of the challenges that we have in our health system. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
And, Mr. Minister, I doubt very much if you’ve got seniors 
migrating to the United States because they’re really happy 
about a system of health care or whatever there. And I doubt as 
well that you’re going to sort of have people really happy about 
the fact that we’re only the third highest in Canada, and two 
Maritime provinces are the only people that exceed us. 
 
Our problem is, is how do we keep it fair for the citizens that 
live in Saskatchewan? I’m not concerned about the ones in 
Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, or the United States of America. 
I don’t think it’s fair to Saskatchewan seniors. And that’s the 
problem. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I mean you talk about the contribution that 
you’ve got to, to long-term care. And I recognize that. It’s an 
appropriate contribution to the fact that there’s a reality of the 
need for our long-term seniors to have appropriate health care 
into the future, and that it’s appropriate for them to pay a 
portion of it because it also has a housing component. 
 
You indicated earlier on that you said, currently that $108 

million is coming from residents and 337 is your . . . this year’s 
commitment to long-term care. I understand that. But the 
amount of money that you’re now going to raise extra out of 
these people’s pockets in that kind of a magnitude of a cost 
thing is I believe by the release from your department, where 
it’s quoted as $7.4 million . . . Is that the actual estimated 
amount that’s going to be raised because of these extra fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s correct, for six months. So on an 
annualized basis, it’s almost $15 million. 
 
And so I would ask the member opposite just to look at the 
Health budget or look at the budget of the government in 
general and say on an ongoing basis, where would you take $15 
million of the . . . out of the Health budget and explain that. So I 
mean there are some places that the member can tell us where 
. . . (inaudible) . . . get some of this money. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, don’t make it so easy. Just today in question period, 
my colleague from Swift Current was talking about how you 
could have saved $6 million that you blew on an adventure in 
Australia. 
 
You know, I mean, if you’re talking about priorities, talk about 
them as a government. It isn’t responsible that you as a Health 
minister should be taking the hit from the adventures of your 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I don’t think it’s proper that your Department of 
Health should be taking the hit and be looking to things like 
you’re doing here with the seniors to cover up some of the 
misadventures of your colleagues in SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company) or Australia or wherever 
else. 
 
If you’re talking about where would you get it, well that’s 
pretty easy. It’s pretty easy to understand where you have to get 
it, and it’s a question of priorities. And I think it’s unfair that 
you have to do these kinds of decisions, because they are very 
difficult decisions, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so when you talk about the fact that there’s other places 
this money could and should come from, I agree completely 
with you, Mr. Minister. And I think you’ve got to sit down and 
tell your colleagues that we can no longer afford and it’s no 
longer appropriate for these misadventures going on around the 
world when there are these needs in the health care system. 
 
So I think that you have to make sure that you make your case 
to your colleagues a little stronger, because it’s put you in a 
very awkward position, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to yield to some of my colleagues 
that also have questions on this general topic. And so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I will if there’s time left today, I will wind this 
discussion up later and leave my colleagues have some 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

opportunity ask some questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate that the member has some 
suggestions about how to deal with this, but I would reiterate 
the comment I made yesterday in question period, that you may 
want to seek some professional advice from accountants about 
how the money flows between the General Revenue Fund, the 
Crowns, and other places, so that your comments can be 
informed and can be of assistance to us as we design our 
budgets. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I would say to 
the Minister of Health that we fully understand how money 
flows from the Crowns and to the General Revenue Fund. And 
we understand how your people in the Crowns go off and play 
their Monopoly games with the Monopoly money and lose $5 
million here and $28 million there and $80 million in ISC 
(Information Services Corporation), and all those sorts of 
things. 
 
But that’s not what we’re here to discuss today. We’re here to 
discuss Health, the Health estimates, and all those sorts of 
things. So just in case we don’t have the . . . fully understand 
your new fee structure, I wonder if the minister, Mr. Chair, 
could describe for me how a couple whose monthly income is 
$2,000 a month. They are both currently living in their own 
home, and let’s assume that one of them has to go into a 
long-term care home. 
 
How under the current structure, the old fees — let’s call it the 
old fees schedule — what will the fees that that couple will 
have to pay? And then how will they be affected by your new 
schedule, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So I’m assuming from your question that 
this couple has income of roughly equal because of their 
operation. So they get the old age pension and things like that, 
plus some other investment income. 
 
Then the fee would be based on half of the $2,000 for the 
person who actually goes into long-term care. And I think that 
would work out to probably around $833, like $166 less than 
the $1,000 income. And then the other party would work with 
their income. 
 
And if there are some challenges there around costs, well there 
would be the same kind of supplemental health costs because 
they’re low income. They would also have some . . . or 
supplemental health . . . they’d have some ability for assistance 
through the drug plan, if that was required. So that would be 
how it works. But the income then is dealt with between the 
parties. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, let’s assume in this case that the 
income, the majority of the income, comes to the husband. And 
this is a married couple, and the wife gets . . . her only source of 
income is old age security. And sorry, I should have those facts 
for you, but I believe it’s about 300-and-some dollars a month. 
 
And if the husband was to have to go into a nursing home, how 
would that affect that couple? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — In the scenario that you presented, where 

the higher-income spouse goes into the facility, then that would 
be an appropriate time to say, well we want to have a division 
of our income 50/50, and then calculate the costs of the person 
in the long-term facility based on 50 per cent of the total family 
income. 
 
If the spouse who has the lower income went into the facility, 
then you would say no, let’s just calculate our fee on the cost 
for that particular person. 
 
And so basically the system works to try and provide the lowest 
fee for the person who is in the facility, and leave as much of 
the income out for the spouse that remains in the community. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, could you explain how this couple 
would go about having their income divided 50/50? Does this 
involve this involuntary separation and those things that you 
mentioned in the House yesterday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Using the two scenarios that you 
described — where the higher-income person goes into the 
home and the lower-income remains outside in whatever home 
they have — you can basically say, well we want a 50/50 
designation. And there is no particular application or whatever. 
 
But if in fact the lower-income spouse goes into the home and 
you want to lose . . . use that lower income for the calculation, 
then you need to basically say that, we are separated through no 
fault of our own, and therefore that person can use that lower 
figure. But it has nothing to do with their marital status or 
anything else. It’s just for this particular program; it’s to 
acknowledge that they’re . . . they can’t live together because of 
the care that one of the parties needs. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, so that I completely understand 
this, so you’re saying that if it’s the lower-income person that 
goes into the home, then they would have to . . . the couple 
would then have to go through this involuntary separation? Or 
is it the higher-income person going into the home? I didn’t 
quite follow you there, Mr. Minister. Could you clarify it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Okay. I think the use of the words, going 
into involuntary separation, is just . . . I mean it just creates a 
whole lot more than what it is. But yes, the person with the 
lower income going into the home, and you want to base the fee 
that’s being charged to that person on that lower income. In 
other words, the subsidy is much greater from the overall 
system. 
 
And at that point you have to, you know, basically file a form 
that says, we are living separate and apart, and there’s official 
designation because of the fact that one of us needs some extra 
care. And it’s . . . has nothing to do with the marital status or 
anything else. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, this regulation or form that’s 
required to . . . that this couple would be required to sign, it’s a 
form of your Department of Health, is it, Mr. Minister? It’s not 
a regulation that’s imposed on you by some other level of 
government? 
 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The concept of this is dealt with in the 
regulations for long-term care. And the Department of Health 
just prepares a document that people sign that acknowledges 
that. And if you wish, I can provide you with a copy later so 
that you can actually see what it says. But it’s a Department of 
Health document and its only purpose is for use in calculating 
the fees and the subsidy in this whole process. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, my colleague provided me 
with a form. It’s . . . comes from your department. It says: 
“Long term care. Optional designation for determining resident 
charge.” Would that be the form, Mr. Minister? 
 
And I’m looking at the . . . near the bottom of the form where 
the applicant is asked to check the, I guess, the situation that 
best describes their living arrangement. And one says: 
 

My spouse and I live in separate dwellings for reasons 
beyond our control. However, our marital status has not 
changed. 

 
I am . . . 

 
And then the other one says: 
 

I am separated from my spouse pursuant to a separation 
agreement or judicial separation. 

 
So I would assume that it’s the top one that the couple would 
have to check in this case. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, that’s correct. And so it basically 
says, we’re married but one of us has to live apart; it’s to our 
benefit as a couple to have this designation for determining the 
resident charge. 
 
So you can see the form, the description of the form is directly 
related to how much the resident charge would be in the home. 
And they just need some kind of information that says this is 
what’s happened for us. 
 
There are other people, obviously, who would be divorced. So 
there would be no question about the other people who are 
separated pursuant to some kind of a written agreement. 
 
But that’s not this at all. The first box is to include those people 
who have no intention of ever not being married and they 
believe the words in their marriage — till death do us part. And 
we want to acknowledge that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So in this case then the resident of a long-term 
care home — the one with the lower income — if their spouse 
signed this form, you would use the lower, the lower income 
figure, and that person would then be charged a minimum 
monthly fee of $825. Is that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, it depends on their income, but if 
they were at the sort of normal, over age 65 income for seniors 
in Canada, that’s the fee that they would be charged — and they 
had no other source of income. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that my colleague 
from Melfort, his calculations and the table that he sent over, 

the calculations are correct as far describing or doing the 
calculations . . . the difference between the current fee structure 
and the new fee structure that your government will be putting 
into place in October 1. That as far as you could . . . the $2,000 
a month example, his figures were correct, I believe you 
indicated. So we assume if you set his spreadsheet up properly, 
that the rest of the figures should be correct, Mr. Minister. 
 
So if we look at the $2,000 a month, monthly income, if that’s 
one person, under the old fee structure they would be left with 
600 and . . . approximately $670 per month. Because their, 
under the current structure, their monthly fee is 1,331, and 
under your new fee structure they would be left with $266 a 
month. Is that . . . I believe my math is correct; I think that’s 
about approximately where . . . what they’d be left with. 
 
And I guess that’s probably the crux of this whole argument. I 
mean $2,000 a month is not . . . In anyone’s estimation, these 
people are not rich. And I mean to leave them with $266 a 
month, you know some of these people end up in the homes. 
Their minds are sound; they have physical disabilities; they 
know when their grandchildrens’ birthdays are; they know 
when their great-grandchildrens’ birthdays are; they know 
what’s happening in their extended family. And quite often 
their medication, monthly medication bills, are quite high. 
 
Really, Mr. Minister, you’re not leaving these people with any 
dignity. I mean you’re putting them in the position where they 
can’t even buy their great-grandchild a Christmas present, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I really think that, you know, someone who has a monthly 
income of $2,000 a month, they probably worked very hard all 
their life to accumulate a bit of a pension and a few assets, and 
they really, you know, made the sacrifices that a lot of people in 
society don’t make just so that they could have something for 
their old age. 
 
And now what you’re saying to them, Mr. Minister, is that look, 
we’ve mismanaged this economy; we have some of your 
cabinet members gone off and played Monopoly in various 
parts of the world and now we’re going to have to ask you to 
ante up and help pay to run this province. And that’s a terrible 
situation you’ve put these people in, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would urge you to reconsider — take it back to the cabinet 
table and show these people some dignity, leave them with 
some dignity. We all know that towards the end of a person’s 
life that many people are faced with a situation near the end of 
their life where they have no dignity left. So let’s leave them 
with dignity as long as we can, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I think that the member 
opposite should look at it from the other angle. This province 
has worked very hard over many years to develop a system 
where we have $337 million available to subsidize a long-term 
care prospect for all of the people of the province and 
everybody has worked to provide that. So if you think about it, 
that’s $337 for every single person in the province each year 
that goes into this kind of a program because that’s . . . we 
believe that that’s an important thing to do. That ends up 
subsidizing 75 per cent of the cost. 
 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

The other 25, 26 per cent of the cost, we ask people to 
contribute and we ask them to contribute based on their income. 
And in that particular task, we are asking them to contribute. 
 
So I think that the member, the member who is trying to answer 
this question without even listening to my answer does not do 
any good for anybody by making such a fuss, because what we 
have here is a situation where we are asking people to 
contribute on an income-tested basis. And we’re also saying 
that those people who have a higher income are going to have 
more left out of what they’ve earned over the years than some 
of the people on the lower income. And I haven’t heard this 
kind of a fuss about the people on the low-income scale over 
the years because that’s not what you’re concerned . . . 
 
And so I guess what I would say to the member opposite, let’s 
figure out how we can provide a system of care for the people 
across the province and we will work with people to make sure 
that those who can’t afford to have some of the care, they will 
get that care. We’ll make sure that the people who can afford to 
contribute something towards this kind of care, they will do that 
on a fair basis. 
 
And that’s what we’re trying to accomplish. And I thank that 
member for the questions. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too have some 
questions on this issue for the minister. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, the previous two questioners from the 
opposition, they were talking about people on low incomes. The 
critic, the Health critic, was talking in the range of between 
1,000 and 2,000 in many of the examples. The member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood was talking about a couple that makes 
$2,000 a month. 
 
And when you have attendant costs that happen with . . . for 
seniors, including it might be pharmaceuticals, it might be other 
special needs — it’s not a lot of money. 
 
And it’s this precise point that we want to get to the bottom of. 
We’ve heard members opposite heckle from their seat that, well 
this only affects the wealthy, this only affects the wealthy. 
That’s what they’ve said. 
 
You know, we raised . . . I raised a concern of a lady from Swift 
Current a couple of days ago. And I found out that . . . a little 
bit more about her income because I’d like to ask you about her 
case, frankly, Mr. Minister, and see what you think about her 
case. 
 
She is a long-time resident of the Southwest and her and her 
husband farmed for all of their lives. So they don’t have a 
pension from any particular work they did. They’re going to 
have their pensions that they get through old age and Canada 
pension, that sort of thing. And they will get the income that 
comes from, you know, the disposition of their farm or what 
savings they were able to accrue after all of those years of hard 
work. And she told me that their income in 2001, combined, 
and I’m not sure in whose name most of it is, was about 
$42,000 — $42,000. 
 
Now she wrote to you, Mr. Minister, no doubt your office will 

have many letters so I’m not expecting you to know chapter and 
verse of her case. But she wrote to you, the letter that I quoted 
two days ago, that you asked today that we would table them 
all, a lot of them are to you. This one’s one of them. 
 
And this particular lady, she just assumed that she would 
probably be on the low end of an increase. So she says in her 
letter, if the fee goes up 10 per cent, that means $1,000 less for 
the spouse at home. And she goes on to outline the things that 
she’s worried about — the dental needs of her and her husband 
who’s now in long-term care at the Palliser Regional Care 
Centre; the fact that he’s incontinent and that requires certain 
special needs that are very expensive, on a 24-hour basis; their 
drug and prescription requirements. 
 
So by my calculation, if most of the income, the greater part of 
the income, is in his name, you can cut it in half — the 
government will allow them to do that — so they’re going to be 
around that $21,000 annual income, pay fees based on that. 
Assuming that most of the $42,000 is in this gentleman . . . is in 
the long-term care patient’s name, the husband of the couple. 
 
And so tell me that I’m wrong in assuming, concluding, that 
there was a $322 increase, per month, that she would be looking 
forward to; that the increase she’s going to have to try to find 
out of her household budget is going to be up over $3,800. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If you’re using a figure of about $1,800 a 
month, then I think you are correct. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You know that’s a 
grave concern because she’s talked to me about her particular 
case. This is not a wealthy couple. This is a couple that now has 
to maintain two residences effectively — one that’s very costly 
in long-term care at the Palliser and then their own private 
residence. And I’ve talked to her on the phone many, many 
times. 
 
Minister, I can tell you she is legitimately concerned about her 
ability to afford to operate her car. I think the car’s paid for but 
it’s $800 to plate it a year, she says. And it’s her means of 
transportation to visit her husband at the Palliser care centre. 
 
I could tell you she’s worried about keeping . . . maintaining the 
private home that her and her husband worked a lifetime to 
build. 
 
And I can also tell you . . . I just want to read for you if I can, 
Mr. Minister, and I’ll get right to a question, Mr. Chairman. 
Here’s the last part of her letter to you: 
 

I’m sure this budget was drawn by the government who 
don’t realize who a nursing patient leaves behind when he 
or she ends up in a nursing home. Would the government 
stop and realize and reconsider the blunder they have made. 
I have been an NDP supporter all my voting years. But if 
things don’t change and this government doesn’t smarten 
up, my mind might change too. 
 
(She says) hoping to hear from you. 

 
And that’s the case we bring. This is not a wealthy couple that 
can afford another $4,000 a year. 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

 

You know I talked about her . . . she talked about her quality of 
life already trying to just maintain it under the old regime . . . 
fee regime. She says, we cancelled our . . . You know I used to 
have a little dish to have some extra TV channels, we don’t 
have that any more; I don’t go out any more, except maybe to 
visit my husband at the Palliser care centre. 
 
This is not a couple of great means. But it is a couple that has 
built . . . frankly contributed to building your political party, 
building our part of the province as a farm family, and she 
makes this very good point. 
 
And so I know this question’s getting repetitive and I apologize 
for that, Mr. Minister. But the question is this: why won’t you 
reconsider this? Even at $14 million, when you juxtapose it 
against what’s happening in the Crowns even — even when you 
juxtapose it against that — there’s obviously resources out there 
that can be made available to the government through Crown 
dividends anyway. Why wouldn’t you reconsider, for $14 
million, doing this to this particular couple in the city of Swift 
Current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member can assure 
this woman that I will respond to her letter, and I know that the 
letter is there, and we’re working at that. 
 
And I would also . . . will be reminding her that she should talk 
with the people there in the Swift Current area, and with the 
people of the department to make sure that the best arrangement 
can be made around her particular circumstances. 
 
But I remind the member that we have $337 million, and we are 
subsidizing, or we’re paying for 75 per cent of these costs in 
long-term care — 74 per cent starting in October 1. And we 
have a challenge right across the whole health system, right 
across government, to sort out where the dollars come. 
 
Now I know that the area that the member opposite represents is 
quite keen on asking the Department of Health to pay almost 
100 per cent of the cost of building a new facility for the 
Southwest. And that is something that the department has to 
weigh. They have to weigh the capital costs of facilities; they 
have to weigh the capital costs of equipment; they have to 
weigh the capital . . . or the operating costs of the total system. 
And all of these different things are part of the kinds of choices 
that we make. 
 
Now I’m very much in favour of providing the new facilities 
that are needed right across the province. And we have to do it 
in a reasonable way. Sometimes it will answer the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale’s questions about replacing facilities and 
updating them in the long-term area; other times it will provide 
new clinic space, new primary-care space, and those kinds of 
things. 
 
But one of our challenges now is with the resources we have, to 
try to balance what we’re doing. 
 
And in this particular case, we’re asking for a little greater 
contribution from some of the people who are in the long-term 
care system. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. How dare you, sir, 

lay at the feet of this couple and this lady — who has, as by 
your own admission, supported your party all her voting life — 
how dare you lay at her feet, now that she faces a potential 
$4,000 increase in her long-term care fees thanks to your 
government, how dare you lay at her feet the spectre of the need 
in Swift Current for a regional hospital. 
 
That’s the trade-off you’re suggesting with that kind of answer. 
And you kind of went about a circuitous route to get there. 
 
And, Minister, you even did it in a soft enough tone. But that’s 
your point. It’s either one or the other for this couple and the 
others like it in Swift Current. You can’t have it both. You can’t 
have affordable long-term care and a proper regional facility. 
 
That isn’t acceptable, Mr. Minister. That is not acceptable. In 
fact, I think you’d agree that both things are needed in terms of 
long-term care in the city of Swift Current or any other places. 
 
While the member chirps from her feet that maybe they should 
raise taxes — the member for Meewasin. I’ll tell you that . . . 
I’ll tell that member through the Chair what she should do; she 
should stop the ridiculous spending in the Crown sector. Maybe 
she should speak up at caucus, maybe she should say something 
at her caucus meetings and say, you know what guys, maybe 
our priorities are wrong. Maybe our priorities are wrong when 
we would rather invest in Australia . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well some others are chirping from their seat, 
Mr. Chairman. The member for Saskatoon Nutana, the member 
for Yorkton are saying, well Brad, what are you doing? Nobody 
is watching on television. 
 
This isn’t about who’s watching on television. Unlike the party 
over there, this isn’t about scoring political points. This is about 
a misguided scheme to take out the fact that you couldn’t 
balance your budget on seniors, on the sick and the elderly. 
That’s what it’s about. 
 
So I want to ask the minister: is that what he’s saying to the 
people of Swift Current, either these exorbitant fee hikes for 
long-term care or your new regional facility? Is that what he’s 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite knows 
that that is not what I am saying. He knows that what I’m 
saying is that we have challenges right across this province. 
 
Now if the member wishes me to say some provocative things, I 
can say if you multiply the figure that we spend on long-term 
care by two . . . So we have $337 million times two, and that 
pretty well approximates the amount of interest that we pay 
each year on the debt that was racked up during the 80s when 
that fellow was working for the government of this province. 
 
And I guess what I need to remind everybody is that one of the 
challenges that we’ve had during the 90s, since the ’91 election, 
is to get the house in order so that we can pay for the services 
that are needed for people across the province. 
 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

We have cleaned up all of the problems in the Crowns as far as 
the debts go so that they actually now provide revenue that is 
used for health, education, and highways throughout the system. 
We’ve ended up getting a handle on the total costs of 
government in a way that allows us to look at everything that 
we’re doing and make some of the appropriate plans for the 
future of a sustainable health care system. 
 
All of these things are extremely important and we will 
continue to work with all of the people of the province to make 
sure that the taxation levels are reasonable, that they have 
enough money to do the things that we need to do. But we will 
look at those places where there may be some contribution from 
those that have a little bit more money than some others to help 
make sure that the whole scheme works. 
 
But the plan that we have is a balanced plan; it’s a long-term 
plan; and it’s also a plan where we listen carefully to people. 
And I want to emphasize to all of the public who may be 
viewing this particular session today that if they have any 
specific concern about their own situation, make sure that they 
contact the Department of Health or my office so that they can 
ask some of these questions. Because what is happening is that 
there’s information getting out that is creating a level of fear 
that’s unnecessary. 
 
We want to make sure that people can have the kind of care that 
they need in the long term, and that we can have all of the 
different things that all of us want for our health care system. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As we know, 
this government in its recent provincial budget announced a 
new fee structure for long-term care residents. Residents will 
pay a monthly minimum fee of $828 plus 90 per cent of their 
monthly income. The maximum amount goes from $1,561 per 
month to $3,875 per month which is a huge 148 per cent 
increase. 
 
Other examples of this increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
people that have a annual income of $14,400, an 8.85 per cent 
increase; annual income of $16,800, a 15.75 per cent increase. 
 
It goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker — $28,800 annual income, a 
36.73 per cent income. People that have an annual income of 
$38,400, 80.23 per cent income . . . increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other interesting aspects of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 
someone’s husband is going to . . . into the home and he earns 
$55,000 and his wife earns $10,000, then their income is 
combined and 50 per cent of their combined income is used. 
The rate would be calculated from an annual income of 
$32,500. 
 
If someone’s wife, who earns less, is going into a home, say 
$10,000 per year, then the rate can be set on her income alone. 
This is allowed only if they go through an involuntary 
separation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government’s forcing couples who’ve 
lived together for . . . been married together for 50 or 60 years 
to be forced into an involuntary separation in order to have the 
money for their long-term care needs and for other things that 
they would like to spend money on. 

This government is only leaving 10 per cent of the income to 
cover prescription drugs, medical needs, and personal items that 
the couple would like to spend money on. 
 
Petitions are coming in from all over Saskatchewan — all over 
Redberry Lake constituency — from seniors from Hafford, and 
Blaine Lake, and Delisle, Vanscoy, and other communities. 
And people are outraged at the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in this province. 
 
The seniors of this province have worked all their life to build, 
not only their nest egg for retirement, but built the province. 
And right now we find that this government is gouging the 
seniors. They are really using the seniors to . . . in their 
unfortunate attempt to try to balance the budget. And 
unfortunately this government is running a deficit budget again. 
And instead of holding these pioneers in high esteem, really 
placing them on a pedestal, they are gouging these people in the 
last years of their life. 
 
I would just like to quote from The Leader-Post. I quote: 
 

“This increase in long-term care fees is callous . . . 
calculating against those seniors who have little voice. This 
is a cowardly action,” she wrote. 

 
And Mr. Speaker, the seniors across this province agree with 
that. They believe that the pioneers of this province have 
worked long and hard and deserve to be held in higher regard 
than this government is putting them in. 
 
And I would just like to ask the minister, will his government 
reverse these exorbitant long-term care fees as the 
Saskatchewan government has announced that we would do if 
we form government after the next election? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s unfortunate 
that there was so much information put forward before that 
question that causes some concern for people. 
 
Let me talk again about the question of people living apart 
through no choice of their own. 
 
This does not affect marital status. This is only an application 
form within the Department of Health that allows them to 
calculate the fees based on a lower income for the person who 
may be in long-term care. This is something that is done for the 
benefit of the couple in general, and it’s not helpful when the 
member opposite goes into great length about how there’s some 
kind of forcing a change in somebody’s marital status. That is 
not true at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to say again that we in this government are 
providing $337 million. It subsidizes just under 75 per cent of 
the total system when we go into the new fees in the fall. And 
this is . . . any of the money that we’re requesting from the 
public is based on an income test, based on what people can pay 
based on their income, and that that’s something that we’re 
doing on a basis that allows us to have contribution from people 
at this particular time. 
 



April 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

 

I guess the important thing is to say, is that we are going to 
provide the health care for people in the long term. We’re going 
to provide it in a way that is affordable and reasonable. We’re 
going to do it on a sustainable basis. And we all have to work 
together to figure out how we’re going to provide the funds to 
do that. 
 
And we will listen carefully to what people say and we will 
work with people to make sure that the right solutions are 
brought forward. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question for the Minister of Health is, I guess, a little bit along 
the same lines as long-term care, but maybe it’s prior to 
long-term care, prior to a citizen of the province going into 
long-term care. It’s more dealing with home care. 
 
I had a phone call from a nurse this morning from the 
constituency that I represent, Indian Head-Milestone, that had 
some real concerns with what she perceives are some real 
cutbacks in home care in the area. 
 
And so I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d ask the minister first of 
all to give maybe a brief outline of where his department is 
going in the near future. Has there been anything in the past that 
says, cut back on home care? Are they going to be putting more 
money into home care? Because certainly from the phone call 
that I had received this morning, and a couple of other calls, 
there was some real concern around the home care offered in 
the province. 
 
So I’d just first of all like to hear his comments on the issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the question is about whether 
there’s more money into the home care system, generally, 
across the province. And what I would say is that in last year’s 
budget it was about eighty-six and a half million dollars that 
went into home care. This year, it’ll be 92.6 million. 
 
But I would like to point out that since 1991, the home care 
budget has gone from about 29 million, or just under $30 
million, now to over $90 million. So it’s tripled in the years that 
this government has been working in this particular field. 
 
And so I thank that member for that particular question. And we 
continue to be committed to home care and we will work with 
the new regional health authorities as we have been working 
with the health districts. And we’ll make sure that people get 
the kinds of care that they need. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A couple 
more questions on the home care. I noticed you had mentioned 
certainly the budget has increased, and in this year it increased 
also, although, I guess, maybe whether it’s an anecdotal 
situation that the nurse in my constituency mentioned . . . She 
was really concerned that maybe there was not as much money 
going to the front-line services, the people that actually deliver 
home care, as what was prior. Now, this is just one situation, 
and I’ll pursue it further. 
 
But has there been any direction from government? I mean, yes, 
you put more money in. What type of assurances do you have 
that although you’ve put more money in, more is going to 

actually people going into the homes and assisting seniors to 
stay in their homes longer? Because that is a whole point of this 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — On an annual basis we ask the health 
districts to provide us with a service plan for what kind of 
services they’re going to provide, and one of the . . . the date 
this year that they will be providing those is by May 15 and so 
we will see what the plan is for the next year. 
 
One of the goals in our action plan that we released in 
December was to actually end up with the service plans and all 
of these things being completed sooner so that we can actually 
have the planning go in a much more coordinated basis. This is 
actually a process that’s happening across the country. 
 
I think the system that we’re coming forward with will be one 
of the best — if not the best — by the time we have it fully 
implemented a year from now. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One last question, Mr. Minister of Health, 
to the Minister of Health, is that this person was talking about 
home care and the fact that it had been reduced, that the people 
in this area could only receive home care twice a week. The 
hours of home care were from 8 to 4, not on . . . Monday to 
Friday. And it just seemed that, you know, when you look at the 
increase in long-term care fees . . . And I know people all over 
the province are shuddering with the fact that they may be faced 
with those fee increases in the next year or two if their spouse is 
no longer able to stay at home. 
 
And it really seems like they’re looking at it from the one side, 
where the fees are increasing, and they don’t want to be put in 
that situation. But then, when they rely on the health district to 
offer maybe a stronger home care facility or operation, and that 
doesn’t seem to be there either. 
 
Now perhaps this is a health district’s decision to go down to 
only two visits per week, hours from 8 till 4, Monday to Friday. 
I’m not sure. But you know, it’s a real concern for people all 
over the province that when they look into the future and they 
see that they may be forced into a long-term care home and now 
that the fees are up to 90 per cent of their income, they really 
shudder. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I guess I would ask you, what . . . is the 
department going to put maybe more emphasis on home care so 
people aren’t forced into this 90 per cent of their salary being 
taken for their care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The department and the government 
recognizes that people would prefer to live at home and whether 
that . . . and they’d prefer to be there and so that that’s why we 
do provide the assistance. 
 
Also, just as it’s a better place for people to live to be in their 
own home with the kind of assistance that they need, it’s also 
less of a cost to all of the people of the province. 
 
And so one of the challenges that we have is to get the right mix 
of facilities that we need. We know, based on a national 
average, that we have more long-term care beds than many 
other parts of the country. I think the national average is 100 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2002 

 

beds per . . . 100 beds per 10,000 people, and we’re at about 
118. The point though that I’m trying to make to you is that 
your basic premise is correct, is that we would rather provide 
supports to people in their homes than in some of these other 
places. 
 
Now some of the specific questions that you had about 
whatever policy issues that are happening there, that’s not 
provincial policy. And that may be something to do with a 
temporary shortage of some workers or some other scheduling 
things or things like that, but that overall the plan is to try to 
design the services to meet the needs of the people in a way that 
is appropriate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 
like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for his 
answers to the questions this afternoon. And while I have this 
opportunity, since the minister won’t let me speak to any of the 
health care officials, I’d like to thank the officials as well and 
also express that I won’t take it personally if we run into each 
other at health conferences and you shun me. I understand that 
you’re following the parliamentary precedent that the minister 
has laid down. 
 
So thank you to everyone for being here this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would also like to thank the officials. 
And I guess I’m quite sad that the member would make the kind 
of comments that he just made about how our system works. I 
mean, that’s just not appropriate and at some point he may want 
to apologize to me personally about that. 
 
But what I would also like to say is that we have had many, 
many capable people throughout the province providing good 
health care for all of our citizens. There have been many 
challenges and we’re continuing to meet those challenges. 
We’re using the good ideas, the good skills, of the unions, the 
management, the patients, the doctors — all of the other people 
who are involved in the system — to develop a Saskatchewan 
solution to some of the challenges that are being faced right 
across North America, and I would say right across the world 
around rising health care costs. 
 
And what we have to do is work together to make this all work. 
And I would even thank the member opposite for all of the 
good advice, and every once in a while there’s a real gem and 
we actually work and see if we can’t polish it so that it actually 
works. So thank you very much. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to wish everybody an enjoyable and 
peaceful weekend. This House stands adjourned until Monday 
at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:59. 
 


	Kim Ehman Produces Films on Bullying
	Kim Ehman Produces Films on Bullying

