















































Hansard: April 10, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 593 
 April 10, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents of Carrot River Valley 
concerned about certain inadequacies in the provincial tobacco 
legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Carrot River, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan who 
would like to see the urgent issue of helping children who are 
currently being abused and exploited through the sex trade 
addressed immediately. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Lumsden, Yellow Grass, and Emerald Park. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the tobacco legislation. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Tisdale. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with the overfishing in Lake of the Prairies. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Langenburg, Tantallon, Atwater, Stockholm, and 
Gerald, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
this afternoon to present a petition signed by citizens concerned 
with the deplorable condition of Highway 339. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals, Mr. Speaker, from the 
community of Avonlea, Truax, Drinkwater, Hearne, and 
Sherwood Park, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the shape of our highways. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 

 
And as in duty bound, the petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon, 
Regina, Tyvan, Weyburn, Francis, and Lang. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by citizens of Weyburn and Parry. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to halt crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premiums rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to read from citizens concerned about the highway from 
Junction No. 2 near Simpson to Highway No. 15. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Watrous, Esther, Alberta, 
Mayerthorpe, Alberta, Weyburn, Lucky Lake, Saskatoon, and 
also from Williams Lake, BC (British Columbia). 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received as addendums to sessional papers no. 7, 11, 
17, 18, and 24. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
much money has been collected in permits from the 
Riverhurst Agricultural Products Ltd. since a deal with that 
company was signed under the transportation partnership 
agreement? 

 
Ms. Bakken: — . . . Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 23 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: how many new employees has 
SPMC hired since January 1, 2002; and, further to that, 
how many consultants has SPMC hired since January 1, 
2002 and what is their job description? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to introduce to you and through you and ask all members 
of the Assembly to welcome too, a gentleman seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Louis Kenny, who is the chairman of the SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) board of directors, 
Mr. Speaker, and also an active member of the ethanol 
committee with Treaty Four. I want everybody to please join 
me in welcoming Mr. Kenny here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party 
official opposition I too would like to welcome Mr. Kenny to 
the Assembly today. We do hope you enjoy the proceedings and 
enjoy your time here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Credit Union Central Reception 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s indeed a pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to talk about 
a very special occasion that occurred in the city of Regina last 
evening. The delegates of Credit Union Central of 
Saskatchewan held a reception at the Hotel Saskatchewan and 
myself, along with many of my colleagues on this side of the 
House, had the great pleasure of attending this fine social event. 
 
It was also a great opportunity to meet with the many credit 
union representatives in attendance and to talk about the many 
issues of the day facing our province. Mr. Speaker, one of those 
issues that was the talk of the room last night was that of the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government’s decision to buy 
into an Alberta insurance company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that money is being used to compete against 
insurance companies in Saskatchewan. Many credit union 
people last night were disappointed with the NDP decision to 
use government money to compete against them. And they 
wished that there was at least some NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please, 
order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Some of the comments, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the representatives wish that there was at least some NDP 
members there that so they could tell them directly of their 
dissatisfaction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I, along with my fellow colleagues 
on this side of the House, would like to extend our most sincere 
thanks to Credit Union for a successful evening of networking 
and socializing. It’s just too bad that members on the other side 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

 

of the House chose not to attend. They missed a great evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Building Through the Roof 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday with the 
other world and provincial events, one headline on the front 
page of the StarPhoenix was neglected. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to rectify that today. 
 
The headline read, “Building through the roof.” Construction in 
Saskatoon is soaring in the first two months of 2002, jumping 
by 85.6 per cent. The value of building permits grew to over 72 
million from 39 million. That means that Saskatoon’s growth is 
third among Canada’s 28 major cities. 
 

Dale Botting, CEO of the Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority, said 2002 is promising to be a 
very strong (very strong) for commercial construction, 
which rose 62.5 per cent to $18.4 million in the first two 
months (of 2002) . . . 

 
“Commercial numbers are out of sight, and we’re going to 
see a record year in commercial this year,” said Botting . . . 
 
He said commercial construction will be led by big box 
stores going up near the University of Saskatchewan . . . on 
Eighth Street (occupying former car dealership property) as 
well as some activity on the west side (of the city). 

 
Mr. Speaker, industrial permits were up 97 per cent over 2000, 
making 2001 a record year with bigger growth than any other 
city. 
 
Dale Botting went on to elaborate on his point, stating that: 
 

That’s how you build an economy. If you build a strong 
industrial base, commercial follows and after commercial 
. . . you build residential permit value and of course jobs all 
the way through. 

 
Building fever has also infected the university campus due to 
projects under construction, where $29.3 million was 
committed at the start of the year. A big year on campus, said 
Botting. 
 
Residential permits also grew 80 per cent to 23.5 million. 
Further growth is in condominiums and homes. Certainly this is 
good news for Saskatchewan . . . for Saskatoon and good news 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Boston Marathon 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to take a moment to recognize the outstanding 
achievements of two Regina residents, one of whom happens to 
work for the Saskatchewan Party caucus office. 
 
On Monday Saskatchewan Party communications director Iain 
Harry will fulfill a lifelong goal of his by running in the 106th 

Boston Marathon. Both Iain and his girlfriend Denise 
Ackerman qualified for the Boston Marathon at last year’s 
Edmonton Marathon. They will be leaving for Boston tomorrow 
to take part in this year’s race. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of us as we get older — I don’t know who 
wrote this — tend to shy away from activities involving a great 
deal of physical endurance. Iain’s athletic career has taken the 
opposite direction. He has gone from being a bullfighter, a sport 
that takes 8 seconds . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Bull rider. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Bull rider. Maybe a fighter too — to being 
a marathon runner and a triathlete, sports which take several 
hours to complete and many thousands of hours of training, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On Monday he will reach another important milestone by taking 
part in his first Boston Marathon. Mr. Speaker, on Monday we 
will be following Iain’s progress closely. He will be issued a 
computer chip that will enable us here in Saskatchewan to get 
real-time updates on how he is proceeding in the race. 
 
Some of us that know Iain well have often thought that he 
should be subject to some sort of electronic monitoring, Mr. 
Speaker, so we’re really getting our wish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of the House to 
join with me in congratulating Iain and Denise on their 
excellent adventure in Boston. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Commerce Students 
Win Competition — Again 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as someone 
who has actually run four marathons, I would like to join in, in 
giving my best wishes to Iain and his girlfriend as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was minister of Post-Secondary Education for 
just a few brief months. But in that time I was very quickly 
made aware of the excellent students in our universities and 
technical schools, as were other members. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, my statement today is an encore of 
one given on March 25 by the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. Same member statement, same award-winning 
students, different competition. 
 
(13:45) 
 
You will remember that the member announced that two U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) Commerce students won first 
place in a student business plan competition held at the 
University of Nebraska in Lincoln. Dan Murza and Cory Weiss 
won with the idea for Sandow SK Classic, a manufacturer and 
on-line store that features replicated and authentic collectible 
1970s hockey jerseys. By the way, Mr. Speaker, they won 7,500 
US (United States) for their efforts. 
 
I’m happy to report that the team has done it again — this time 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

at the Queen’s entrepreneur’s competition in Kingston, Ontario. 
With the same business plan, they placed first among 20 teams, 
defeating runner-up teams from Ontario, Nova Scotia, and some 
school called Harvard. 
 
This is Canada so they won a bit less — 3,000 Canadian, but 
I’m sure that they happily accepted the award and the prize. 
 
I join the member from Meewasin in congratulating Dan and 
Cory. Thanks to the outstanding university education 
opportunities here in Saskatchewan, these students are now 
prepared to make their mark in the workplaces of the world. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Biggar School Division Labour Dispute 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, a bitter labour dispute has been 
going on in the Biggar School Division for some time now. 
Forty-six support workers have been on strike since February 4 
of this year. Library assistants, secretaries, and caretakers are 
seeking an agreement on working conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the nurses who recently received the 20 per 
cent increase in this strike, money is secondary. It’s really about 
labour practises. 
 
Although I support the collective bargaining process, I think 
that it’s time that this province moved away from adversarial 
approaches to bargaining and focusing on problem solving. And 
it disturbs me, Mr. Speaker, when I see increasing incidents of 
labour unrest in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am told that this is the first strike in the K to 12 
system in 25 years, and I certainly hope that it isn’t an 
indication of what’s to come. 
 
This strike is affecting the communities of Biggar, Cando, 
Landis, Handel, Sonningdale and three Hutterite colonies, and it 
is driving a wedge between the people in these communities. 
These communities are too small for this kind of conflict and 
divisiveness to be going on, and it will take a long time to heal 
the wounds that this dispute has caused in these communities. 
 
The people of these communities want their situation to be 
resolved as quickly as possible. This strike is adversely 
affecting children, teachers and parents. I strongly recommend 
that the two sides sit down in a non-adversarial way and 
reconcile their differences once and for all. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pangman Duo Win Top Prize at Science 
Fair for Second Year 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the Weyburn Review 
recently reported that the community of Pangman is home to 
two budding scientists. Shannon Lozinsky and Megan Howse 
are grade 12 students who will represent Saskatchewan at the 

Youth Science Foundation’s Canada-Wide Science Fair in 
Saskatoon, after winning first in the Southeast Regional Science 
Fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students demonstrate the high quality of 
education in schools across this province. Saskatchewan 
students do excel in the fields of mathematics and science. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, this Pangman duo has shown their ability in 
science not once but twice, since this is the second year in a row 
they will appear at the national competition. 
 
I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that Ms. Lozinsky and Ms. Howse 
will represent this province well, no matter their placing. These 
two young people have something far more valuable than a blue 
ribbon. They have scientific imaginations that will bring our 
communities greater health and prosperity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this Assembly to join with 
me in congratulating their work so far, and in wishing them 
luck in the national competition in May. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lakeland and District Citizens of the Year 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 
my pleasure to participate in the Lakeland and District Citizen 
of the Year Dinner on Saturday evening, April 6, 2002. 
Traditionally, Mr. Speaker, events such as these provide 
communities the opportunity to recognize one of their own for 
dedication and contribution to their hometown. 
 
Often, Mr. Speaker, communities are faced with the difficult 
choice of narrowing the field of qualified candidates down to 
one. It’s a difficult choice indeed. 
 
The Lakeland area was able to narrow its choice down to two, 
Mr. Speaker. Fortunately, these two people are husband and 
wife. 
 
Maurice and Doris Parent are the Lakeland and District 2001 
Citizens of the Year. Affectionately referred to as Mo and Do, 
Mr. Speaker, this couple of high-energy, community-involved 
entrepreneurs are always found in the middle of or at the 
forefront of local events. 
 
Whether it’s with the local Lions Club, the Métis local, or the 
Archery Club, Mo is kept busy with his passion for the great 
outdoors. 
 
Do is kept equally involved, either assisting Mo in his 
endeavours, plus, Mr. Speaker, she is also involved with the 
snowmobile club, chamber of commerce, and other sundry 
opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to bring to this 
honoured Assembly further recognition for Maurice and Doris 
Parent, and I ask all members to please join me in 
congratulating this very special couple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Water Quality 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister of excuses. 
 
Yesterday the minister revealed that Saskatchewan 
communities facing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would remind the member that 
he’s to refer to all members by their proper title in the 
Assembly. Question period is to ask ministers of the Crown 
questions. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Then to the 
Minister of Northern Affairs. Yesterday, the minister revealed 
that Saskatchewan communities facing water quality problems 
have two months to get their act together or face the 
consequences. Communities across the province are scrambling 
to try and understand what that will mean for them. Well, 
according to the minister, it might mean jail time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for 10 years the NDP have made cuts to the water 
quality monitoring program. They did all of this knowing that 
water quality in the province of Saskatchewan would be 
compromised. They did this knowing that people’s health 
would be put at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP say if municipalities don’t comply with 
still unknown regulations, they will be thrown in jail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP charge municipalities for poor 
water quality when they have not fulfilled their own mandate to 
provide safe drinking water in the province of Saskatchewan for 
the last 10 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, when I stand in this 
Assembly and say this government has a plan to talk about 
helping communities with infrastructure work, this government 
has a plan to make sure inspections are done on a more timely 
basis, this government has a plan to work with regulations, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has a plan to work with all the 
communities that have challenges out there, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has a plan, I’ve asked that member not to play 
politics with this and I’ll explain to him very clearly: we are 
going to work with all the communities. 
 
And we’re pointing out that those communities that don’t 
follow the rules on a constant basis, those communities that 
knowingly operate their system while breaking the rules, those 
are the communities that we’re going to focus on, Mr. Speaker. 
And I can assure you that it’s only in extreme cases, Mr. 
Speaker, that there will be trouble. I know that many 
communities, mayors and civic leaders take their responsibility 
very seriously. 
 
So I point out again, rules and regulations are part of the 
process, we will work to explain those rules and we’ll work this 
thing through, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in one of 
those communities that the minister referred to last night, in the 
city of North Battleford, they held a public meeting to discuss 
Justice Laing’s report on the contaminated water situation. The 
people who attended the meeting were very concerned. And I’ll 
quote a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) report about 
this concern: 
 

People said the provincial government has done more to 
cover its own assumed liability than help communities 
ensure safe water. 
 

That’s it in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker. While Saskatchewan towns 
and villages are doing everything they can to fix their water 
problems, the NDP is doing nothing but threatening them. 
They’ve had their revenue sharing cut, they’ve been told to wait 
and see if the infrastructure program is approved, but in the 
meantime, Mr. Speaker, the NDP says, be prepared to go to jail 
if you don’t comply with our rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why will the NDP not accept their own 
responsibility for reducing water quality in this province over 
the last 10 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a 
plan, as I mentioned. We’ve gone through the inquiry, we’ve 
learned, and as a result of the recommendations — we accept 
the recommendations, we have a plan to meet those 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to work with all the communities. We are going to 
explain the rules. We’re going to take time to work with the 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, only in extreme cases where people 
knowingly and consistently don’t follow the rules . . . well this 
government has got to stand up and we’ve got to say, you will 
follow the rules because the recommendations in Laing says 
you will follow the rules, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are showing leadership. It is time that we get off our duff 
and both parties on both sides of this House have to know this is 
an incredible responsibility. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, I will point out one thing. 
That party’s Finance critic, and I will give you the information 
here, dated March 30, 2001, and I quote: 
 

Incredibly the NDP has added 515 new government 
employees in one year, Krawetz said. 

 
Quote: 
 

It is really a slap in the face for every Saskatchewan 
resident taxpayer. 

 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was their comment a year ago. Have they 
changed their mind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Over and over and over again in Mr. 
Justice Laing’s report he states that it was the NDP’s decisions 
over the last 10 years that contributed directly to the 
contamination to the water supply in North Battleford and in 
other communities across the province. He says the cabinet 
knew what the consequences of their decisions were going to 
be. He said that even after the NDP accepted the CDI (cabinet 
decision item) in 2000, that they didn’t commit the finances to 
accomplish the objectives. He said SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) was an inadequate 
and ineffective regulator and the NDP had not fulfilled their 
mandate. 
 
The people of North Battleford and the people of Saskatchewan 
are quite right, Mr. Speaker. The NDP are hiding from their 
own responsibility and are now dumping everything onto the 
backs of communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night the mayor of North Battleford had the 
grace to apologize to the people of that city who got sick from 
contaminated water. When, Mr. Minister, are you going to 
apologize? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just remind the member to make all of his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is very important to 
point out that Justice Laing was asked to find out what went 
wrong and to make sure it never happens again. That was good 
work that he done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on this side of the House we are going to respond to those 
recommendations by way of action. Not only are we going to 
make sure that there’s some funding support — and those 
details are coming; not only are we going to make sure that we 
have inspections — and those details are coming; not only are 
we going to make sure that we protect water at source — those 
details are on their way; but, Mr. Speaker, we also got some 
rules and regulation that we have to enforce. 
 
But before we do all that, we’re going to work with every 
community, Mr. Speaker. Every community will be fully aware 
of what the rules are and the regulations are and the 
implications. We have to make sure we take a tough approach 
with this. Public health is so very important in this effort, Mr. 
Speaker. And that party ought to know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
answer to the written questions I submitted to the Minister of 
Environment earlier in this session, the Environment 
department says that there six discharges of raw sewage that 
were reported to them in the last year. Of those six discharges, 
three occurred in the city of North Battleford on the dates of 
July 16, July 22, and July 25, 2001. Coincidentally, the 

boil-water advisory in North Battleford was lifted on July 25 — 
the same day as the last raw sewage discharge into the North 
Saskatchewan River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this House why SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) lifted 
the North Battleford water advisory when they knew that there 
had been recent discharges of raw sewage just upstream from 
the water treatment plant, including one on that very day. Will 
he tell us if the people of North Battleford were notified? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it should be known that 
the commission has done some good work. It went through all 
the processes, it went to a lot of people to hear a lot of different 
stories, Mr. Speaker. We are here today to say that we have a 
plan of action. And what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
we’re not going to speculate, we’re not going to allow the 
fearmongering that the opposition is trying to do. 
 
We are going to stand in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to answer questions over the next coming weeks and 
hope . . . the next coming months about what we need to do to 
work together to put forward this plan of ours to make sure that 
water quality in Saskatchewan’s towns, cities, and villages is 
there for the people to enjoy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, you can make all the allegations you want. 
The bottom line here is we have some good progress being 
made, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan, we got inspectors, we got 
rules, we got regulations, and, Mr. Speaker, we have also some 
financial support. 
 
And those details are coming so we do have a good plan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s been some good work done in the 
past and there’s greater work to be done in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — . . . Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government made deliberate choices that resulted in over 7,000 
people getting sick. Why didn’t they at least respect the right of 
the people of North Battleford to know there had been a sewage 
discharge and allow them a choice not to use the water if they 
didn’t feel safe? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the moment we heard 
there was trouble in North Battleford, our Premier went to 
North Battleford. And what did our Premier do? The same day 
the Premier was there, and what did the Premier do, Mr. 
Speaker? He didn’t make any excuses. He said, we will have an 
inquiry. We will find out what went wrong and we’ll find out 
how that will never happen again to another Saskatchewan 
town, village, or city, Mr. Speaker. That’s what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

 

Recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — So, Mr. Speaker, I think the most 
important thing is leadership is being on this file. What you’ve 
got to do is make sure you keep the fearmongering out of it, 
make sure you keep the politics out of it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the opposition to stop whining 
and let’s get on with the work that is necessary to make this file 
finally come to a conclusion where all people of Saskatchewan 
can have safe water for decades to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund is part of 
the Environment department. It earns its revenues from the sale 
of hunting, trapping, and angling licences which are used to 
secure fish and wildlife habitats, improve resources, promote 
resource education and endangered species programming. This 
fund, Mr. Speaker, is overseen by a steering committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: can the 
minister explain the role and the responsibility of the steering 
committee for this fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well finally, Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to be able to take a question on the environment. And I 
believe that the member opposite, quite frankly, has already 
outlined in detail for members of this House just exactly what 
the purposes of the Fish and Wildlife Fund are and also the 
steering committee. 
 
They are an oversight committee. They look . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Overseeing committee then, if people would 
prefer me to use that. 
 
This committee is there to ensure that the mandated uses of the 
Fish and Wildlife Fund happen. The mandated uses of the fund 
are habitat protection, habitat development and management, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of a budget briefing 
document that was sent to the Fish and Wildlife Fund steering 
committee. And, Mr. Speaker, committee members are outraged 
that the NDP are going to redirect their fund’s surplus to pay for 
the NDP’s new water regulation plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the document, the NDP will move 
$1.6 million from the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund to 
supply the annual half a million dollar grant to the 
Saskatchewan Wetland Conservation Corporation and, Mr. 
Speaker, to hire 17 full-time equivalent positions. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the document says a grant to the Wetland 
Conservation Corporation will now be an ongoing expenditure 
for the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and that, because 
of the loss of the fund’s surplus, will require future reduction in 
other habitat programs in future years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: can the 
minister explain why the NDP is draining the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund to now pay for the Wetland Conservation 
Corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wetlands 
Conservation Corporation will receive exactly the same money 
this year as they received last year — $503,000. They will then 
be able to be in a position to find matching grants or grants 
exceeding that amount from various partners to continue their 
work of wetlands protection. Mr. Speaker, we work in concert 
with various community groups to ensure that we have adequate 
wetlands conservation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on budget day, I have to tell you, I spoke with 
Lorne Scott and Joe Schemenauer of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Fund. I talked to them about what was happening with the 
Wetlands Corporation. As well, one of my staff, Dennis 
Sherratt, talked with them, and we’ve sent them letters and we 
continue to communicate with them about this fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, the 17 positions being funded by the 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund is said to be a one-time 
expenditure in this budget document, yet the document says 
these jobs will all be specifically related to the administration of 
the fund or be eco-regional staff, but it is curious why the Fish 
and Wildlife Development Fund needs 17 more people to do its 
work when its surplus is being drained but the fund’s budget is 
exactly the same as last year and the expenditure is said to be a 
this-year-only occurrence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is definitely something fishy going on. 
Perhaps the NDP are using this fund to hire more people for the 
Environment department and hiding the expenditure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the minister explain exactly 
what the 17 new staff people will do . . . will be doing in her 
department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the only 
thing that’s fishy in this House is the members opposite. You 
know they are deliberately trying to create a controversy where 
there is none. Habitat is being protected and will continue to be 
protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even before budget day there were 30 staff of 
Saskatchewan Environment, formerly the Department of 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management, that 
were paid for out of the fund — fish hatchery staff, seven; fish 
development staff, seven; and the balance worked on wildlife 
habitat developing and delivering the representative area 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

network program, which delivers over the past year over 14 
million acres to habitat protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now the extra staff are ecologists and technical 
field experts dealing with habitat protection and development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister tells us that there was consultation with the members 
of the Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
However the steering committee members say they weren’t 
consulted about their budget drain. They had specific 
conservation projects in mind that they needed to use their 
budget surplus to fund. The committee members say they had 
no idea what 17 new full-time employees will be doing because 
their budget was not increased this year and now their surplus 
has been drained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they think, and we think, that this is more fudge-it 
budget activity — robbing Peter to pay Paul; draining the Fish 
and Wildlife Development Fund to hire 17 more people for the 
Environment . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I’m finding it 
increasingly difficult to hear the member. Would the member 
proceed directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, draining the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund to hire 17 more people for the Environment 
department, using this fund to pay for the new level of 
bureaucracy, the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, why were the steering committee 
members not consulted about this budgetary move? And why is 
the minister using this fund to hide expenditures in her 
department? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, the steering committee were 
consulted about the general programs in this fund. They were 
consulted — they continue to be consulted. Mr. Speaker, at . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, at 8:30 this morning I had 
well over a half hour conversation with Mr. Lorne Scott about 
this very matter. Mr. Speaker, on budget day, I spoke with 
Lorne Scott and Joe Schemenauer about this matter. Mr. 
Speaker, on budget day Mr. Dennis Sherratt of my department 
spoke with many of the other members of the steering 
committee. We’ve also sent out a letter which appears to be the 
cause of the outrage on the side opposite. 
 
But I have to point out the mandated uses of the fund are habitat 
protection, habitat development and management. The staff that 
are now being paid out of that fund will be doing exactly that — 
habitat protection, development, and management. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment by Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance in Alberta 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned that the minister responsible 
for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) has 
violated his own financial disclosure rules as it relates to Crown 
corporations investments outside of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what the minister’s own rules say from the 
CIC annual report. Here’s what their rules say about disclosing 
these kinds of investments . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Here’s what their own rules say about how . . . 
what must be disclosed to the taxpayers of the province in terms 
of Crown investments: 
 

Crowns must report transactions likely to be of interest to 
legislators and the public, for example, external 
investments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, clearly a $1.7 million investment in the province 
of Alberta by SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is an 
external investment. The question to the minister is this: why 
did he . . . why did the NDP violate their own disclosure rules? 
Why did they try to hide this deal from the taxpayers of the 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
didn’t think I would get the opportunity for more bonus answers 
to the questions that were raised yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me be absolutely clear — I find it incredulous coming from 
this party talking about disclosure and transparency, Mr. 
Speaker. Our Crowns and our government should always strive 
for improved transparency; we should always do that. But let 
me tell you about some of the improvements that this 
government and our Crown corporations have engaged in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Since 1996 with the review of the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, we meet or exceed Toronto Stock Exchange standards, 
Mr. Speaker, for debt/equity ratios, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we received praise from the Canadian Royal . . . 
from the CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) World 
Markets for what they call, our enlightened dividend policy 
based on cash flow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board of Canada rated our 
governance structure amongst the best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
And that member says we don’t, we don’t provide transparency, 
Mr. Speaker. We should continue to strive to improve but I 
argue we have improved an incredible amount. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister did not answer the 
question. We’re talking about his rules, we’re talking about the 
NDP rules for disclosure of these investments. Why did the 
minister ignore those rules in the case of SGI’s investment in 
Hi-Alta? And will he commit to the Assembly that there are no 
other such deals out there that would violate his own disclosure 
rules? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s incredulous that 
that member would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there’s not 
disclosure here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the rules are clear — 
as he describes, they are clear, Mr. Speaker. That transaction 
did not come close, Mr. Speaker, to triggering the mechanism 
for describing what is a significant transaction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our government and our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, should, as I 
have said, strive to improve transparency, Mr. Speaker. They 
should always do that. But they have made, they have made 
monumental strides, Mr. Speaker, from what that government 
used to disclose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can talk also as well, Mr. Speaker, about the Institute of Public 
Administration of Canada who awarded CIC the Governor 
General’s gold medal, Mr. Speaker, for our governance and 
performance management systems, Mr. Speaker. That is much 
better than what that, what that party and that government has 
ever done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, as you look over to your 
right side and you see about 30-odd faces all with that same 
deer-in-the-headlights look, you have to know, Mr. Speaker, 
you’re looking at a group of men and women, you’re looking at 
a group of men and women who apparently don’t understand 
that this isn’t their money. This is the taxpayers’ money, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan have a right 
to know when they’re spending multi-millions of dollars in 
other provinces and around the world. That’s what we’re asking 
for, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. We’re not holding 
them to any higher standard than their very own. In 1997 that 
NDP government, that NDP government announced their own 
disclosure guidelines for Crown corporations. Now they appear 
to be violating them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier issues a press release when he loses 
his briefcase. Why won’t the minister tell the taxpayers of the 
province when he’s invested $2 million in Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I might as well put it on record, Mr. Speaker, as well. That 

member talks about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that party 
would know all about Dearborns caught in the headlights, Mr. 
Speaker — all about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me also say, Mr. 
Speaker, that if that member is so concerned about 
transparency, Mr. Speaker, so concerned about transparency 
and disclosure he might want to tell us and the people of 
Saskatchewan a little bit about the Country Music Hall of Fame, 
Mr. Speaker. He might want to tell us a little bit about that as 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Registered Plan (Retirement Income) 
Exemption Act/Loi portant insaisissabilité des 

régimes enregistrés (revenu de retraite) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 23 — The Registered Plan (Retirement Income) Exemption 
Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Before 
orders of the day, I would like to make a statement. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Rulings on Points of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Yesterday the Government Deputy House 
Leader raised a point of order concerning a phrase used by the 
member for Swift Current during oral question period. I also 
wish to thank the Opposition House Leader for his comments. 
 
I have reviewed the record and found that the member for Swift 
Current used the phrase hurricane Maynard in his question. 
 
Order, order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
While the word hurricane is not unparliamentary by itself, the 
use of it in conjunction with the Christian name of a sitting 
MLA is not appropriate. I do not interpret that the phrase was 
derogatory to the minister. However, when referring to other 
members in debate, it has been a long-standing practice that 
members be referred to in the third person, by their 
constituency, or by their title. 
 
I therefore ask the member for Swift Current to refrain from 
incorporating the names of members into his remarks. 
 
But this incident underscores a growing concern of mine. On 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

occasion, the amount of noise in this Chamber has reached 
unacceptable levels and renders it difficult, if not impossible, 
for members of both sides of the House and the Speaker to hear 
the words spoken in debate. 
 
In fact I had to consult the written record before we could 
address this matter and this illustrates the difference . . . or the 
difficulty caused by excessive noise. It also prevents the 
Assembly from dealing promptly with questionable language or 
possible rule infractions. 
 
I therefore remind all members of the need to measure their 
exuberance so that they are not drowning out the recognized 
member. 
 
I also wish to make a comment on another matter. Last night at 
10:25 p.m. the member for Moose Jaw raised a point of order 
that a quorum was not present. At that time I stated that it was 
not a point of order but I was obliged to proceed with a quorum 
count. 
 
To maintain consistency and clarity, I want to correct my 
statement and indicate to all members that this indeed . . . that it 
is indeed our practice to call for a quorum count on a point of 
order. The rule of order that is being breached by a lack of 
quorum is rule 5 in the Rules and Procedures of this Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I stand to 
respond on behalf of government to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members, please control 
your exuberance. I recognize the Government Whip and I 
would like to be able to hear specifically the questions that he is 
supplying . . . responses he’s supplying. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I stand on behalf of the 
government to table responses to written questions numbers 78 
through 87, and once again to thank those civil servants that 
worked extremely hard putting this information together so we 
could answer these questions for the members of the opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 
84, 85, 86, and 87 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Emergency Protection for Victims 
of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before proceeding to my 
prepared remarks in response or in comment on Bill No. 2, I’d 
like to ask your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, to introduce four 
guests who have joined us who are seated in the west gallery. 
And I would ask for permission to make introductions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you and I thank all 
hon. colleagues for giving me the leave to do that. I’d like to 
introduce to members of the House four people in the west 
gallery who have joined us because of their interest in the 
second reading of Bill 2. 
 
We will find in the gallery Peggy Rubin, who is program 
coordinator of the Prince Albert Outreach Program; seated next 
to her is Brian Delorme, outreach worker with Safety Services 
here in Regina; next to Brian is Shari Daughton, outreach 
worker in Prince Albert; and finally, Stephanie Springer who is 
a program director with Safety Services here in Regina. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Emergency Protection for Victims 
of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, generally when 
members rise in this Chamber to move second reading of 
legislation, it’s not uncommon to find that we preface our 
remarks with the phrase, it gives me great pleasure or, it is a 
great honour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find neither pleasure nor honour in rising today 
to move second reading of The Emergency Protection For 
Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act. 
 
The fact that circumstances exist in this province that require 
this legislation is repugnant to me as Minister of Social 
Services, as a member of this legislature, as a citizen, and as a 
father. 
 
The sexual exploitation of children and youth on the street is 
child abuse of the lowest order. Mr. Speaker, this is morally 
reprehensible behaviour and it cannot and it will not be 
tolerated. To that end, Mr. Speaker, our government has made 
this issue a priority. 
 
Over the past number of years we have worked with First 
Nations, Métis people, police, and other partners to establish 
community-based programs in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 
Albert. Through these partnerships, services such as safe 
houses, outreach, family support workers, and mobile safety 
vans are helping children get off the streets and into a safe 
environment. We’ve also been working with agencies to 
support in a holistic and culturally sensitive manner youth and 
adults to exit the street. 
 
One example is Operation Help in Saskatoon. Operation Help is 
a unique project that provides intensive support to youths and 
adults exiting the street in a holistic and culturally sensitive 
manner. A key contributor to the success of Operation Help was 
that it brings together social workers, elders, law enforcement, 
legal aid, health care providers, and others to ensure services are 
delivered in a coordinated manner and respond to individual 
needs. 
 
In January 2000, we amended The Child and Family Services 
Act to provide more direct services to youths 16 and over who 
are involved on the street. 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have moved aggressively to 
address the root causes that lead children to the street. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, we announced the creation of the Kids 
First program. Kids First greatly expands the capacity of 
communities to respond to the needs of vulnerable children and 
their families in the crucial early years of life. 
 
The implementation of the SchoolPLUS model announced 
recently by my colleague, the Minister of Learning, is another 
important development. And through SchoolPLUS, young people, 
particularly vulnerable children and youth, will have available 
to them a network of programs and services within or attached 
to the school system and close to home. 
 
Building independence, the most significant reforms to welfare 
in Saskatchewan in 30 years, has helped 4,600 families, 
including 10,500 children, leave social assistance since 1998. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, since 1994 social assistance caseloads in 
Saskatchewan have decreased by more than 22 per cent and the 
number of children living in poverty has dropped by more than 
26 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — But while, while addressing the root 
causes is critical to preventing sexual exploitation of children in 
the future, we cannot forget those children who are on the street 
now. And to this end, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly established 
the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children Through the Sex Trade. 
 
Over the course of 18 months, the committee held hearings in 
11 communities and heard from nearly 200 witnesses. In June 
2001 the committee tabled its final report and this report, which 
contained 49 recommendations, was comprehensive and 
far-reaching. 
 
With your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to extend my 
thanks to the 188 individuals, groups, and organizations who 
participated in this important process initiated by this 
Legislative Chamber. I would also like to thank the members of 
the legislature and staff who worked diligently as a part of the 
committee. 
 
A very special thanks goes to the government members whose 
proactive work began once the table . . . once the report was 
tabled. I appreciate very much the ideas, feedback, and hard 
work they have given to this task, working with me and the 
department officials in preparing not only this legislation, but 
the government’s action plan. 
 
I would also like to especially recognize the member from 
Greystone for his personal and professional commitment to this 
issue. Mr. Speaker, he brought experience and insight to the 
legislature, and therefore down-to-earth, practical advice that 
has proven invaluable to me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the committee’s report was 
tabled. Several departments of government have been working 
together as well as with our community partners — youth, First 

Nations, and the Métis Nation — to examine how these 
recommendations can be acted upon to build on the responses 
already in place. 
 
For example, we’ve amended the regulations pursuant to The 
Victims of Crime Act. This amendment ensures children and 
youth who may be required to assist in the prosecution of 
offenders will have full and immediate access to victim 
services. 
 
Earlier this session, Mr. Speaker, government released our 
response to the special committee’s report and this Act, Mr. 
Speaker, is but one outcome of this work. One theme that is 
consistently clear from the committee’s deliberations and our 
own consultations is that these children are victims and need to 
be supported. 
 
We have made the decision that these children are our first 
priority when it comes to accessing services. There will be 26 
spaces in our present array of resources, plus the new safe 
shelter for Regina announced a few weeks ago. These kids are 
victims, plain and simple. And when it comes to services, they 
will be our first priority; they will go to the front of the line. 
 
The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse 
and Exploitation Act supports a child welfare approach to 
victims. This means two things. First, the safety of children and 
youth must be paramount. And second, sexually exploited 
children and youth are victims and must be supported. And 
thirdly, Mr. Speaker, offenders must be held responsible for 
their actions. 
 
This Act will clarify and strengthen Social Services’ response to 
children sexually exploited on the street. It enhances the 
capacity of outreach workers to provide victims with proactive 
intervention. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Act contains provisions that further serve to protect 
children and youth by preventing contact between child victims 
and johns, pimps, and other sexual offenders. Police, social 
workers, and outreach workers can obtain emergency 
intervention orders on behalf of a victim immediately through a 
simple infrastructure and procedure to keep offenders away 
from victims. 
 
In addition to responding to the needs of victims, Mr. Speaker, 
the committee heard broad consensus on the need to increase 
deterrents of those who victimize our children, and strengthen 
law enforcement’s capacity to prosecute offenders. This Act 
does just that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Act includes search and seizure provisions to strengthen the 
ability of police to gather evidence of child sexual abuse. The 
burden of proof to obtain protective intervention orders will be 
lower than in criminal matters, and hearsay evidence will be 
permitted as under The Child and Family Services Act. 
 
There will be special training provided to members of police 
services in our province in order to effectively carry out these 
provisions in this Act. 
 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Act creates offences for sexually 
abusing a child or failing to report a child . . . or failing to report 
that a child has been exposed to abuse for a sexual purpose. 
When the provisions of an order are breached, the Criminal 
Code of Canada provides for a maximum penalty of up to two 
years in prison upon conviction and/or a $25,000 fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ending the sexual abuse and victimization of our 
children has been a priority for this government for some time 
and it will continue to be a priority until we have eliminated it. 
This legislation is neither a starting point nor an end point. It 
represents an important addition to a range of responses we 
already have in place to support victims and prosecute and deter 
offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Emergency 
Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation 
Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a great 
honour for me to stand today and speak to this Bill. As you 
know, as many of the members know, I was part of the 
committee that was dealing with prevention of child abuse and 
with children in the sex trade. 
 
And I want to start by first of all also welcoming the guests that 
were . . . are here today. I know that this Bill means a lot to a lot 
of people in this province and people have been watching with 
interest for over five years when the member from Humboldt 
first starting bringing this whole issue to the attention of the 
House. 
 
I know the minister talked about the member from Greystone, 
and it’s important to recognize that he was Co-Chair of the 
committee that we all worked on. The Co-Chairs worked 
incredibly hard and the member from Humboldt brought it to 
the House many, many years before the government started 
working on it. And I think we should be congratulating her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in 1999 at the end of that year 
when the committee was first started, I was really honoured and 
privileged to be asked by the member from Humboldt to sit on 
this committee. I don’t think often when we’re elected we have 
the opportunity to embark on a committee that changes our 
lives the way that this committee did mine and many of the 
members that were actually on that committee. 
 
We were introduced to the lives of people that we don’t deal 
with in our ordinary life. And when we came to know the 
circumstances surrounding children on the streets that, I think, 
was heart wrenching to everyone of us. I know that many of the 
members opposite have read the Hansard, they’ve read the 
reports from the witnesses, but it’s not the same as being in the 
room. It’s not the same being . . . as talking to the people that 
actually are living those lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was 188 witnesses that came to our 
committee. And everyone of them had story to tell or everyone 
of them had a suggestion. Something that the government 

opposite has an opportunity, through this Bill and through many 
other actions of their government, to deal with. 
 
In our report, the first reports, one of the first things that we all 
agreed on — and I have to keep reminding the members 
opposite that this was an all-party committee — and we agreed 
that, in the first place, a child is everyone’s responsibility. We 
can’t go to bed at night thinking that’s somebody else’s 
problem or we don’t have to think about it. Every child in this 
province belongs to every one of us and we all have a 
responsibility to know that they are being dealt with in the most 
wonderful manner possible. 
 
Secondly, the involvement of children in the sex trade is child 
abuse. For too many years we talked about . . . we used the 
words child prostitution. There isn’t prostitution when it comes 
to children under the age of 16 years old, it’s abuse. They have 
no idea what’s happening to their mind or to their body and we 
have no right as adults to say, that’s just a child prostitute; it 
isn’t happening. We don’t do that in every other aspect of our 
life and we can’t do it here. 
 
We also agreed that zero tolerance is our goal. The member 
from Humboldt said many times in our committee meetings that 
maybe we should have a big sign as we enter into the province 
saying that there is zero tolerance for child abuse in this 
province. Maybe that will be the first sign that we have as 
showing that Saskatchewan is against this. Everyone in this 
province is against abusing our children. And I think that was 
something that of course never went any further than that — 
making signs, talking about child abuse isn’t something that we 
do, but it is something that we should all feel in our hearts and 
then it’s going to go without saying. 
 
The committee also recognized that there was four main 
headings that we have to deal with when we’re talking about 
children in the sex trade. We have to talk about the offenders. 
How can we actually deter the offenders? And that was 
something that this government and every government has 
really been focusing on over the years. We talk about the johns 
and the pimps, but that’s only one part of the equation. 
 
Another part is the protective services for the children and 
youth that we have. What do we have for them to go to after we 
actually get them off the street, or as an alternative for them 
being on the street? 
 
And more importantly we have to talk about the root causes. 
Why are the children on the street in the first place? And then 
we have to talk about prevention and early intervention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the key factors that actually involve . . . that make 
children go on the street, or allow them, or force them to be on 
the street in the first place is summed up in the first 
recommendation or in the first issue that we talked about, and 
that was the deep poverty among the vast majority of families 
whose children are involved in the sex trade. 
 
We learned often on our travels that many of the children 
involved in the sex trade are Aboriginal — I think it was over 
85 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And those families and those young 
people are living in poverty that you and I can’t comprehend. 
 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

 

And because of their involvement in the sex trade and because 
of their deep poverty, we have a loss of self-esteem. We found 
that there was a lot of abuse in the homes of children. The ones 
that are now on the streets learned that from the very beginning 
of their own life in many cases. They didn’t know any better or 
they didn’t know of any other type of life. We know that there 
was a lot of family dysfunction and we also know that they are 
suffering from the results of racism in many cases. 
 
And again the word substance abuse — we heard that from so 
many of the witnesses that came forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are . . . there is a number of the 
witnesses that we spoke to that made a lasting effect on many of 
us. And I want to read you a poem that was written by one of 
the young women. I’m not going to give her name because she 
didn’t say that we could, but I’m sure that if you speak to any 
members of the committee we could get a hold of her. 
 
Her words aren’t written in master’s English; they’re written by 
someone who lives on the street and someone who knows what 
happens when you live on the street. This is her words and this 
is what she was talking about, about her own life. She said: 
 

The sun is shining 
I think I’ll take the kids for a walk 
As I walk down the street 
My kids are laughing 
But I see them looking and whispering and pointing 
They know what I’ve done 
But they don’t know me. 
My children don’t go to their friends to play 
Their friends don’t come to play with them 
They’re scared of me. 
If I change, they can’t see that. 
My children didn’t do anything wrong. 
Their only wrong is having me as a mother. 
My sins are theirs and my life is theirs. 
I have no future, so do they? 

 
I’d like to forget the life that I’ve lived 
But if I forget who will remember? 
Who will care? 
And if no one remembers and if no one cares, 
then nothing is going to change. 
Is that what you want? 
Is that what you really want? 

 
Mr. Speaker, the kinds of words that this young person said 
were spoken over and over again to us, and we know that the 
life that they live is something that you and I will never 
understand. 
 
We learned that the 600 children that are on the street right now 
are loving, lonely people. And we can’t address them by merely 
having one Bill introduced. We have to look at it as a 
philosophy of our province, and as a government; we have to 
look at it as knowing that all of our children are special people 
that we look after. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one young person’s . . . talked about the first time 
she turned a trick. That’s the term that she used, and it’s 
something that we actually shuddered at the first time we heard, 

but we know it’s something that they talk about quite openly. 
 
This young girl said that she was 12 or 13 years old, and she 
hadn’t had anybody at home for two or three days, and she had 
younger siblings in the house, and there was no food in the 
house. And she didn’t know what to do with the younger sister 
and brother that were crying in the house. And so she did what 
she had learned; she turned a trick. And she made $20. 
 
And she put her younger brother and sister in a wagon and she 
went down to Mac’s store, and she bought diapers and food, 
and she took them home again. 
 
That’s the kind of life that these children are living. And she’s a 
child herself. And she knew what had to be done, and she knew 
the only way she could think of, the only knowledge she had 
from her background was what her family had taught her, and 
that was what she learned how to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that many of the members on our 
committee learned that often drugs and the sex trade go 
together, and we often thought that people turn tricks or are 
involved in the sex trade so that they can support their drug 
habit. But you know what, we’re wrong; it’s the other way 
around. 
 
Because young people’s minds are so hurt and so . . . they need 
healing. They have to get away from the abuse that they’ve had, 
of not only their body and their mind, and the only way they 
can escape it is drugs. 
 
And I’m going to read you just one more short poem from this 
young person that will explain to you how she feels: 
 

I’m tired of this life. 
I’m alone and afraid. 
The guilt traps me like a cage. 
I can’t get away and I can’t think. 
What do you want from me? 
I’d like to go to sleep now 
But I see them all when I close my eyes and I remember. 
 
The thing that scares me the most is tonight 
Like every night, I long to be numb. 
To stop the pain and the memories. 
So I need a fix 
So I can sell my body 
So I can forget what I’ve done. 
I have nothing left but my body and a fix. 
That’s all I need. 
I’m a worthless piece of trailer trash. 
That’s all I am. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t continue this. We can’t allow our 
province to continue the way it has been going. And I know that 
there are . . . that members opposite are working hard to deal 
with the problem, but it’s not just a single problem. It happens 
not only in Saskatchewan; it happens right across, right across 
Canada and probably right around the world. 
 
But we have to . . . somebody has to make a stand and 
somebody has to start to make a difference. Saskatchewan is 
number one in so many things that I’m not proud of. I would 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

love to be able to say that . . . Something I’m proud of is to say 
that we, as a province, learnt . . . stopped the child sex trade — 
the first place in Canada — perhaps the first place in the world. 
We can stop the child sex trade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill addresses part of the 
problem and I congratulate the government for that. They talked 
about mostly the offenders. But we don’t . . . we’re not talking 
enough about the protective services; we’re not talking enough 
about the root causes; and we’re not talking enough about 
prevention. 
 
As the critic of Education, I’ve spoken to teachers who tell me 
that with some of the changes in the community schools, they 
thought having a breakfast program in the school was going to 
be something that would allow the children to go to school and 
to be able to learn because they were fed; they were physically 
comforted and they would be able to learn. Do you know what? 
They had to change the time of that breakfast program for the 
school because there were perpetrators. There were johns that 
were willing to pick up those children before they got to school 
in the morning. That kind of thing is happening and our school 
system knows about it. 
 
So on one hand, I’m pleased that the Minister of Learning has 
accepted the responsibility that Education isn’t a stand-alone 
department, that we have to deal with Health and Justice and 
Social Services. But we have to do more and we have to do it 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members of the committees and all members in 
this legislature want to make a difference. I think every one of 
us want to leave this Assembly knowing that we left 
Saskatchewan a better place to live in. I think that we all have a 
heart and we all want to show it. 
 
And often . . . I should maybe, I should say seldom do I agree 
with the members opposite philosophically or fiscally, but we 
did agree on the recommendations, all 49 of these 
recommendations. 
 
And I know that we have to deal with the children as part of 
families and we have to recognize that there’s a shortage of 
money. And I can go into that whole area of money, but it’s not 
really going to be dealing with this at the moment. 
 
But I want to remind the minister that when we talk about 
protecting our children, we know that that often means a safe 
refuge home. But that doesn’t mean we have to spend money on 
bricks and mortars. Heaven knows, there’s lots of empty 
buildings in this province that’s losing people. We’ve got 
schools and hospitals and buildings right across this province 
that can be used and functioned in a way that it’s going to help 
children. 
 
(14:45) 
 
So please, Mr. Minister, when we talk about having . . . 
spending our money helping our children, let’s do it on the 
people — on the front-line people — and not waste any more 
dollars. 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt has been spending a 
lot of time on . . . going through this Bill and she’s going to be 
bringing forward a number of amendments that we believe will 
enhance the Bill. 
 
And I think . . . I’m hoping that the members opposite will be 
looking at these amendments and knowing that any thoughts 
that are brought forward are just as critical now as they were 
when we were a member of an all-party committee. I think that 
open . . . looking at them with an open mind and recognizing 
that just because it came from this side of the House doesn’t 
mean they’re wrong — that everybody has the same goal in 
mind. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I . . . hoping that we’ll find a way to measure 
the outcome quickly so we don’t have to spend another four or 
five years seeing if the . . . if what we’re doing today is going to 
make a difference. 
 
I’m pleased with the intent of this Bill. I know it has to go 
further, and I’m hoping that the minister is going to look at the 
amendments that were brought forward by the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a few 
comments in regards to the Bill that we have before the 
Assembly. And it’s noteworthy to note, Mr. Speaker, that 
normally on the second reading of a Bill, the first time it comes 
forward, we would move to adjourn and do some more research 
and the Bill would come up later. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we’re taking the time this 
morning to put two or three speeches forward talks to the 
importance of the Bill. And the importance of this Bill is such 
that we feel that it move, it move forward rather than just kind 
of sit on the order paper. And I believe the government is aware 
of that as well. 
 
And at the end of the day I would trust that they would 
appreciate the fact that we believe in this Bill and what the 
intent and the purposes for this Bill in addressing the needs of 
young people on the streets — and specifically children — 
being taken advantage of in the sex trade. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if there’s anything more 
appalling than to think that a little child would be violated to 
that point. As my colleague, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, related that a 12-year-old girl would find 
that the only way that she could provide for her siblings was to 
sell her body. And I’m not sure if there’s anyone in this 
Assembly or in this province would even vaguely agree with 
that means of providing for your siblings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue. 
 
Now when I think of children, and each and every one of us can 
look at our lives, and many times we wonder how these bodies 
tick. And I’m reminded of a . . . the words of the psalmist when 
he talked about the fact of us being conceived in the innermost 
parts of his mother’s body, and he talked about how fearfully 
and wonderfully made we are. And biblically speaking, we’re 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

 

made in the image of God, and I don’t believe that being 
created in that image was to be used in this manner and abused 
by adults . . . children being abused by adults or anyone. 
 
So I think it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard over 
the past, past two or three years and certainly the member from 
Humboldt — my colleague from Humboldt for the past number 
of . . . eight years or so since she’s been elected to this 
Assembly — has been bringing this question forward and 
talking very specifically about the need to address this problem. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
noted — and being a part of the committee that was struck in 
December of 1999 and then going on the road and listening to 
presentations by groups across this province and by young 
people themselves — to be honest with you, Mr. Speaker, I 
found it quite appalling to really begin to understand that this is 
as big a problem as it is. 
 
My first impressions, the first thoughts I had, well it’s just a few 
kid . . . children here and there. But it’s a bigger problem, well 
certainly, a bigger problem than what I thought it was. And I’m 
certainly . . . the minister in bringing forward this legislation, 
the government bringing forward this legislation are aware of 
that as well; otherwise they would not have come forward with 
this piece of legislation. 
 
And as has already been mentioned, we believe we need to go 
further than what the legislation is doing and I’m trusting that 
the government recognizes this; that this is a part of addressing 
the number of recommendations that the committee brought 
forward. And this is just one part of a puzzle. It’s not just the 
be-all and the end-all, it’s a part of an ongoing puzzle to address 
a problem — an ongoing problem on the streets of this province 
and the cities of this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we trust that the decisions that are being 
made here, the changes in legislation that are being brought 
forward, we trust, Mr. Speaker, that they will have an impact; 
and that indeed, for a change, the province of Saskatchewan can 
provide leadership, if you will, across this nation in addressing 
the problems of child prostitution and the abuse of children on 
the streets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt we have to offer and we have to 
find ways of protecting our children. Normally we would 
expect parents to provide a loving and caring environment — 
provide a clean and healthy home, home environment for the 
children. 
 
But as we found from our committee, many times some of the 
. . . many of these children actually find themselves almost 
fulfilling the role of adults because their parents aren’t there. 
And a lot of it has to do with the drug culture, with the . . . and 
with alcoholism. And it leaves children in very vulnerable 
positions. 
 
And it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we have to actually sit 
down and create laws, or make laws to try and address a 
problem that we would normally think that parents would 
provide themselves — they would provide that home 
environment; that they would provide that loving environment; 
that caring environment, that environment of providing for their 

families — providing the shelter, providing the food, giving 
them the opportunity to get to school and become educated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while in many cases society has failed these 
young people and, as a result of that, we are forced to come 
forward with rules, with laws, with guidelines, we trust, Mr. 
Speaker, that we can begin to work within the community as 
well, because all the laws in the world will not necessarily 
address all the concerns or stop the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can create laws from one . . . from A to Z, and 
they don’t always do what you intended for them to do because 
society has to change its thoughts, has to change its views, has 
to change its impressions of the responsibilities that they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague indicated, we need to look at the 
root cause. And I’m not sure if we’ve identified all the 
problems and the root causes out there. We need to take a 
serious look as to why these children find themselves in this 
situation. And maybe it’s a matter of providing parenting 
opportunities or courses or what have you, so that parents can 
begin to realize their responsibility. 
 
It’s easy to have a child, but it’s another thing to learn what the 
. . . responsibilities you have in providing for that child and 
taking care of that child. And if a parent grows up and hasn’t 
really been given an opportunity to be a child when they were 
younger, a lot of times what we’ve found as a committee is that, 
Mr. Speaker, most of the times these children . . . Actually, it’s 
just a revolving cycle within a family environment, because . . . 
my mother was there; there’s a lack of the food or the clothing 
or even just having some fun, some finances to buy a nice pair 
of shoes or a nice pair of jeans or clothing or what have you. 
 
So the parent happened to follow this avenue of providing some 
income. Well it sounds like it might be an avenue that we can 
look into, that maybe we can pursue to provide the financial 
needs that we have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we heard, there is an ongoing social 
problem out there as well that needs to be addressed. I 
personally do not believe that it can always be addressed by just 
creating avenues whereby government provides the finances, 
the resources, the homes, or what have you. And I think those 
are necessary; it’s necessary because we need to have some 
steps. We need to have places, secure places and safe places for 
children who are in situations that want to escape the problem 
they’re in. 
 
We need to have places that they can go to, to receive help and 
assistance. But we need to begin to work in the larger picture of 
really working with community to address the issues. And as 
my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena indicated, the largest 
number of young girls on the street happens to come 
unfortunately from our First Nations community. 
 
And I believe we need to work with that community, and I 
believe that community is beginning to realize as well that this 
is a problem that they have to deal with. And we need to work 
together to build bridges so that we can address the issue of 
children in child prostitution. 
 
So what we have, The Highway Traffic Act that allows the 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

police to seize vehicles and now we are bringing forward this 
emergency . . . another Bill, a second Bill to address some more 
of the recommendations. Mr. Speaker, I would hope we don’t 
just rest on that fact that maybe we’ve done enough. 
 
And I think, as my colleague the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena and my colleague the member from 
Humboldt, and I’m certain the government members as well 
will indicate, that we need to go a little further, that we need to 
find ways of really providing for these children and addressing 
the problems that are out there, so that down the road we won’t 
have to really worry about children on the streets, being abused 
— that these children can actually feel safe and they can go out 
and run and play with their friends. 
 
They can feel safe that they can go to school and enjoy the 
companionship of friends in the schoolroom and on the school 
grounds without the johns and the pimps coming to prey on 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill is a start, along with the Bill, An Act respecting 
Emergency . . . or changes to The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I think we really need to take a close look 
at how decisions are made in our courts. And unfortunately I 
see a lot of times decisions are coming down now, based on the 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and I look at the recent ruling 
in BC regarding Robin Sharpe. 
 
And it disturbs me, Mr. Speaker, when the courts would rule 
that because there might be some literary merit or value to 
information that is totally obscene and totally goes against the 
mainstream flow of society, that we would abuse and that we 
would even talk about and call that as having literary value. I 
would hope, I would hope that our courts would begin to realize 
that children are a very precious commodity and we need to 
begin to protect them, Mr. Speaker, as well. 
 
So while we have these two pieces of legislation . . . And I 
commend the government for moving forward in this regard. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also want to see the government move 
further. We want to see the government . . . And my colleagues 
and I are committed to working with the government, if that’s 
what it takes to address these issues. This is important. This is 
important that we, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we put aside 
our political differences for an important matter such as this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can say this: we have a resolve to address this 
concern. And I would have to suggest as well that if we didn’t 
have a resolve in our caucus, the member from Humboldt 
would see to it that we did have a resolve, because this is such 
an important issue. And she has done an excellent job in 
bringing to our caucus the importance of this issue and the fact 
that it is a matter that we just cannot sweep under the rug. It’s a 
matter that we have to take into account very carefully. 
 
We talk about the fact that while we can remove the vehicles of 
the perpetrators, while we can . . . this piece of legislation talks 
about ordering individuals to stay away from certain areas if 
they have been apprehended, and if the police suspect that they 
might be in a certain area because they want to prey on 
children, they can be ordered out of those areas. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we need to be very careful as well that we go 
beyond that; that we begin to reach out to the needs of families 
and these children who unfortunately end up on the streets. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about reaching out to these 
young people and we talk about sometimes we always like to 
point the finger at government and say government should be 
doing something to address this issue. Government should be 
putting in, if you will, more money into safe houses, or putting 
more money into programs to begin to address the concerns we 
have regarding the child sex trade or children who happen to be 
on the streets. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as well, I think that it’s important that we 
take a look at some of the agencies . . . a number of agencies 
that are already out there that are reaching out to young people, 
that are basically putting programs together. And I believe 
Mayor Fiacco is doing something in the province of Regina 
regarding basketball and wrestling to — or in the city of 
Regina, pardon me — to reach out to some of these children 
and show them there’s more to life than just sitting on a street 
corner; that they can get together and they can be an 
encouragement to one another. 
 
There are other agencies that are putting programs together to 
bring young people in off the streets and providing recreation, 
providing an environment of support mechanisms, and giving 
them something to eat, something to drink. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud those community groups that are doing 
that because I believe they can have more of an effect than just 
government building, creating programming, and creating spots 
and safe houses and opportunities . . . or methods, if you will, of 
removing a child from the street. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, when we remove them and put them in a 
safe house, in many cases, as we heard on our committee, we 
find that sometimes young people don’t . . . While they want to 
get away from the effects of street . . . of the street life, they 
also want, Mr. Speaker, they still . . . Family is family, and they 
want to be part of that family. 
 
So let’s look at . . . let’s take a look at some of the avenues that 
are already out there and the community groups that are 
working to reach out to young people to assist them to develop 
in their character and in their lives. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I would like to, as I’ve 
indicated earlier and the member from Kelvington-Wadena has 
indicated, we certainly want to express our support for this 
piece of legislation. 
 
We trust, Mr. Speaker, that as this legislation moves forward 
and as we take a serious look at the 49 provisions that have 
been brought forward, the recommendations that have been 
brought forward by the committee, that we will be able to add 
to the legislation and add to methods and ways in which we can 
address the concerns of children on the street, address the 
concerns of child prostitution, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
guarantee the safety of young people, young men and women, 
in our community. Thank you. 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to support this particular piece of legislation. 
 
I’d just like to deal with one issue that has been raised by 
members opposite, and the member for Moosomin I think 
expressed it best when he asked, why are children caught in this 
situation? That is to say, why is it that children are involved in 
the sex trade on the streets and communities of Saskatchewan? 
And the member said that this is something that we needed to 
study further, as if there was some mystery about why it is that 
children are caught in these situations. 
 
I don’t think that there is any mystery about this, Mr. Speaker. 
All of the experts, all of the people who study these things, all 
of the people who comment on these things, say that — and 
they agree — that if you want to have healthy, happy children 
in our communities there are three preconditions that have to be 
met — three. One is an absence of poverty. Secondly you have 
to have effective parenting. Third, there have to be an 
appropriate level of institutions that deal with the needs of 
families and children. 
 
As to the absence of poverty, Mr. Speaker, the children that are 
caught in this sex trade on the streets today, are the children that 
were born in the grinding poverty of urban Saskatchewan in the 
1980s. A 1980s, Mr. Speaker, a 1980s that saw massive, 
massive cuts; massive gutting of social programs in 
Saskatchewan; an increase to poverty levels in Saskatchewan at 
that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no mystery about this. If you want to have 
healthy children you have to have an absence of poverty. Mr. 
Speaker, it took this government, it took this government, it 
took this government some years, some years, to rectify the 
complete financial mess that we found in the early 1990s. So, 
that by the mid-1990s, we were able to put into place effective 
changes to our income support, effective support for families in 
Saskatchewan so that we could begin the job of, not only 
reducing the number of people that are caught on the welfare 
rolls, but also to reduce poverty in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’m pleased to see that we’re finally beginning to make 
some progress on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re beginning to see a reduction of the number of children in 
poverty in Saskatchewan. And there is no mystery about that, 
Mr. Speaker. You have to have concerted government action, 
you have to have a plan. You have to have a strategy that has to 
be funded if you want to reduce poverty, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to see that we’re making some progress on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, another precondition that has to be 
met if you want to, if you want to have healthy children 
growing up in our communities, if you want to have happy 
children growing up in our communities, Mr. Speaker, is that 
you have to have programs that promote effective parenting, 
Mr. Speaker. You have to have programs that promote effective 
parenting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has begun programs such as Kids First that begin 

to deal with the root problems that exist in some families in 
Saskatchewan, that provide help for many of these young 
parents. And we know that by introducing programs such as this 
that we can reduce abuse; that we can reduce the number of 
children that grow up in environments of abuse, and hopefully, 
reduce the number of children that are caught up in situations 
such as this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you also have to have effective institutions in a 
society. You have to have effective health programs. You have 
to have effective education programs. You have to have 
programs such as community schools. You have to have 
programs such as SchoolPLUS, Mr. Speaker, that reach out to 
children, that help those children grow up in a better way than 
has been the case, Mr. Speaker. That is something that needs to 
be done. 
 
And all of this, Mr. Speaker, all of this means that members of 
the Legislative Assembly need to provide the budgetary 
approval for these strategies and for these initiatives, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Members cannot say one day we want to end this problem, we 
know that it’s a problem, we know that it’s caused by poverty, 
we know that it’s caused by a lack of effective parenting and 
then say on the other hand, but we don’t want to fund that. You 
can’t say we want to end the problem, and then the next day say 
we want to gut social programming and we want to reduce, in a 
massive way, funds for social programs in Saskatchewan. 
 
You can’t have that kind of inconsistency. If you want to put an 
end to this problem. If you want to reduce this problem you 
have to consistently provide the support that is necessary in 
these three areas. There is no mystery about this, Mr. Speaker, 
no mystery whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to provide support for 
this legislation but I did want to take the opportunity to remind 
members that these . . . that this horrible social problem does 
not grow up in a vacuum, is not sort of something that comes to 
us of isolation of anything else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This comes to us because we have had conditions of grinding 
poverty — continue to have poverty — but it’s something that 
we’re working on. Happens because we have a lack of 
programs for parents, happens because we don’t have the 
necessary institutional supports, Mr. Speaker. And if you want 
to change that, you have to support that. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve very 
pleased to rise on this very important issue. Mr. Speaker, an 
issue that since we had an all-party committee that toured the 
province to investigate the reasons and the solutions for the 
situation of children involved in the sex trade of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. A committee that came forward with 49 
recommendations that were agreed to by all sides of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, and all members in the House. 
 
We had, Mr. Speaker, in place here a very good non-partisan 
piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. A very good non-partisan 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about the sex trade, when we talk about children 
in the sex trade, we’re not talking about something that 
happened just today. We’re not talking about something that 
just happened yesterday, Mr. Speaker. This has been an 
ongoing problem in society. Not just in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, but around the world. 
 
You often see documentaries, Mr. Speaker, dealing with this 
situation from countries far and wide. Not just in affluent 
countries like Canada and the US and Europe, Mr. Speaker, but 
around the world. It’s a universal problem, Mr. Speaker. And, 
Mr. Speaker, as a universal problem, it has also universal 
reasons as to why it takes place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem of children involved in the sex trade 
is here in the 1990s under a New Democratic government. Mr. 
Speaker, it was here in the 1980s under a Progressive 
Conservative government. It was here in the 1970s, Mr. 
Speaker, under a New Democratic government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no partisan political party has the answers 100 per 
cent to its solution and no partisan political party is 100 per cent 
responsible, Mr. Speaker, for the situation. We are all equally 
responsible, Mr. Speaker, and we all equally have to find the 
solutions. And when one member of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, stands up and says there is one cause for this problem 
of children involved in the sex trade, Mr. Speaker, it’s wrong 
and it’s unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children in the sex trade is not just a problem in 
Regina and Saskatoon and P.A. (Prince Albert) and Moose Jaw 
and other communities across this province. It’s a problem in 
Winnipeg. It’s a problem in Vancouver. It’s a problem in 
Calgary and Edmonton and Toronto and Montreal and any other 
place, Mr. Speaker, where children are in trouble, where parents 
do not care enough, and where society in general doesn’t 
provide the necessities for life — be it Nova Scotia, 
Saskatchewan, British Columbia, or any other location in the 
world. 
 
And for a member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to stand up in 
this august hall and suggest that one group, one political party is 
responsible for this entire situation, be it in Saskatchewan or 
around the world, Mr. Speaker, is beyond comprehension. I 
think it shows, Mr. Speaker, the lack of real concern that 
individual has for those children . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — . . . the lack of understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, that individual has for the real problems in society 
with children, here in Saskatchewan or around the world. 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, it shows that that individual has, Mr. 
Speaker, no class. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that needs to be resolved by 
unanimity in this House, not by acrimony. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through exercises such as this piece of legislation 
and more, Mr. Speaker, we will be able to work towards a 
solution, a solution of people in the sex trade — children and 

adults — goes back to time immemorial, Mr. Speaker. And 
while we need to work towards the solution, they are not going 
to come quickly and they are not going to come fast. But we fail 
if we don’t try to provide some of those solutions, Mr. Speaker, 
and today is as good a day as any to start working on those 
solutions. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my privilege to be able to enter into the debate this 
afternoon to speak in support of the Bill before us — Bill 2, The 
Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and 
Exploitation Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I’m very pleased that I 
sense that we’re on the verge of all-party agreement on this 
legislation and perhaps second reading this day, which gives me 
great pleasure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to begin by thanking all the community organizations 
across Saskatchewan who have contributed to the development 
of this legislation. The members of our government could not 
have brought this legislation forward without this very valuable 
input. And to the 188 organizations that presented briefs 
throughout the work of the special committee that was set up by 
this Legislative Assembly to examine this important issue, I 
want to on behalf of all government members express our deep 
appreciation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to say a particular 
word about the young people who presented to our special 
committee. I think all seven members of the special committee 
were very moved by the presentations, the very powerful 
presentations and insightful presentations that we had from 
young people during the hearings. 
 
Some of these young people, Mr. Speaker, had been sexually 
exploited themselves and as you will appreciate, it was 
extremely difficult for them to come before a legislative 
committee. But their insights and advice was extremely 
important to the workings of our committee and to the 
development of the legislation that has come before this House 
in the last year. And I want to say a special appreciation for 
them. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my appreciation to 
the members of the special committee that was set up by this 
Legislative Assembly more than two years ago now to bring 
forward recommendations that have formed the foundation of 
the legislation that’s now before us. 
 
I want to extend my appreciation to, first of all, the government 
members of the committee that have worked very closely with 
me and with the Minister of Social Services and the Minister of 
Justice, our Attorney General, to frame the legislation that’s 
currently before us. 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

 

I want to recognize my colleague, the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin who has worked with me and met with many of the 
Saskatoon organizations in helping to develop this policy. 
 
I want to recognize the two members from Regina who worked 
very, very long hours to develop the package that we have 
before us — the member for Regina Northeast and the member 
for Regina Dewdney. And the member for Regina Dewdney, 
Mr. Speaker, sits on our legislative instruments committee and 
spent many, many hours working to craft the details of the Bill 
that’s now before us. 
 
I also want to recognize the significant contribution throughout 
the hearing process that was made by members of the official 
opposition in this Assembly. I was very pleased to have the 
opportunity to work with them. 
 
And I want to recognize the very important contribution the 
member for Humboldt has made in raising this issue over a 
six-year period and the diligence of the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena and the member for Moosomin in terms of 
their concern and work on our committee. 
 
So all seven members have contributed, I think, in a significant 
way. 
 
And the government members have made a very special 
contribution behind the scenes, Mr. Speaker, in terms of many, 
many, many hours of work after the, after the hearings were 
over and the report had been filed; in terms of actually shaping 
the parcel of measures — some of which are before the 
legislature, some of which are reflected in the provincial 
budget, Mr. Speaker — and of course, particularly the Bill 
that’s currently before us. So my appreciation to each of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the Bill now which is one part of 
our overall package of new measures that are intended to stop 
the sexual exploitation of children and youth on the streets of 
our cities. 
 
And I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that it is one step in a 
set of policies that is necessary to stamp out child sexual 
exploitation in our province. And that I think is the goal of all 
members of the Assembly — zero tolerance, Mr. Speaker, for 
the exploitation of our children; zero tolerance for the unethical 
activities of the sexual predators who are preying on our 
children. That’s our . . . I think a value that is held by all 
members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to specifically lay out as a . . . to add to the words of 
the Minister of Social Services some of the key provisions of 
this Bill. 
 
The centrepiece of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, are provisions that 
will allow social workers, our police services in Saskatoon, 
Regina, Prince Albert, and perhaps elsewhere in the province as 
well, and outreach workers, and other agencies that are working 
with children who are being sexually exploited, to obtain 
emergency intervention orders at very short notice from a 
Justice of the Peace, in order to ensure that sexual predators are 
kept away from children at risk. This is the centrepiece of the 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And the orders, Mr. Speaker, go beyond just the notion that a 
sexual predator needs to stay away from a specific child that he 
has been in the company of, and that police believe to be at 
serious risk of abuse, or have knowledge that that child has 
been abused. They go beyond just keeping the predator away 
from an individual child. 
 
They also allow a Justice of the Peace to issue an order that will 
keep a pimp or a john, as they are called — a sexual predator — 
away from a geographical area where children are known to be 
at risk: in other words, Mr. Speaker, the strolls of our cities in 
Saskatoon, and Regina, and Prince Albert. 
 
This legislation allows for an order to be issued that over a 30- 
or 60- or 90-day period will require a sexual predator to stay 
away from the strolls of our cities. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we can expect that in some cases the 
police may investigate further beyond the attainment of the 
order, to see if Criminal Code charges are warranted. But the 
important thing to note about the order is that it can be issued 
immediately by a Justice of the Peace if they believe that the 
evidence warrants it. And secondly, this is an order that is 
granted on the basis of a balance of probabilities in terms of the 
evidence at hand. 
 
It’s important to note, Criminal Code charges are not being laid 
here. The predator in question is not going to jail with this 
order. The order is to stay away from the child and to stay out 
of the geographical area that constitutes the stroll. But if the 
order is violated, if the order is violated by the man in question, 
there can be a jail sentence of up to two years and major fines 
involved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so this is a very significant deterrent for those who, up 
until now, have unfortunately often escaped the hands of the 
police because the police didn’t have the tools that they needed 
to, in effect, deter the predators in question. So this gives our 
police services a very important new tool, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The police here also have the tool to conduct searches and 
obtain evidence from vehicles — that evidence that is required 
to substantiate a potential charge around sexual abuse, Mr. 
Speaker. So the police are being given new tools here with 
respect to search of vehicles if they have reason to believe that 
child sexual abuse either has occurred or is about to occur. And 
that is also a very important provision in the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to point out that this initiative supplements, it 
complements the legislation that has just been proclaimed in 
this province around vehicle seizure. So what we’re going to 
have, Mr. Speaker, is the initiatives that I just talked about and, 
in addition to that, legislation that is now in effect in 
Saskatchewan that enables the police to seize the vehicle of 
someone who has been charged with a prostitution-related 
offence and is using a vehicle in carrying out that offence. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, many of the sexual predators that 
have been driving up and down our streets over many years, 
now when they are charged with a Criminal Code offence 
related to prostitution, they will immediately lose their vehicle 
and they will have to pay for the impoundment fees for that 
vehicle to be gotten back, Mr. Speaker. And if a child is 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

involved in the prostitution-related offence, they won’t be able 
to get the vehicle back. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the vehicle seizure, if they’re 
found guilty in a court of law, they will automatically have a 
driver’s licence suspension for a year. 
 
So we need to keep in mind that the legislation that is now 
before us is in addition to the legislation that has just come into 
effect in the province of Saskatchewan. And I think that that 
legislative package, Mr. Speaker, taken together, addresses 
several of the major recommendations that were put forward in 
the report of the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade and the 49 
recommendations that are in there. Many of these 
recommendations dealt with the legislative package that has 
already been either passed by the Assembly or is now before the 
House. 
 
So I think it’s clear that our government has gone a very 
considerable distance in addressing the recommendations of the 
special committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the legislation 
that’s before us will require mandatory reporting of cases of 
child sexual abuse to an authorized child welfare authority for a 
timely and appropriate response to the needs of the child 
victims. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the legislation also creates offences for 
sexually abusing a child or failing to report that a child has been 
exposed to abuse for a sexual purpose. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of measures that our 
government has introduced in the budget and that have been 
talked about to some degree in the Assembly already that 
complement this legislation. And I just want to, if I may . . . if I 
can have the indulgence of the House, just comment on three of 
those, Mr. Speaker, because I think they’re an important 
complement to the Bill that’s currently before us. 
 
One is that our provincial government is setting up regional 
intervention committees, Mr. Speaker, that will bring together 
representatives who advocate on behalf of children who’ve been 
victimized, representative . . . social workers, justice officials, 
health officials, together with community agency 
representatives. And these committees will advocate and . . . to 
ensure that the needs of children who have been victimized are 
fully addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s the position of this government that the needs of children 
who’ve been sexually exploited on the street are going to move 
right up to the top of the priority list in terms of service delivery 
by the Department of Social Services and other provincial 
government service agencies in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that this is a very, very important message. It’s a 
message of hope for all those children, Mr. Speaker, in our 
province right now who’ve suffered victimization at the hands 
of sexual predators in these past years and can now be assured 
that services will be there for them, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
that’s a very important initiative that has been spearheaded by 
our Minister of Social Services. 

(15:30) 
 
I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we are increasing the 
number of residential spaces within our Social Services 
residential network that are available for children who’ve been 
sexually exploited on the street. And in all there will now be 26 
such spaces available in our province. 
 
Five of these spaces, Mr. Speaker, of course are at the safe 
house in my home city of Saskatoon; it’s run by the Saskatoon 
Tribal Council. There will also be a safe house established in 
the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, and I know that the community 
organizations that are working on this issue in the city of 
Regina will welcome that announcement. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that it is the intention of 
our government to significantly increase the involvement of the 
First Nations and Métis community on this issue. And one of 
the messages that I think all seven members of the special 
legislative committee will recall and agree with me on is that 
we heard throughout the hearings from First Nations people that 
they want to be involved in a major way in addressing the needs 
of children who’ve been victimized through sexual exploitation 
on the street. 
 
And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, our government is making 
a commitment that we will work with the First Nations and 
Métis community, and we will closely involve them in the 
development of programs and the design of services to meet the 
needs of children who are being sexually exploited. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are . . . these are some of the other 
measures that I think complement the Bill in question. And this 
afternoon, because I want to focus on the subject of the Bill at 
hand, there are many other areas that I’m not touching on in 
terms of initiatives that we will take. But clearly, our efforts in 
the area of Kids First, our preventive efforts in terms of 
preventing child abuse in the home, our initiatives in terms of 
the building independence program, and the extra funds that 
have gone to support low-income working people who are 
supporting children in our province — these things also 
complement the Bill in question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I might make one comment with respect to 
issues around poverty. The member for Kelvington-Wadena 
was rightly recognizing that poverty is an important cause of 
children being at risk on the street. And it is my view, and I will 
continue to press the case, that we not only need to do more 
around the building independence program but we also need to 
take steps to increase the allowances for shelter and food and 
clothing under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s a view that I hold personally, and I’m putting that 
forward as a personal concern that I will continue to work on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we have an excellent package before us. 
And I want to thank the Minister of Social Services and the 
Minister of Justice for all the work they’ve done within 
government to facilitate this package. 
 
I want to thank the former minister of Social Services, the 
member for Regina Victoria, for the opportunity to serve as 
Co-Chair of the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade. 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

 

And I want to urge all members of the Assembly to support the 
legislation that’s now before us, which I think will give our 
community, our police officers, and our outreach agencies 
additional important tools to achieve our ultimate goal in this 
Assembly, which is the complete elimination of child 
exploitation in our province. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
extremely pleased to rise today to respond to the minister’s 
second reading speech that deals with Bill No. 2, An Act 
respecting Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual 
Abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin, I have some acknowledgements 
that are certainly in order and I hope express the appreciation 
that all members of this Assembly and all the people of 
Saskatchewan feel for contributions put forward to help us with 
this very, very serious and important matter. 
 
And I’d like to make, first of all, an acknowledgement of all the 
members from our Assembly that were a part of the committee 
that was struck to prevent the abuse and exploitation of children 
through the sex trade. I would like to commend the other 
Co-Chair on the committee, the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone, who has put forward a great deal of work and whom 
is one person on the other side that I really believe has a great 
depth of sincerity for this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the many individuals 
and community organizations, people from those organizations 
that care very deeply about children in this province that came 
forward to our committee to put forward their knowledge, their 
views, and their suggestions about how we could address this. 
Some of those people, those very people are today with us in 
the galleries and I welcome them — the people from Regina as 
well as from Prince Albert. 
 
And I’d like to make a special acknowledgement at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, to one member that called me one day about two 
and a half years ago — a member of this Assembly that is no 
longer sitting in the Assembly but who was in fact very 
instrumental in spearheading this whole effort for the 
committee. And that member was the member from Saskatoon 
. . . or rather from Regina Elphinstone, Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter recognized that I had been bringing this issue 
up for five years. He recognized there were people in the 
province, in communities who were gravely concerned about 
what’s happening to children on the streets. And I think he 
knew that the astute thing to do was to finally try to get forward 
some action. And so today I salute Mr. Lingenfelter for actually 
being the person that was the drive behind getting our 
committee going. 
 
Truly, Mr. Speaker, this issue of child sexual abuse and 
exploitation is of such vital importance for all of us. For youth 
at risk — yes, for sure. But also of vital importance for the 
overall well-being of society. 
 

The importance of this issue, Mr. Speaker, cannot be 
understated. The value we place on our children’s lives is of 
paramount importance. The United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child states that every child has the inherent right 
to life and states shall ensure to maximum, child survival and 
development. 
 
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 
states that states shall ensure that each child enjoys full rights 
without discrimination or distinctions of any kind. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the word, states, refers to jurisdictions — not only 
states like in the United States. 
 
That Convention on the Rights of the Child also states that 
states shall protect children from physical or mental harm and 
neglect, including sexual abuse and exploitation. The child is 
entitled to the highest attainable standard of health. Children 
shall have time to rest and play. States shall protect children 
from the illegal use of drugs and involvement in drug 
production and trafficking. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in a country like Canada — which according 
to the United Nations is the best country in the world for quality 
of life — children being continually abused through sexual 
abuse and exploitation on or off the streets of Saskatchewan or 
any jurisdiction in this country cannot be tolerated in any way 
or form. And it is our duty to fight for the rights of those 
children and their protection and their assistance. 
 
Our social responsibility is to work towards the betterment of 
all lives in order to better society. But most of all it is to work 
for and protect the most vulnerable members of our society and 
ensure their healthy development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six years ago it became evident to me just how 
insidious this problem was in the province of Saskatchewan, the 
problem of child sexual abuse on the streets. When I learned 
what was happening to our children, that there were pedophiles 
out there — sick adults, very sick adults, hurting the bodies and 
destroying the souls of innocent children, sick adults who were 
taking advantage of vulnerable children — I was compelled at 
that time to start working with whoever would work towards 
this to stop the abuse and exploitation of children through the 
sex trade and to focus on measures that would concentrate on 
developing the strengths, the talents, and the capabilities of 
youth in a positive, constructive, and meaningful way so that 
eventually those children could experience healthy, 
life-enhancing opportunities. 
 
There was work to be done and I was ready to do it. I was ready 
to take whatever was necessary to make . . . to do what was ever 
necessary to make this a reality. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I met with a number of people during the 
five or six years since I’ve been elected — people who not only 
work with children involved in the sex trade, but I also met 
some of the children who were actually being forced to turn to 
the sex trade to make some money or who had been forced by 
pimps and relatives to sell their bodies. 
 
I was appalled and deeply distressed, Mr. Speaker, at what I 
heard and what I saw. The lives of hundreds of children were 
being attacked, and many of them destroyed through the abuses 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

they suffered. It was hard to believe that this was happening in 
our province, in this century. 
 
The member from Regina Victoria mentioned when he was up 
speaking just a few minutes ago that it was a mystery . . . it was 
no mystery to him about — or to anybody in the province — 
about why this was happening. And he referred to poverty as 
being the reason. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about the 
children when we speak about the poverty. Mr. Speaker, 
poverty of children certainly leads to why they end up having to 
be on the streets. 
 
But there is one other reason that we must not overlook in this 
legislature or in society and that there’s a spiritual poverty in 
this province and throughout the country and world of men and 
women who continue in their deprived way to mentally and 
emotionally damage our children to meet their own needs. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that I’m so very 
pleased that the two pieces of legislation that have come 
forward in this legislature in Saskatchewan deal with deterrents 
— deterrents towards perpetrators and deterrents towards 
people who would continue to feed their deprivation, who 
would continue in their mental illness to hurt our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 600 children in this province, that’s an 
estimated number of children in Saskatchewan who are being 
abused through the sex trade. For the members on this side of 
the House and I know throughout the legislature, that’s 600 too 
many. It’s too many for all the citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years my efforts to draw attention to the 
urgency for action was unheard by this government. I tried 
desperately on behalf of the children to introduce some 
legislation in this very legislature in 1997, 1999, and the year 
2000, hoping that the members opposite would recognize the 
issue and acknowledge the need to address it. And I can’t begin 
to tell you how encouraged I was when the members opposite 
announced that they were finally forming a committee to study 
the abuse and exploitation of children involved in the sex trade. 
 
I was pleased, Mr. Speaker, to serve as Co-Chair of that 
committee and after 100 meetings and literally hundreds more 
informal dialogues, the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse 
and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade released its 
final report in June of last year. That report, along with 49 
recommendations, was fully supported and endorsed by all 
members of this House. All members, Mr. Speaker, recognized 
the importance of the issue and that immediate action must be 
taken. 
 
(15:45) 
 
After that report was released last June we all waited 
impatiently for those recommendations to be implemented. And 
we all knew how critical this issue was and how important it 
was that something be done immediately. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I must say I was a bit disappointed because 
by fall there was nothing happening. And fall turned into 
winter, and Christmas came and went. And I can’t help but 
think what a perfect opportunity Christmas would have been, 
Mr. Speaker. What a wonderful Christmas present that would 

have made, not only for those working to help children involved 
in the sex trade, but most importantly, for those children 
themselves — some help, some hope, a chance at health and 
happiness. 
 
But, unfortunately, there was nothing done last Christmas, or 
the Christmas before, or the Christmas before. Sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, those kind of delays mean that even more children 
become trapped in this horrible and devastating trade. Sadly, 
Mr. Speaker, more children’s lives were being destroyed. 
 
But now, finally, nearing spring, the government has taken 
some legal steps to do something. 
 
Following the amendment to The Highway Traffic Act, we now 
have this proposed legislation before us, Bill No. 2, An Act 
respecting Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual 
Abuse. And I applaud this, Mr. Speaker. Every member on this 
side of the House applauds it. The entire province is in 
celebration because we have finally got something on the table 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a very important Bill; it’s a well-intentioned 
Bill. In essence it talks about emergency intervention orders to 
keep child abusers away from vulnerable children on the streets 
— children at risk. And it gives police more authority to search 
and seize evidence from suspicious vehicles. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the focus of this Bill is on the perpetrator. It’s 
to deter and punish perpetrators or would-be perpetrators. It 
doesn’t have any provisions though — and this concerns me — 
or immediate directives to take care of the abused child who is 
left behind on the street. 
 
Now the member from Greystone mentioned that it is the law 
that anyone who recognizes a child in need of protection must 
report it. But what about after that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the emergency prevention order that this Bill talks 
about is allowing the police to order a john to stay away from a 
child. 
 
When the minister introduced this Bill, he talked to the media 
about safe houses and designating spaces in group and foster 
homes for sexually exploited youth. He talked about 
intervention and about retraining service providers so that 
people working with children involved in the child sex would 
know how to deal with them. And in fact the minister talked 
about all the issues the child sex trade committee recommended 
and he talked about them as being addressed. 
 
I believe that all members of this House have the best interest of 
the children at heart. We all want to do whatever we can to get 
them off the streets, keep them safe, and to show them that they 
do have choices, that they do have options. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m a bit saddened that while the minister 
talks about doing these things, this Bill, the two Bills that have 
been laid on the Table of this legislature to deal with this issue, 
it doesn’t allow for any of those things I’ve just spoken of to be 
implemented. It talks about intentions. It talks about what the 
government is focusing on. 
 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

 

But we need meat-and-potatoes legislation here to make sure 
that there is a follow-up for services that the children will need, 
ongoing services and support. In fact, I know that maybe some 
of the members opposite disagree with what I’ve just said. But 
it’s patently clear that the Bill No. 2 doesn’t really assist 
children involved in the sex trade. 
 
The Bill doesn’t do anything, Mr. Speaker, to assist them to exit 
the street life and fully recover. It doesn’t provide any resources 
for that. There is no new funding, except a commitment by the 
Minister of Social Services of $300,000, and I believe that must 
be for operating expenses in a safe house in Regina. We don’t 
see any commitment for extra human resources or financial 
support for them. 
 
We don’t see any specifically designated police officers. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to remind the Assembly that one of the 
recommendations that came forward in our report was for a 
special police unit that would be funded by the government. We 
don’t see that happening. We don’t see any measures here for a 
pilot project for protective secure care. There is no 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, to actual measures for ongoing 
support or backup or recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the safe house that the Minister of Social Services 
was talking about as being set up here in Regina is good news. 
That’s wonderful news. We have one in Saskatoon. 
 
But there’s no talk about establishing safe houses in other 
communities, Mr. Speaker. Now I wonder why, because the 
members opposite surely must realize that there are children in 
danger of becoming involved in the sex trade in places like 
Prince Albert, Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, and other places 
throughout the province. If they don’t realize that, they should 
review the transcripts of the report which indicates safe houses 
are needed in many centres. The child sex trade has invaded 
virtually every corner of this province and action must be taken 
now. 
 
Another thing this Bill doesn’t do is address the fundamental 
question of what happens to the children after an intervention 
order has been served to a child abuser. What about the child on 
the street? Do we just leave them there without support? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 2 doesn’t address some of the root causes 
of why children are involved in the sex trade. It doesn’t look at 
underlying issues. What it doesn’t look at is the need for 
rehabilitation and the need for recovery from addictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make any absolute, concrete 
commitment towards homelessness. As a result we have a Bill 
with some teeth, but not enough teeth, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 
go far enough. It won’t assist the children off the streets and it 
won’t keep them off the streets. And it won’t provide long-term 
safety or security. It will not provide long-term healing and 
opportunities to grow as the children deserve. And it most 
certainly won’t provide more funding or resources to police or 
any other groups; people who work tirelessly day in and day out 
trying desperately to help children who are being abused and 
exploited through the sex trade. 
 
While the ministers of Justice and Social Services basically 
reiterate the recommendations that were originally made by the 

Child Sex Trade Committee, that’s pretty well all much . . . as 
much as it does. So, Mr. Speaker, what we really need is follow 
through with all those recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of some of the things that the 
members opposite have said when it comes to addressing this 
critical issue. They say that keeping our community safe is a top 
priority for their government. They say that the abuse and 
exploitation of children will not be tolerated. They say that they 
are committed to children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, commitment to action implies concrete, 
comprehensive plans initiated immediately. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, during committees of the whole, I . . . Committee of 
the Whole, I will be introducing amendments to this Bill. 
Amendments that will strengthen it and make it more 
comprehensive. Amendments that will ultimately protect and 
assist children. 
 
These amendments concur with the draft Bill inserted in the 
final committee report that were made by the Child Sex Trade 
Committee. And it is my sincere hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members opposite will see the benefit of these amendments and 
will allow them to pass during Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of all the legislation that has come before this 
Assembly, none have been more important or have had the 
capacity to profoundly affect more lives than this one. The very 
lives of Saskatchewan’s children who are involved in the child 
sex trade or who are at risk of involvement depend on it. And 
while this Bill is not comprehensive enough to counteract all 
the evils that have been done, it is indeed a good start. 
 
But so much more could be accomplished with this legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, children involved in the sex 
trade have been failed by others so many times in so many 
ways. We must do all that we can to help them. 
 
And I’d like to just recite some words that were presented to 
our committee by a young woman who I greatly admired, who 
has since exited the streets. And her poem speaks almost of her 
desperation. It speaks of whether she can really truly believe 
that as a society someone cares enough to try to help them to 
move on to a better life. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recite this woman’s valuable 
words at this time: 
 

What does the future hold for the child of a prostitute? 
I know whole families that work — the aunties, the mother 
and the daughter. 
I know a prostitute. Her parents made her work. 
 
The situation on the streets gets worse every day. 
How do you stop this? How do you help them? 
Do you throw them in jail? Do you think that would work? 
 
Okay, so they get a fine. 
How will they pay for that fine? 
Well they’ll go right back to working the street. 
 
It is like any business. 
As long as someone buys your product, 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

You’ll stop what you’re doing because you’re not making 
any money. 

 
Rather, I think I should have intoned that a little bit different, 
Mr. Speaker. Her next line is: 
 

You’ll stop what you’re doing if you’re not making any 
money. 
 
The same goes for a prostitute. 
If you stop people from buying them, they would stop 
working. 
 
I lost too many friends to the streets, 
And I don’t want my children to make the same mistake as 
I made. 
Something has to be done and soon. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be quite brief, 
but I do think it is important for me to place on the record the 
support of myself and of my party for the measures that are 
being proposed before the House today. 
 
I know that throughout this process the primary focus has been 
on the young people whose lives are being destroyed by the sex 
trade. This is of course appropriate; however, I think before we 
leave the subject altogether, I think we should express a thought 
for those law-abiding citizens and those community groups who 
are concerned about the effects on their neighbourhoods by the 
sex trade. 
 
And I’d like to say that I have met with the concerned citizens 
of Riversdale who simply want to be able to sit in their 
backyards of an evening to have a barbecue, to have their 
children come and go from school or for their various evening 
activities, without being accosted and without being subjected 
to inappropriate displays of solicitation. 
 
And for many of us who live in safe neighbourhoods, it is 
indeed sobering to be told that there are people not involved in 
any way in the sex trade who simply want to be able to sit in 
their backyard without having to witness inappropriate displays. 
And say, while I in no way detract from the work of the 
committee in saying our primary concern ought to be for the 
young people in the sex trade, I think we should also spare a 
thought for those citizens who see their neighbourhoods 
maligned and degraded by the problem of street prostitution. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think most of what can be said has already 
been said, but I would like to say that it is also important that 
we acknowledge that harsher and harsher penalties and 
legislation of a criminal or quasi-criminal nature will not, of and 
in itself, end the social ill of street prostitution and the child sex 
trade. 
 
And in that regard, while I think some of the remarks of the 
hon. member for Regina Victoria were certainly unfortunate, he 
was in fact making a valid point. That if we really wished to 
end the street sex trade that requires stronger families, stronger 

schools, and stronger communities. And simply resorting to the 
criminal or quasi-criminal power will not, of and in itself, 
correct the sickness which is unfortunately in some of our 
homes and some of our families. 
 
(16:00) 
 
So I think the fact that it does require a multi-faceted approach 
to deal with the sicknesses in our society and in our homes is a 
valid point and one that we cannot lose sight of, and we cannot 
lose sight of the fact that the criminal law, or the quasi-criminal 
law, is always a blunt instrument which always seeks to deal 
with problems after they’ve occurred as opposed to preventing 
them to begin with. 
 
Nonetheless, this is in fact a noble initiative, and it is one that 
deserves the support of all hon. members. And it is my hope 
that some of the citizens’ groups I’ve talked to will be able to 
have neighbourhoods where they and their children can move 
freely, especially in the evenings, without being confronted 
with inappropriate sights and without being confronted 
themselves with offensive solicitations. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to the comments that I 
made a few moments ago, I certainly intended to inform the 
government that the opposition is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member has spoken once. 
Does the member have leave to complete her comments? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — All right, Mr. Speaker, I guess the rules of the 
House have got to be brushed up on, no doubt by myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to present to the government of the 
day that the official opposition would be most happy to move 
this Bill to Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I see that the 
minister is rising to conclude debate, and at this time it is my 
duty to advise members if there’s anyone else that wishes to 
speak, this is the time to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker, and I thank all hon. colleagues for the opportunity to 
conclude debate as provided in rule 34(3) of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise not to repeat the words that I said earlier or 
really to respond to comments made by members, but more 
importantly, more significantly, to acknowledge a process that 
is occurring on this day, and that I think should . . . ought to be 
acknowledged because it is significant. 
 
It is rare indeed. I’ve been in this Assembly for in excess of 15 
years, and it is extremely rare that a Bill will move from the 
introduction of second reading debate to a vote in a single day. 
And that is in fact is what’s happening here today and that 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

 

should be noted not only by the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because it does say loud and clear by virtue of this action that 
this is an Assembly that cares, that cares very deeply about the 
consequences of sexual exploitation of kids in the street, sexual 
abuse of those kids, and that we are resolved and we are united 
in our resolve in this Assembly to do something to deal with it 
in a very concrete and constructive and proactive kind of way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I came to the portfolio — I had the privilege 
of coming to Social Services this fall — I had the opportunity to 
come to know in a very personal kind of way the passion that 
has been felt by the government members of the committee as 
we’ve worked together on the development of the government’s 
response to the committee’s recommendations and including the 
Bill as before us today. 
 
Today in debate here in the Assembly, I was able to also, I 
think, enjoy the privilege of hearing the passion directly by the 
opposition members who were participating on the committee. 
 
And I know that it was a committee that was made up of seven 
members who started with varying degrees of knowledge and 
experience but who became passionately united in their resolve 
to do something positive to deal with an ugly circumstance in 
our province. And I want to say how much . . . how deeply I 
appreciate of all the members that they have made that 
commitment and I have been able to experience, to experience 
that sense of passion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also had opportunity of course to deal with the 
many stakeholders, and some of whom had dealt with the 
committee and others who hadn’t. It is impossible, and I 
understand in a very personal way some of the comments made 
today, that it is impossible to be close to the subject without 
feeling absolute disgust for the ability it seems of some in our 
society to prey upon those who are vulnerable. 
 
This is an issue, which focuses on some of the most 
reprehensible of human behaviour, and I am so proud to be a 
member of an Assembly that has said no more, no more. 
 
I had the privilege some years ago, and I know to join with the 
member for Cannington and others to be a part of an 
all-member . . . all-party legislative committee to deal with an 
important issue, that in those days, dealt with a subject that I 
still believe to this day and till the day I die was a subject that 
brought about changes, partially through the result of this 
Chamber, that will save lives. 
 
No less, Mr. Speaker, do I believe that the work of the 
committee resulting now in what’s before us in this Bill, and 
other things related to it is any less significant in the fact that it 
will too also literally save lives. 
 
And it is a motivation of all the members that come to this 
House — regardless of the party that we represent and the 
passions and the philosophical differences that we may have, 
we all come with a common purpose, and that is each in our 
own way to be a part of building a better world. 
 
And I would like to say how pleased and proud I am of this 

Legislative Assembly and the demonstration of what legislative 
committees are capable of producing, and the kind of actions 
that legislators are capable of producing in a non-partisan way 
because of the belief that we are acting in the common good of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Bill No. 2 introduced as, obviously, the second Bill given notice 
in this Assembly, then brings forth just simply that — a piece of 
legislation which is part of a much broader package. I’ve heard 
each member who has taken their place this afternoon refer to 
the fact that this Bill itself is not an answer and I agree, I agree. 
 
All by itself this Bill is not the answer. It is part of a broader 
strategy and a combination of initiatives which we are taking, 
building on, building on a solid foundation of what is already in 
place, and then in an uniquely Saskatchewan way using our 
Saskatchewan resources and our Saskatchewan commitment 
and our Saskatchewan dedication and our Saskatchewan 
experience to do what we see as the most sensible way of 
addressing this issue. 
 
So it will be with much interest, I think not only by ourselves in 
this House, but by many who care passionately who are outside 
these Chambers, who are watching these proceedings, either 
directly or indirectly, and who also care very passionately about 
these vulnerable kids that we have on the streets of 
Saskatchewan, that we will look together, then, at the total 
package. 
 
I welcome constructive criticism. It must be understood that 
what we’re dealing with here today is neither a start because we 
started long ago, nor is it a conclusion because there is much yet 
to be done, and we are at a point in time which we are 
challenged as members of this Assembly to take the resources 
that we are given, resources include finances, but also resources 
include human resources and experiences upon which we must 
build. 
 
And we will do that, Mr. Speaker, with the resolve that number 
one, through this Bill, we will be more effective. We’re dealing 
in this Bill in an action that is first in Canada — first in Canada 
— to act in a very aggressive way to separate the perpetrators 
from the victim, and then as part of that, using that tool to then 
address in an effective way that being engaged in the process 
for healing the lives of the children that motivate us to do what 
we do. Because the end of the day, there is nothing — nothing 
— that is more valuable in attending to this subject than the 
futures of those kids who are vulnerable. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I take my place now saying thank you 
very much to the members of the Assembly, to the members of 
the committee, to those who work in our Social Services sector, 
who are dedicated to improving the lives of these vulnerable 
kids, giving them a chance to escape from the trap that they’ve 
been thrust into as part of this whole business of sexual 
exploitation and giving them the opportunity, as kids should 
have, to be able to dream about their futures and to think with 
some hope and optimism about building lives for themselves 
and for their families and the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is with all of that in mind that I say 
thank you again for the contribution of members in the debate 
today and look forward to moving forward . . . looking forward 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

to moving forward with progress on this project. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 16:11 until 16:16. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 48 
 
Calvert Atkinson Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Lorjé Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Nilson 
Junor Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Thomson 
Yates McCall Hermanson 
Kwiatkowski Heppner Julé 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Brkich Wiberg Weekes 
Allchurch Huyghebaert Hillson 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion declared unanimously 
without any abstentions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to move second reading of The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act deals with many 
issues from licensing to registration, and very specifically with 
legislation regarding the penalties for impaired driving. 
 
The proposed amendments to the Act will clarify some of the 
existing laws and make the Act more consistent, while at the 
same time ensuring fairness and safety for all Saskatchewan 
motorists. 
 
The first group of proposed amendments I’d like to outline 
relate to the serious problem of drinking and driving, with a 
focus on drivers who are participating, I should say, in the 
ignition interlock program. An ignition interlock is a device that 
is attached to the ignition of a vehicle. In order to turn that 
vehicle on, the driver must blow into the device, which checks 
for blood alcohol level, in order to start the vehicle. 

In an effort to encourage individuals convicted of drinking and 
driving to change their behaviour, the proposed amendments 
will enable the ignition interlock device to be used by repeat 
drinking and driver offenders. Currently, only first-time 
offenders are entitled to reduce their suspension through 
participation in this program. 
 
Experience in other jurisdictions indicates that expanding the 
ignition interlock program to include all offenders has proven to 
be an effective way to reduce the numbers of repeat drinking 
and driving offences. 
 
In the four months the ignition option has been available to 
Saskatchewan residents, 134 devices have been installed in 
vehicles with offenders paying all costs for participation in the 
program. 
 
The next proposed amendment to the Act is required to add 
consequences to drivers and third parties who seek to 
circumvent the interlock device. Any attempt to bypass or 
tamper with an interlock device is a serious offence and may 
ultimately result in an individual being removed from the 
program. 
 
By strengthening legislation regarding compliance with the 
ignition interlock program, the public will be assured that 
program participants are being closely monitored to ensure the 
safety of all road users. However, in an attempt to be fair and 
balanced, the proposed amendments to the Act will also allow 
for an appeal to the Highway Traffic Board when an ignition 
interlock program participant is disqualified from the program. 
 
I would note, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has among the 
strongest package of drinking and driving legislation in place in 
Canada. 
 
These proposed amendments build on initiatives taken in 2001, 
including zero alcohol tolerance for new drivers and the 
immediate 90-day roadside administrative driver’s licence 
suspension. The recently implemented 90-day administrative 
suspension is imposed if a driver has a blood-alcohol level of 
over .08 or if they are charged with refusing to give a breath 
sample. 
 
The new proposed amendment to the Act will add the Criminal 
Code offence of failing to stop for a peace officer to the list of 
offences which will result in a statutory driver’s licence 
suspension. Currently the Act provides for the suspension of a 
driver’s licence if a driver is convicted of one or more of a 
series of listed offences such as driving while impaired, 
dangerous driving, or failing to provide a breath sample. 
 
Enhancing the Act to allow for the suspension of driver’s 
licences of individuals charged with failing to stop for a peace 
officer is further evidence of the hard work being done to deter 
dangerous driving practices on our roads. 
 
Another group of proposed amendments I’d like to outline 
involves the monitoring of medical conditions of Saskatchewan 
motorists. SGI’s medical unit reviews and monitors drivers 
whose health issues represent a potential danger to themselves 
and other users of roads and highways. 
 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

 

Presently the medical review unit must schedule a hearing to 
review a driver’s medical situation before any safety sanctions 
can be added to the driver’s licence. Time constraints and 
customer availability often result in delays which are very 
frustrating for the drivers involved. The proposed amendments 
eliminate the need for these hearings and fall in line with other 
policy changes to the medical review unit designed to help 
simplify and streamline the entire process for our drivers. 
 
Recent customer service improvements to the medical review 
unit’s policies include reduced reporting requirements for 
drivers with stable medical conditions, the elimination of 
periodic monitoring for some medical conditions, and a 
redesign of complex forms. 
 
If the individual is unhappy with the decision of the medical 
review unit he or she continues to have the option of an appeal 
to the Highway Traffic Board. 
 
The Saskatchewan Medical Association supports these 
proposed amendments which will improve service for drivers 
being monitored with medical conditions, and at the same time, 
enhance the safety of all other drivers on the road. 
 
The new . . . I should say the next significant change to this Act 
continues to involve medical reporting but affects only 
commercial drivers. As of January 1, 2003 commercial drivers 
will be required to provide periodic medical reports to maintain 
their commercial driving status. The obligation is part of the 
National Safety Code program and must be implemented if the 
Saskatchewan drivers wish to operate in the United States. 
 
Current legislation enables SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) to suspend a commercial driver’s licence if a 
medical report is not provided upon request. The proposed 
amendments would authorize SGI to issue a class 5 licence to a 
commercial driver instead of suspending the driver, provided 
there are no other grounds to consider a suspension. 
 
A class 5 licence allows a driver to continue to operate private 
passenger vehicles during the time their commercial licence is 
invalid and SGI is waiting for the medical information. 
Monitoring of commercial drivers for medical conditions that 
may affect their driving ability is another change that will 
improve our road safety for all users. 
 
The final proposed amendment simply expands the definition of 
driving while disqualified to include the proposed medical 
suspension and the 90-day roadside administrative suspension. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that concludes my outline of the amendments set 
out in this Act. These amendments work together to strengthen 
the rules and regulations in the areas of licensing and 
registration as well as to specifically target impaired drivers in 
an effort to make Saskatchewan’s roads and highways as safe as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Vehicle Administration Act. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand today and add some remarks to the record 
regarding Bill No. 14, An Act to amend The Vehicle 

Administration Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an area that I have spent a good 
deal of my life dealing with, is traffic safety. And as I listen to 
the minister talk about a number of areas that this Act is going 
to be dealing with and really working to promote safe driving 
on the streets and highways of our province, I would applaud 
that. 
 
He covers a number of different areas. The first area that he 
talked about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is of great interest to me 
is the vehicle interlock process that the government is moving 
towards to try and limit the amount of drinking and driving 
done on our highways and to deal with some of the habitual 
reoffenders in that area. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the drinking and driving issue has 
been a real sore spot in our province for a number of years. We 
normally would say that about 50 per cent of all the fatal 
collisions that happen in Saskatchewan have alcohol involved 
— not necessarily the person was impaired, but alcohol was 
involved. And any steps that we can take to limit that and 
reduce that number of fatalities we think is a good step. 
 
I know a number of, back about six, seven years ago when 
government introduced a number of initiatives, one of them — 
and was also addressed today — was the 90-day suspension, 
administrative suspension as soon as the person was charged. 
And all of those things are working towards reducing the 
number of impaired drivers on our streets and highways. 
 
I also remember for many years we keep saying that about 50 
per cent have alcohol involved with fatal collisions which . . . 
and it has carried on that way. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
wonder if we’re making any progress. But when the number of 
fatals have dropped in half over the last 30 years in our 
province — a good deal due to seatbelts — but also this 
interlock would be another area that will hopefully bring that 
number of fatals down. So when you cut your number of 
fatalities in half and you still say that 50 per cent are involved in 
. . . have alcohol involved, you’ve really reduced that instead of 
50 per cent of 200 — which would be 100 — 50 per cent of 120 
certainly is a lot better record. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we think the, you know, on surface it 
looks like a great idea, we have to do some more consulting in 
the area. 
 
The other area that he talked about was the 90-day 
administrative suspension for people that fail to stop for a peace 
officer. And I think — I don’t have the numbers — but 
certainly with anecdotal evidence in the city of Regina, we’re 
hearing more and more of that with the number of car thefts that 
we’ve witnessed in the city of Regina. And it used to be it was 
one thing to steal the vehicle, the other game that a lot of the car 
thefts . . . thieves are playing right now is to get into a chase and 
then try and extend that for as long as possible. 
 
So you know I’m not sure of the record of the people that are 
stealing the cars, how many actually have licences, but this is 
one way to hopefully get them off the street. Whether it will 
stop it or not completely, I don’t know; but it’s just one more 
tool in the tool chest to try and prevent the number of car thefts. 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

The medical issue is always an interesting one because I know 
again dealing with a number of people in my constituency that 
have lost their licences due to medical situations — they may 
have had a stroke, may have had a heart attack, that type of 
thing — and they normally have to go through a medical 
process to regain their licence back. 
 
(16:30) 
 
The minister talked about streamlining that process, which we 
think is a good idea, and making it not easier for them to 
receive their licence, but maybe not quite so many hoops to 
jump through. And, you know, whether it’s eliminate the need 
for hearings, that sounds on the surface like a pretty good idea, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we know that, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan — and I’ll speak for that because that’s the area 
that I know best — a driver’s licence is everything for many of 
the seniors. I mean, without that driver’s licence, they just can’t 
get around. There isn’t the availability of public transit, whether 
it’s bus or taxi service. 
 
And it doesn’t have to be just in rural Saskatchewan. A lot of 
the small towns, you know, whether it’s a senior that’s had 
some medical problems, to lose their licence, then they’re 
having to have somebody get them to the doctor and that type 
of thing. So to streamline the process we think makes a lot of 
sense. 
 
The commercial driver issue and medical reports on commercial 
drivers, failing to provide the proper medical report and then, 
by failing to do that, taking their commercial licence away, 
again, you know, at first blush it looks like a real good idea. 
Certainly we don’t want people driving out there when their 
medical condition is in poor shape. 
 
We always used to say . . . I remember talking many, many 
times on the fact that if you looked at the fatal collisions in our 
province and you know that about 50 per cent have alcohol 
involved, how many other per cent have some other sort of 
factor, whether it’s a medical issue or legal or illegal drugs. 
 
So we need to try and work to prevent those people being on the 
streets and highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But before we move this on, there are a number of people that 
we feel this Bill is going to affect, and without proper 
consultation with those people, Mr. Speaker, it would be an 
injustice to move it any further until we have the opportunity to 
consult with a number of the affected parties. So, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before 
I begin my remarks, I’d ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They are still there. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce to members of the 
Assembly, seated in your gallery, two SaskEnergy officials who 
have worked on this Act and the amendments that we’re 
proposing. 
 
First of all, Ron Podbielski with corporate affairs. And I want to 
point out to members they . . . if you’ve known Ron before and 
maybe didn’t recognize him right now because of all of the bags 
under his eyes, he’s a new father that I understand has not slept 
very much in the last week or two. So welcome very much, 
Ron. 
 
And also with him is general counsel — our general counsel in 
SaskEnergy, I should say — Mark Guillet. So if I could ask 
members to please join me in welcoming these two gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 – The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you again very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s an honour and a privilege for me to rise in 
the House today to move second reading of Bill No. 4, The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
As the members know, The SaskEnergy Act is the governing 
legislation for SaskEnergy and its subsidiaries. It also enables 
the terms and conditions by which natural gas is distributed and 
transported within Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m proud to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all . . . 
and, I should say, to all of my esteemed colleagues, that this 
Bill means good news for the oil field industry and by the 
extension of that, for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the past few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, oil field activity 
and the competitive royalty structures have been a boon to our 
Saskatchewan economy. Last year a record 1,366 oil wells were 
drilled and cased here in Saskatchewan. Predictions point to 
another successful year in 2002. It’s something that we here 
should all be proud of. 
 
By another, but another reason why I’m proud today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is because this Bill will make it easier for 
commercial oil field producers to do business in our great 
province. Under The SaskEnergy Act, SaskEnergy has the 
exclusive legal franchise to own and operate a natural gas 
distribution system. But after discussions between SaskEnergy 
and various oil field producers interested in streamlining their 
business operations, this Bill was created to allow the producer 
community to run its own natural gas lines between its own 
facilities. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, creates a win-win situation for the producers 
and for SaskEnergy. Producers benefit from reduced cost and 
reduced time in installing underground pipelines, and it also . . . 
and it’s . . . it is also, I should say, important to SaskEnergy. It 
will help the corporation strengthen its relationship with oil 
producers and facilitate an environment that makes it easier for 
these producers to do business in Saskatchewan. 
 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

 

I’d also like to add, Mr. Speaker, that through this Bill, safety 
will also be enhanced for all 320,000 customers throughout the 
province. 
 
For a number of years now, SaskEnergy has implemented a 
successful call before you dig campaign to help educated 
landowners and contractors about the importance of calling for 
a line locate before any construction work begins. This program 
has been quite successful throughout the province. 
 
These amendments will strengthen safety provisions in the Act 
by ensuring landowners and contractors are aware of their joint 
liabilities should they fail to call SaskEnergy or TransGas. This 
is a very appropriate . . . This is very appropriate considering 
the serious situation that could arise if a natural gas pipeline 
was contacted. 
 
In closing, this Bill represents fundamental benefits for oilfield 
producers, SaskEnergy, and for natural gas customers . . . 
consumers across Saskatchewan and I urge all members to 
support this Bill. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 4, 
The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
anything that enhances the opportunities of producers and 
people who work and drive the economy of Saskatchewan is 
always good news. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take the minister’s word that 
the changes to this particular Act as far as the distribution of 
gas, is good to the producers of this province. Because I have to 
believe that it will be good for them. If they can take production 
from facility A and move it to facility B for consumption there 
within their own services, that will be a good thing. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen this happen before where that 
was happening but where the government was still intervening 
to a certain degree in that operation. If this Bill eliminates that 
interference and intervention, then that will be a good thing, Mr. 
Speaker, and will benefit all of Saskatchewan as the economic 
activity will produce results in the name of tax dollars which 
will benefit us all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when the minister talks about safety, though, I . . . While I 
support very much, Mr. Speaker, the need for safety in all our 
operations, I do have some questions in relationship to the 
safety aspects of this Bill because it talks about denying people 
access to property where it says gas lines are located. 
 
Now what does that actually mean, Mr. Speaker? Does that 
mean the right of way that is in place for laying that pipeline 
and for accessing that pipeline? Which in some cases is a 16 
foot strip, X number of miles long. Or does it mean the 
designated titled property on which that pipeline runs? That 
hasn’t been clarified by the minister. 
 
It’s one thing to say that you shouldn’t dig over top of the actual 
pipeline, which anyone who knows that it’s there isn’t going to 
do, Mr. Speaker. It’s another thing to say that you have to 

phone SaskEnergy up if you want to dig a rock out of your land 
that’s a half a mile away from the pipeline, just because, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s on the same title. 
 
The minister didn’t address that and I think that needs to be 
addressed. Because the owners of property need to be able to 
carry out their legitimate business upon that property without 
undue interference by government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is also another part of the Bill that the minister didn’t 
mention at all, and that is clauses 4 through . . . clause 4, Mr. 
Speaker, I guess. There’s a number of subsections to that 
clause. And it talks about committees and the executive 
committee of the SaskEnergy Corporation. And this clause 
removes the words “the executive committee” and puts in its 
place “a committee appointed to pursuant to clause 1(a).” 
Which is: 
 

The board may: 
 

(a) appoint any committees that it considers necessary for 
the efficient conduct of the affairs and business of the 
corporation; 

 
Now does this mean all of these other committees that are being 
mentioned in this particular Act will be board members who are 
elected or appointed to carry out their fiduciary duties on behalf 
of the board? Or does this deal with people selected at random 
or people selected by the government to sit as quasi-board 
members, perhaps, of SaskEnergy? Or board members 
somehow on some committee within SaskEnergy but in no way 
related to SaskEnergy? 
 
What does this mean, Mr. Speaker? Because it certainly isn’t 
going to be a committee without remuneration. Because it also 
changes the fact that the remuneration will be set by the board 
for these committees, whomever they might be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think we’re opening up a can of worms here, Mr. 
Speaker, that is potentially to the disadvantage of SaskEnergy, 
Mr. Speaker. And clearly if you take, if you take the 
committees away from the board, Mr. Speaker, you’re taking 
those committees away from the responsibilities to SaskEnergy. 
 
SaskEnergy Board of Directors have a fiduciary duty, Mr. 
Speaker, to that corporation. What duties, what responsibilities 
do these new committee members have to SaskEnergy? Do they 
serve SaskEnergy or do they serve another master, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Another amendment deals with “striking out ‘$200,000’ and 
substituting ‘the amount fixed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council’.” So within SaskEnergy there is a fee, a cost, a 
payment — I don’t know — of $200,000 for some action or 
inaction, and the government is substituting that the cabinet can 
make the decision on what this amount will be. 
 
Does this mean it will vary based on circumstances and 
occurrences — it could be lower in one case, higher in another? 
Or does it mean that it is simply going to rise whenever the 
cabinet decides it needs more money or wants to pay somebody 
more money? We don’t know, Mr. Speaker, because the 
minister in his address on this completely abrogated his 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2002 

 

responsibility in even discussing this particular issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So there are lots of issues that need to be investigated in this. 
There are lots of third parties that need to be contacted to try 
and gain an understanding and to try . . . and for them to gain 
some knowledge to what the implications could be of this 
particular legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on this Bill, 
Bill No. 4, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my remarks, I’ll move second 
reading of The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2002. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the changes are needed for various sections 
of The Farm Financial Stability Act that deals with the livestock 
loan guarantee program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the livestock loan guarantee program was 
introduced in 1984 and the purpose of the program is to allow 
Saskatchewan producers to establish livestock associations 
which are empowered to borrow funds from financial 
institutions in order to purchase feeder and breeder cattle on 
behalf of the association members. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The association members post funds in the form of an assurance 
fund. For breeder associations, association members are 
required to post 10 per cent of their borrowing level in the 
assurance fund; for breeders, it’s 5 per cent. And the assurance 
fund is the first to be accessed in the event of a default. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan guarantees 25 per cent of the 
association’s loan, should a default occur. Mr. Speaker, this 
program has proved to be very successful since its inception 
and its success has led to the many enhancements. 
 
In 1991 the regulations were expanded to include breeder cattle. 
And in 1999 the regulations were further expanded to allow the 
inclusion of feeder bison and feeder and breeder sheep. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act provides the opportunity for producer 
association members to access a significant source of financing 
for livestock purchases in Saskatchewan. And since the 
program’s inception there has been in excess of $1 billion in 
livestock loan purchases through livestock loan guarantee 
programs in Saskatchewan. 
 
In 2001 alone, more than 127 million was borrowed from 
financial institutions to purchase livestock through the livestock 
loan guarantee program. And, Mr. Speaker, more than 6,500 
livestock producers are members of 130 feeder/breeder 
associations in our province. Mr. Speaker, this program has 
provided a valuable source of credit for livestock producers in 
Saskatchewan. This has contributed to the growth of the 
livestock sector in the province and the diversification of 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural economy. 
 
And since last fall, producers who are members of the 
feeder/breeder livestock association have consulted with me and 
the Government of Saskatchewan and these producers have 
requested that the Government of Saskatchewan make 
amendments to this particular piece of legislation. 
 
The amendments are considered essential in order to clarify 
within the Act that livestock purchased by the association are 
the property of the association rather than the individual. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan livestock producers in the 
feeder/breeder association have discovered that the current 
language of the Act need to be changed to make it clear that the 
feeder/breeder association’s cattle are owned by the association. 
This amendment needs to make it clear that association animals 
cannot be seized to pay other debts of individual association 
members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the producers association would like the 
Government of Saskatchewan to revise the Act so that The 
Personal Property Security Act of 1993 does not apply to 
transactions between the association and the member producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other changes proposed would allow for 
regulations to prescribe the commodities to be included within 
the livestock loan guarantee program. The amendments 
proposed here today clearly state that the transactions between 
the feeder/ breeder associations and their individual members 
are not subject to The Personal Property Securities Act of 1993. 
 
The proposed amendments will strengthen The Farm Financial 
Stability Act by clarifying the existing premise of the program 
that the association is the owner of the commodities. 
 
The proposed amendments will enhance the integrity of the 
program and increase lender confidence in the program. The 
proposed amendments will allow for the continued expansion of 
the livestock industry through the feeder/breeder program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the specific changes to the Act would be as 
follows: section 41 of the Act would be amended to define the 
term of member producer; section 59(1) will be amended to 
ensure that the association is the owner of the commodities 
being purchased under the production association loan 
guarantees, and that the transactions between the association 
and the producers does not create the security interest and 
therefore is not subject to The Personal Property Security Act, 
1993. 
 
And further that section 60 be repealed and submitted . . . and 
substituted to clarify that the association is the owner of the 
commodity purchased and that the association does not act as 
the trustee for the member producer. 
 
Section 61 amended to allow the regulations prescribed 
commodities for the purpose of section 59.1. 

 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I encourage you to adopt the amendments of The 
Farm Financial Stability Act, and therefore I move that The 
Farm Financial Stability Act, 2002 be read the second time. 
 



April 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of 
pleasure that I rise to speak briefly on this legislation that’s 
being proposed by the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Farm Financial Security Act is — we 
understand in consultation, our brief consultations, with people 
in the industry — is a needed improvement to a program that 
has gone a long way in improving the development of the 
livestock industry in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the livestock loan guarantee program has been a 
very important segment of the ability of the livestock industry 
to expand in Saskatchewan. And I think that, in general, people 
are in agreement that this is a very worthwhile and 
fundamentally important bit of legislation, and an important 
program to make sure that Saskatchewan realizes its full 
potential in terms of developing a value-added agricultural 
business in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s particularly important that we make sure that 
we do everything reasonable that we can in order to expand the 
livestock business, particularly in light of the debate that we 
engaged in yesterday about the ethanol industry, because the 
livestock industry and value-adding into livestock and grains 
are critical components of how we’re going to grow the 
economy of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister in his statement said that it was 
important that there be clarity in the legislation to make sure 
that the legislation clearly outlined who the owners were going 
to be of the livestock that was under this program. And I think 
that in the past this has created some difficult situations when 
the guarantees had to be acted on. And so we think that 
potentially this makes a great deal of sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can imagine, it’s important for the official 
opposition to consult with industry people, to sit down with the 
producers who are going to be affected by this legislation, and 
to make sure that nothing has been missed in terms of taking 
this opportunity while the Act and the legislation is being 
opened, to make sure everything is being done that is 
reasonable to stimulate and encourage the livestock industry in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition looks forward to those 
discussions with producers about this important legislation, and 
until that discussion can take place, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:54. 
 


