















































Hansard: March 27, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 307 
 March 27, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned about the 
deplorable condition of Highway 339. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the community of 
Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
work with the federal government, First Nations 
representatives, and with other provincial governments to 
bring about the resolution in the Lake of the Prairies 
situation and to ensure that our natural resources as a 
whole are used in a responsible manner by all people in 
the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Yorkton and 
the town of Saltcoats. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of Yorkton, Saskatoon, Humboldt, and Muenster. And 
the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to resist 
the call of some groups in Saskatchewan to eliminate both 
the passenger and the express services of STC, leaving 
parts of rural Saskatchewan completely without these vital 
commercial and economic lifelines. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those citizens concerned 
about the new enhanced crop insurance program. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 

insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the folks from my constituency of 
Estevan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of the citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Weyburn, 
Tyvan, Sedley, Francis, Indian Head, and Qu’Appelle area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
that is presented on behalf of the citizens who are concerned 
about the continuation of STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) services. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to resist 
the call of some groups in Saskatchewan to eliminate both 
passenger and express services of STC leaving parts of 
rural Saskatchewan completely without these vital 
commercial and economic lifelines. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are from the citizens of Regina and the 
community of Pense. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to day to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens and constituents of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, and all the people of Saskatchewan on 
. . . about the deplorable state of highway No. 35. And the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in order to prevent 
injury or loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by citizens from Fort Qu’Appelle, Fillmore, 
Kronau, Francis, Regina, Weyburn. 
 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. It reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to resist 
the call of some groups in Saskatchewan to eliminate both 
passenger and the express services of STC leaving parts of 
rural Saskatchewan completely without these vital 
commercial and economic lifelines. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is from the good citizens of Earl Grey, Saskatoon, 
Regina, and Punnichy. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of the 
citizens concerned with the current state of tobacco control 
legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the majority of the petitioners are from my 
hometown of Swift Current, but there are also petitioners from 
Wymark, Regina, and Radisson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed by the 
good citizens from Arm River. Petition to halt the crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Girvin, and 
Bladworth. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby received. 
 

A petition concerning passenger and express services of 
STC and addendums to previously tabled petitions, being 
sessional papers no. 7, 8, 11, 16, 17, and 18. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 15 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: (a) what are the rate increases, 
service fee increases, and all other increases and charges to 
public or businesses for services rendered, implemented by 
your department for the year 2001-2003 fiscal year; (b) 
what is the projected increase or decrease in projected 
revenue taken in by your department through these fees and 
charges in 2002-2003 fiscal year; (c) for each fee or charge 
your department levies against the public or business for 
the provision of certain services, what is the projected 
amount to be taken in during the 2002-2003 fiscal year by 
your department, and what is the projected cost to your 
department to provide these services; (d) what service 
reductions or program cuts will occur in 2002-2003 for this 
department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of others dealing with the 
various ministries. 

 
And I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the members of the House and to our assembled guests 
today, I would like to introduce the grade 12 class from the high 
school in the community of Abbey. They are sitting in the west 
gallery, which is appropriate — they have probably come from 
the furthest point west to this event here today. 
 
And I asked if I would be privileged to introduce them 
individually. They declined that particular option, but I think I’d 
like to ask them to stand, if I could today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The grade 12 class from the school of Abbey, Saskatchewan, 
and their . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 
Alan Colpitts, and they were driven here by Harriett Schinbein. 
And I thank you for welcoming them to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — And on behalf of the entire legislature, all the 
elected members, I wish to extend a special welcome to all of 
our guests here today who have come from various parts of the 
province to be close to the action in the legislature on this 
particular day. And I hope that everybody enjoys watching the 
proceedings of the legislature. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Rocanville Economy Growing 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to what some people are 
saying, or rather naysaying, there are good things happening in 
both urban and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In a good new story that comes to us from the East, there have 
been many positive developments in downtown Rocanville. As 
heralded in a recent issue of the inimitable Moosomin World 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

 

Spectator, Rocanville is booming. As a result, the buildings on 
Main Street have filled right up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are some of the reasons why. Since 1996 
Main Street Rocanville has seen the opening of a new medical 
clinic, a large thrift shop, a computer store, a framing and art 
shop, and Denis Lecomte’s plumbing shop. 
 
Julie Palaniuk has just opened a full-line bakery and deli that 
will serve the community as a coffee shop and a place for lunch, 
an opportunity that she has wanted to pursue for years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Super Thrifty Drug Mart will double in size this year; 
something which pharmacist Tracy Burke attributes through the 
support the community has received . . . the support that the 
store has received from the community, support which has seen 
increased sales for each and every one of the past five years. 
And, Mr. Speaker, recent census numbers indicate that 
Rocanville’s population is on the rise. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan like the folks in 
Rocanville are succeeding through co-operation, hard work, and 
smart planning. And they are doing so in an economic climate 
facilitated by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to go to Calgary to find a 
flourishing entrepreneurial spirit; it’s right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Award 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly rise in the 
House today to talk about a very remarkable resident of Arm 
River, Mrs. Helen Campbell, whose volunteer commitment to 
the community of Outlook has earned her the recognition of her 
fellow residents. 
 
On January 23 of this year, I had the honour to attend the first 
annual Jim Kook Citizen of the Year awards presentation 
during the Outlook Chamber of Commerce annual meeting and 
banquet. Mrs. Campbell was an obvious first choice selection 
by the awards committee as she has been heavily involved in 
the Outlook community as a teacher, and since her retirement 
has established many programs which encourage interaction 
between students and seniors in Outlook. 
 
Her noble volunteer service extends to being the coordinator of 
the Variety Place Buddy program, vice-president of the 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living, assisting 
with Meals on Wheels, editing the local Co-op newsletter, and 
finally, helping out with the Welcome Wagon and Baby 
Welcome visits in Outlook. 
 
Clearly this lady is most deserving of this new community 
award — one named after another great Outlook community 
man, the late Jim Kook. It’s great to see a lady like Mrs. 
Campbell get the recognition she so deserves. 
 
When asked how it felt to be so appreciated, she said, “There 
are so many deserving people. It is wonderful!” 

Mrs. Helen Campbell represents the true spirit of 
Saskatchewan. I would ask that you join me in congratulating 
Mrs. Campbell for a lifetime of community service in the town 
of Outlook. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Success Stories from Wilkie and Unity 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard from the 
east side of the province, Mr. Speaker, so how do you suppose 
they’re feeling out west? For instance, what about the two 
communities of Wilkie and Unity? 
 
In an article entitled, “Rural Saskatchewan Community Success 
Stories,” we read that, quote, “the town of Wilkie in 
collaboration with other communities in the region has had 
some remarkable successes,” particularly the West Central 
Pelleting plant with its 600 shareholders. 
 
Close by in the town of Unity, says the same article, is the 
highly successful farmer-owned North West Terminal. Both of 
these ventures prove that community ventures are viable and 
profitable. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the Unity director of economic 
development, Carey Baker, predicts a good year for his town 
with several major developments, including a 7,000-head 
feedlot just north of town. 
 
Mr. Baker is quoted as saying: 
 

We will see job creation, which is great . . . People choose 
to locate here because of the amenities and quality of life 
. . . Younger individuals are moving and staying here. They 
are starting to raise their families here. 

 
A strong infrastructure and a solid business community is 
leading the way to a strong housing market. People in Unity are 
optimistic that economic opportunities will continue to grow 
this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is near my home territory, and I’m proud to 
talk about it. When we on this side talk about people moving 
west, we’re talking about fine Saskatchewan towns like Wilkie 
and Unity. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Camp Sask Cadet 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this past weekend a cadet seminar was held at Camp Sask Cadet 
which is a wilderness camp north of Kelvington, and this 
seminar was to discuss the various aspects of leadership. 
Forty-seven young men and women, representing 30 of 38 
Saskatchewan air cadet squadrons, along with 12 capable staff, 
were in attendance. These air cadets were selected to attend the 
seminar because of their leadership roles in their respective 
units. 
 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to be asked to speak to this group 
of young people about leadership. The discussion centred on the 
types of leadership: autocratic, laissez-faire, and democratic, 
with emphasis on honesty, loyalty, teamwork, integrity, and 
communication skills as they pertain to effective leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say the members opposite could learn a 
great deal from these cadets about these important traits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cadet program in my opinion is the best youth 
program in Canada if not the world. The program focuses on 
citizenship, physical fitness, and leadership. 
 
It’s ironic that this province is facing many challenges with its 
youth sector, yet our cadet program is not full. This program 
represents a great opportunity for young people to further 
develop themselves, not only as individuals but as future 
leaders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Major Pete Garton and his 
organization for their continued commitment to Saskatchewan’s 
youth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Southern Economy 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, if we can trust the 
ever-vigilant press — and I think we can — it appears the 
Weyburn and area economy is seeing impressive growth. 
 
In a recent story in the Weyburn Review, the telling line was as 
follows, quote: 
 

Despite strains on a continental level, local industries are 
forging ahead. 

 
How so, Mr. Speaker? Apache Canada had a, quote, 
“remarkable year” with production levels increasing by 30 per 
cent. And with all the drilling by Apache, it estimates it spent 
around $75 million of which a large part went into the city 
itself. 
 
Who else? PanCanadian, with its groundbreaking CO2 injection 
program, is a company looking at continuous growth and the 
signs for 2002 show no sign of letting up with a gas plant in the 
Goodwater area being constructed. 
 
Nexan Canada, formerly Alcatel Canada Wire, has just finished 
a $20 million expansion of its plant and looks to increase its 
business even more. 
 
And Duraco Window Industries says 2001 was one of its best 
years ever. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Weyburn This Week reports Mayor 
Don Schlosser as saying that economic growth in Weyburn was 
only outdone by Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Good things are happening in Weyburn and area, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you to the local media for letting us know about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Melfort Journal 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, our local newspaper, The Melfort Journal, was 
named top of its class for the second time in three years. The 
judges of the 2002 Saskatchewan Weekly Newspaper 
Association General Excellence awards judged The Melfort 
Journal to be the best all-round newspaper in its circulation 
class. Out of 50 entries, they were the only paper to receive 
more than 900 points out of a possible 1,000 — 48 ahead of the 
next runner-up. 
 
The Melfort Journal has also been recognized in the past by the 
Canadian Community Newspaper Association, which judged 
their publication as fifth in 2000 and sixth in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I speak for all of the community when I express 
our appreciation for the excellent coverage that The Melfort 
Journal provides. I would ask that you join me in 
congratulating the management and staff for their success and 
wish them continued good fortune. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News Headlines for Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In answer to the 
eternal opposition question, can anything good come out of 
Saskatchewan, we’ve heard the good news from the East, the 
good news from the West, the good news from the North, and 
the good news from the South. 
 
The answer is yes, it can. And there’s more, Mr. Speaker. Had 
we world enough and time enough I could elaborate, but here 
are some recent headlines from Saskatchewan. 
 
First from the Northwest, “Tolko Mill to create 240 jobs” in and 
around Green Lake. From Lloydminster, “Border City 
continues upward trend.” From Wadena, “Construction at $1 
million mark.” From the hills and valleys of Fort Qu’Appelle, 
“Economic Development Officer says Fort Qu’Appelle will 
boom.” From Humboldt area, which we heard about yesterday, 
“Doepker Industries charts course with new distribution 
network.” 
 
From several places, stories like this, “B.C. couple finds 
Wroxton area promised land of ranching” and “Alberta ranchers 
moving to Moosomin area.” And not to leave out my 
hometown, the best little city in Canada, there’s this, “City 
Shines in Growth Projections.” And this, “Saskatoon’s 
economy forecast to outperform the Canadian average.” Finally, 
our Queen city, “Regina hits record $214 million in building 
permits.” 
 
So much good news, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately so little time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would like to mention to all of 
guests, that by our parliamentary tradition the action on the 
floor, that is if we’re referring to speaking and heckling and 
applause, is supposed to be handled by the members only. In 
other words, you have to be elected to participate, and I’d ask 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

 

people to observe that. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Finance. The 1999 election platform by the 
New Democrats promised, first and foremost, to create 30,000 
new jobs in Saskatchewan over four years. But the NDP’s job 
creation record since ’99 has been a dismal failure. In fact, since 
1999 Saskatchewan has posted by far the worst job creation 
record in the country. It’s not a creation record; it’s a loss 
record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP made its promise when our workforce 
was 480,000 people. Two years later the workforce had dropped 
to 472,000, and today only 465,000 people are working in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my question is quite simple. In light of the 
first promise in the NDP platform of 1999, does today’s budget 
contain a plan to honour the NDP’s 1999 promise of creating 
30,000 jobs before their term ends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will ask the Leader of the 
Opposition to have patience. In but a few moments he will 
know all that is in the budget. 
 
What he has seen in the course of the last week and a half 
within this House, introduced in the Throne Speech, a very 
solid plan to build in this province, the province of opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker. A plan that says we are going to invest in our 
economy, we are going to invest in our people, in our human 
capital, and we are going to invest in our infrastructure and 
physical capital. 
 
That plan, Mr. Speaker, announced in the Throne Speech about 
what, a week and a half ago, in a week and a half we have in 
this House introduced Canada’s leading ethanol plan. A plan, 
Mr. Speaker, that will show leadership in North America, the 
first jurisdiction in North America to mandate the use of 
ethanol. 
 
In this week and a half, as part of this plan, we have introduced 
measures in this House that will take on those who sexually 
exploit our children in the streets. We promised in the Throne 
Speech to restructure government. That’s done. 
 
We have a plan and our plan will not be deterred by the 
negativity of the men and women opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we 
heard the same words two years ago. That they had a plan, that 
they were going to create jobs, that thousands of people were 
going to find work in Saskatchewan; 10,000 people were going 
to find work in the forestry sector alone. Mr. Speaker, words do 
not create jobs. A change in direction by the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government will create jobs. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are — and I hope 
that the Premier and his ministers listen — the facts are that 
jobs are being lost in Saskatchewan and lost by the thousands. 
These are people that are not only losing their jobs but leaving 
the province. 
 
So once again I say in the light of the job loss record and no 
indication up to this point that there’s a plan to correct it, will 
today’s budget contain a plan to create those 30,000 jobs that 
were promised in 1999? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It should be obvious to all the difference 
in approach. Members on this side of the House day after day 
— including today — stand in their place and celebrate the 
success of Saskatchewan peoples and Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Day after day in this House nothing but 
doom and gloom from the opposite benches. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the Leader of the Opposition stands and refers to comments 
made about a year ago. That’s very interesting that he should do 
that because about a year ago he was saying exactly the same 
thing, exactly the same thing, opposition blasts government. 
 
But what did he say a year ago? Mr. Speaker, what did he say 
about the population increases in Saskatchewan a year ago? He 
said, if the Saskatchewan Party wins the next election, quote: 
 

Hermanson said the population outflow would be stemmed 
within a year or two and the province would then grow if (if) 
the weather and the national economy permitted. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget, our plan, is not based on 
weather permitting, Mr. Speaker. It’s a plan based on the 
optimism and conviction of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budgetary Projections 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to conclude that 
the Premier is not going to give any intention as to whether or 
not he’s going to meet that 30,000 job creation promise of the 
1999 platform. So let’s move on to another topic of smoke and 
mirrors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year the NDP borrowed more than $400 million from the 
bank to balance its budget. But they tried to cover the deficit up 
by claiming the magic money was coming from the so-called 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Never mind that the Provincial 
Auditor and just about everybody says there is no money in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
The NDP just dreamed up this non-existent stabilization fund 
and then used it to try to hide a massive, $400 million deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Finance minister be using the same 
smoke-and-mirrors routine this year to hide yet another massive 
NDP budget deficit from Saskatchewan taxpayers? 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we stand in the legislature 
today with a government in place that has delivered today — 
counting today — nine straight balanced budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, in a province today 
that in the last five years has received nine straight credit rating 
upgrades . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We stand today, Mr. Speaker, in a House 
that will be addressed by a Minister of Finance who has 
delivered five straight balanced budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in the current year, in 
the current year it is well-known that our expenses have 
exceeded our revenues — our expenses have exceeded our 
revenues. In this circumstance, we have drawn from those funds 
set aside in the savings account. 
 
Now what, Mr. Speaker, would any Saskatchewan family find 
wrong with that? There’s only one group who finds trouble with 
this — it’s this group. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, last year, right after the budget last year, 
what did they say? I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party today slammed the NDP 
government for sitting on (over) 500 million dollars of 
taxpayers’ (money, saying that we should spend it in tax 
cuts) . . . 

 
They would have spent it all, Mr. Speaker. They would have 
spent it all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 
the 1999 election the NDP has been more concerned about 
covering up its dismal performance than in providing good 
government and an honest accounting of government’s revenue 
and expenditures. 
 
Hidden fees, hidden fees and an expanded sales tax in the year 
2000. The creation of a non-existent rainy day fund to hide a 
huge deficit in 2001. It looks like the NDP has borrowed a few 
recipes from the BC’s (British Columbia) NDP’s budget 
cookbook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the NDP to come clean with 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. It’s time to tell the whole story about 
the NDP’s budget deficits and fictional rainy day funds. It’s 
time to follow the recommendation of the Provincial Auditor 
and the action of 7 out of 10 provinces in Canada. 
 
Will the Finance minister confirm today he is moving to 
summary financial statements in this year’s budget so that the 

taxpayers will get the real picture about the NDP government’s 
deficit budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in order to answer the 
question about whether we’re going to tell the complete picture 
of the finances, you know what I’m going to do? I’m going to 
quote the member opposite who said . . . who had this to say. 
This is how phony this argument is, Mr. Speaker. This is what 
he had to say on CJME radio, July 23, 2001. Question from 
Bonnie Braden: 
 

Mr. Krawetz, (I’m quoting) when we look at these 
accounts, we see the summary or the full picture that you’re 
talking about wanting to have in there. It’s just a matter of 
you have to look. 

 
And here’s what he had to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I believe so, yes. When you look at the two together, I think 
you get a complete understanding of the province’s 
financial picture. 

 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, when the member said that, the 
member was telling the truth, and I hope the member continues 
to do so today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the member doesn’t 
even know what is in his own auditor’s document. The 
summary financial statements are prepared by the auditor and 
they are presented approximately six months after year-end. 
That was the comment that I was making, Mr. Speaker, that 
indeed these numbers are six months late. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — They are not on time. Mr. Speaker, you know 
the strategy that the NDP minister follows is like the EnronDP’s 
approach to financial management. 
 
Last year, the NDP took $200 million in dividends from the 
Crown corporations. And a few weeks ago, the Finance minister 
admitted he plans to suck out as much as $300 million out this 
year. But there is no evidence the Crowns actually made $200 
million in profit last year or that they planned on making $300 
million in profits this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Finance minister plan to force Crown 
corporations to borrow money to pay the government a 
dividend that exceeds the profits the Crowns actually make? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite would 
watch the books and actually read the documents that are 
prepared by government, he would know, Mr. Speaker, that two 
years ago we had budgeted to take a dividend of $150 million 
from the Crown corporations. That year we took zero. 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

 

That year I announced, Mr. Speaker, that we would leave that 
money in the Crowns until we needed it and we would 
withdraw that money when we needed it. The budget prepared 
today will do this, Mr. Speaker, it will do what this government 
said we would do. That’s what it will do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet let me just add, because the members 
opposite are fond of quoting the Provincial Auditor, I have a 
quote from the Provincial Auditor where he says — and this is 
from The Leader-Post of February 19: 
 

Acting Provincial Auditor Fred Wendel said the 
government is doing “a good job with its cash management 
practices” where it borrows from various funds to reduce 
borrowing costs. 

 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that the interest costs on the debt 
ran up by those people have come down $200 million under this 
administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Declining Student Populations 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last year Saskatchewan people 
learned that the NDP government was planning on the loss of 
30,000 students from the K to 12 school system by the end of 
this decade. Can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker, 30,000 fewer 
students in schools in Saskatchewan? 
 
That would mean thousands of fewer teachers working and 
living in our communities. And it would mean even more 
schools closing. And the NDP has set the loss of 30,000 
students as a goal of their government. Clearly the NDP 
government needs to be defeated, and the sooner the better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Finance minister tell us whether today’s 
budget will scrap the NDP’s plan to lose 30,000 students out of 
the K to 12 system this decade? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly the member opposite has asked this question before. 
And when we talk about demographics in the province of 
Saskatchewan and we look at the projections for a loss of 
30,000 students in the public system, what the member opposite 
neglects — and it’s not a surprise to me that she neglects this — 
but the reality is that we now have students in our public 
system, we have students that are home-schooled, we have 
students that are in independent schools, and we have students 
in band schools. 
 
And from 1989, which the total population of students in this 
province was 204,000, and guess what it was last year — 
203,000. So we’re losing in the public system but our 
Aboriginal population is growing and those students are just as 
important as everyone else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this minister’s own briefing notes 
said that our school system is going to be losing 30,000 

students. Maybe he should be talking to the Finance minister 
about it. And if you don’t have a copy of it, Mr. Finance 
minister, we’ll be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would ask the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena to direct all her remarks through the 
Chair, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the truth is the NDP government 
has no vision for education. It has no plan to retain students; it 
has no plan to retain teachers; and it has no plan to grow 
Saskatchewan. What they do have is a plan to lose 30,000 
students by the end of the decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school divisions have indicated that they’re going 
to need as much as $85 million more to cover the cost of the 
new teachers’ contract this year. Will the Finance minister 
confirm that there is adequate money in this year’s budget to 
cover the cost of the new teachers’ contract, or is this NDP 
government going to do as it’s always been doing and that’s just 
download the cost on to the taxpayers . . . the property 
taxpayers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we all know that there 
are current negotiations between teachers and the 
government/trustee bargaining team going on right now. And 
they will bargain and there will be an agreement at some point 
in time. 
 
And what we have done in the past has consistently . . . this 
provincial government has covered the cost of those teacher 
salary increases. 
 
But I’m not going to make any commitments today. The 
Finance minister will deliver his budget later today. But let me 
tell you what we’ve done for education in the province of 
Saskatchewan just in the past few years. 
 
We have increased the funding to our foundation operating 
grant over 16 per cent in just two years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have doubled the number of community schools from 41 to 
83, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have expanded our pre-kindergarten positions by over 80 
per cent. 
 
We have been investing in education, and the members 
opposite, in their platform in 1999, froze spending on 
education. Not one dime, Mr. Speaker, not one dime. Shame to 
them I say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drinking Water Quality 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the new Minister of Environment. Last year 
the NDP were faced with a serious water crisis in North 
Battleford. And as we all learned, the NDP government had 
been warned by department officials that many municipal water 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

supplies in Saskatchewan were below acceptable standards, and 
the province was facing a Walkerton-type situation. 
 
Unfortunately, the NDP didn’t listen to their officials, and they 
didn’t take any action to improve the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the availability of safe drinking water is still a 
major concern for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Will the minister commit today that we will hear of an 
immediate plan by this government to address these concerns 
and supply safe drinking water to our communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I point out that 
Saskatchewan’s going to face an incredible challenge when it 
comes to water quality. And last year this government put $30 
million into the fund to help meet some of those challenges, Mr. 
Speaker. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to make 
sure that all the operators in these water plants are certified, Mr. 
Speaker, and in five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to make sure that every 
water plant in this province is going to be inspected. And, Mr. 
Speaker, coming from that member . . . last year we chose to 
increase water inspectors; we chose to increase some of the 
health inspectors, some of the front-line people to help meet the 
water challenges. And what did that member do, Mr. Speaker? 
He stood up in this House and he voted against that budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the 
old minister of Environment to explain that to the mayor of 
Arran, who’s been hauling water; to the town of Perdue, who 
applied to the infrastructure program three years running; to 
explain it to the town of Elfros, who just very recently we’re 
told that they should as well apply to the Canada infrastructure 
program, but they were rejected. Both of these communities 
now are out of water. They’re trying to dig new wells at this 
very moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the response to the water quality and supply 
situation for these communities is totally unacceptable. When 
there are three departments — Sask Water, Government 
Relations, and Environment — all charged with overseeing 
water management, supply, and quality for Saskatchewan 
residents, why can these communities get no help from this 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there are many times I get 
tired of the posturing by the member opposite and the party 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. The very important thing is we are 
dealing with the city . . . or with the village of Arran now. Sask 
Water has met with the village people and they’ll continue 
meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yes, on this side of the House we are going to make a 
response, Mr. Speaker. And yes, on this side of the House we 

are going to put some serious effort into sitting down with all 
the communities — the cities, the towns, the villages — and 
together with the federal government, with the Aboriginal 
governments, and the provincial government, we will come up 
with a very sound, co-operative strategy to meet some of the 
water challenges that every jurisdiction in this province has, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan is not immune to the water challenge that every 
jurisdiction has, Mr. Speaker, but what we are going to do is, 
we’re going to stand in this House and we’re going to vote in 
support of every single penny that we can spend on water 
challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Safety Net Program 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a February report from Statistics Canada 
demonstrated that since 1998, 36 per cent of the people 
primarily involved in the field of agriculture have left that 
industry. It’s no surprise that farm families are leaving the 
farmland of this province. Times have been tough over the last 
decade due to depressed commodity prices, international 
subsidy disputes, and most recently, severe drought. 
 
But those times have not been helped, Mr. Speaker, by the NDP 
when they ripped up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) program in 1993. High taxes and a depressed 
Saskatchewan economy have not helped either. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, will you commit 
today in the budget . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member to rephrase his 
question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the government 
opposite today commit to the farm people of this province that 
you will implement a long-term safety net . . . that the 
government will implement a long-term safety net in this 
province, as promised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the House and the member 
opposite, I could tell you what’s not helped in Saskatchewan in 
developing an agricultural program — what’s not helped, Mr. 
Speaker. What’s not helped in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is 
that when we make a presentation to Ottawa about putting 
additional money into their share, the member opposite and his 
party says we don’t need the money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s happened on every front that we talked about, Mr. 
Speaker. When we said that the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) program in this province doesn’t work, the member 
opposite in the Saskatchewan Party said CFIP program is what 
we have to have. 
 
When we said that we don’t have to have the AIDA 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

 

(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program, Mr. 
Speaker, when we said the AIDA program doesn’t work in this 
province, the member opposite said we should be advancing 
AIDA for Saskatchewan farmers. Doesn’t work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then when we roll out a Saskatchewan plan for agriculture 
on safety nets, you know what? We don’t hear one peep from 
the member opposite — not one peep, Mr. Speaker. And I say 
to the member opposite and the Saskatchewan Party, when 
we’re building Saskatchewan agricultural policy, get out of the 
way because you’re not helping us at all. Get out of the way. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture in his subsequent 
remarks should address them all through the Chair. 
 

Property Tax Rebate on Farmland 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the two-year property tax rebate on 
farmland has now expired. This program helped rural 
municipalities as well as it helped farmers with the property tax 
concerns. It was a topic of interest at the recent SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 
and many municipalities — in fact, all municipalities — and 
farmers across this province are wondering whether this 
program will continue. 
 
Farm families have been through a very difficult year with 
respect to this province because of drought and may be facing 
another, unfortunately, difficult year. And if this property tax 
rebate isn’t continued, many people believe that they won’t be 
able to pay their land taxes this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the seriousness of the farm income situation 
in Saskatchewan, will the government opposite today commit to 
continuing the property tax rebate on farmland in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting time for 
the member opposite to stand up and ask whether or not we’re 
going to be putting additional money in for farmers because 
you’ve not heard the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, ask any 
questions about adding any money to the farm property tax 
rebate in the last 10 days that we have been here. Never heard 
the request once, Mr. Speaker, from the members opposite — 
not once. But today they raise it. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that this government will 
continue to do a whole host of things for farmers in the 
province as we have already. We’re going to make a 
commitment, Mr. Speaker. We’ve made a commitment in the 
past to CFIP, and we got the third year of a commitment to 
continue for CFIP of $70 million. 
 
We’re going to continue, Mr. Speaker. We have a crop 
insurance program today which we put our share in the crop 
insurance program and grew the crop insurance program by 14 
million additional dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have some tough choices to make in Saskatchewan 

today as other provinces do. And in a few minutes the member 
opposite will know what’s happening in the agricultural file, 
Mr. Speaker, and in other parts of the delivery. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, and to the members opposite, 
we can’t build a provincial safety net program. We can’t build a 
strong agricultural policy in Saskatchewan without federal 
money, Mr. Speaker, without any federal money. And I say to 
the members opposite, you need to get on board . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By believe I’d like to 
respond on behalf of the government to written questions no. 
10, 11, 12, 14, and 15. 
 
The Speaker: — By leave of the Assembly, items 10, 11, 12, 
14, and 15 are hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to convert for 
debates returnable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Item 13 converted to returns for debatable . . . 
motions for return (debatable). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to submit the estimates and supplementary estimates, and 
accompanying them is a message from Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would everyone please rise for the message 
from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as 
follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits the estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2003, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for 12 months ending March 31, 2002, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed), Honourable Lynda Haverstock, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Please be seated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That Her Honour’s message, the estimates, and 
supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
my colleagues for that warm welcome. And with your 
permission, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take just a moment to 
introduce a few special people among the very large number of 
special people here today. 
 
First I’d like to introduce my wife, Pauline Melis, who works at 
the University of Saskatchewan. And beside Pauline is our good 
friend, Laurence Osachoff, who farmed in the Blaine Lake area 
and who’s also a retired public servant. Beside Laurence are 
our good friends Eileen Laverty and Marian Donnelly. 
 
Eileen is a very talented singer and songwriter who lives in 
Saskatoon, and she has just returned from a tour of Ireland and 
is now negotiating a distribution deal for her beautiful music in 
Ireland. 
 
Marian is the executive director of the Saskatchewan Recording 
Industry Association, which is doing a very good job for our 
vocal artists and musicians. 
 
I’d like to welcome them and I’d like to welcome everyone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would also like to 
take this opportunity to recognize someone who is not here 
today but who is probably watching from her desk. And I’m 
referring to Margaret Allan of the Department of Finance who 
for 25 years has been working as a senior administrative 
assistant and who served 10 deputy ministers of Finance. 
Tomorrow is her last day before a well-earned retirement, and 
I’d like to say thank you, Margaret. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour today to 
present my fifth budget, presented in a time of global economic 
uncertainty and amid unprecedented concern about the very 
security of communities. Challenging times demand of us all 
the courage, vision, and leadership not only to overcome the 
difficulties of today, but also to plan and prepare the way for a 
future of hope and prosperity. 
 
There is no denying that the global economy has been changed 
by the events of last September and their aftermath. National 
economies have redirected billions upon billions of dollars to 
homeland security and away from other priorities. Consumer 
confidence, which had fuelled a decade of rapid economic 
growth, has been strained. No family, no company, no 
government is immune to the impact of these economic 
realities. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are faced with the added burden of a 
devastating drought, lower oil and natural gas prices, the 

ongoing softwood lumber dispute, and a national government 
which too often refuses to live up to its national responsibilities, 
particularly with respect to our largest industry, agriculture. 
 
This combination of circumstances has resulted in total 
revenues for this budget year about to end to be $84 million less 
than we had projected last spring. Our revenues for the coming 
year will be $56 million lower than projected last year. 
 
Other governments with different priorities have recently taken 
drastic actions in response to these new global economic 
realities. Saskatchewan people have taken note of decisions 
elsewhere which have slashed essential public services, 
eliminated tens of thousands of jobs, and demanded more from 
those least able to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is determined to take a different 
approach, a path of stability in a time of strife, a path that 
protects people today while still moving forward on a plan to 
build a better tomorrow for everyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Our province has the freedom to choose 
this different path thanks to Saskatchewan’s tradition of 
planning for the long term. Two years ago when this 
government created the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and 
committed $775 million to this rainy day account, some 
questioned this decision and suggested a multitude of ways to 
spend this money immediately. 
 
This is not a year for large spending increases. In fact, once 
again this year our expenditures will exceed our revenues. In 
this sense, on a cash basis we are in a deficit situation as we 
were in 1995-96, 1997-98, and last year, and many other years 
in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, governments have always drawn on savings from 
previous years to balance our books. Going back at least as far 
as the Liberal government of Premier Dunning in 1925, prudent 
governments have relied on stabilization funds as we will be 
doing this year. We will be balancing the books by relying on 
the savings built up in surplus years. Last year we used $411 
million. This year we’ll use $225 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no amount of long-term planning will forever 
shield us from difficult decisions and tough choices, and we 
have made many in this budget. This budget will hold the line 
on government spending while moving forward with new 
investments in key areas. Let me say how proud I am of our 
Premier and his determination to demand no more of others 
than he demands first of himself and his government. 
 
That is why the Premier has announced a reduction in the 
number of government departments, a reduction in the size of 
cabinet and ministerial staff, and a reduction in government 
positions. With the new budget year, we will abolish more than 
350 full-time equivalent civil service positions, but we will 
avoid reducing front-line staff that serve the public. This 
reorganization will save taxpayers $40 million over the next 
two years. 
 
But cost reduction is not the only objective. We’re going to 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

 

change how government does business, making it more efficient 
and effective and improving access for people and 
organizations, businesses, and local governments. We will 
continue to do more to make government accessible 
electronically as we have done for tax filers and farmers 
applying for fuel tax rebates. 
 
We will streamline government, Mr. Speaker, but without a 
heartless resort to massive layoffs of thousands of public 
servants. We are taking a reasoned, balanced approach, 
reshaping government as we move forward. 
 
The tough choices did not stop with reorganization of 
government. Mr. Speaker, we will also introduce a number of 
changes in fees and charges to better recover costs, and we will 
introduce two tax changes related to alcohol and tobacco. 
 
Effective midnight tonight, tobacco taxes will increase from 
$2.15 per pack to $4 per pack in order to raise revenue to help 
pay for health care and to discourage young people from taking 
up smoking. 
 
Effective midnight April 1, the liquor consumption tax will 
increase from 7 per cent to 10 per cent, the same rate it was 
until 1991. 
 
Other fees and charges will be increased marginally on a 
user-fee, cost-recovery basis. Some will be asked to pay a 
greater share of the cost of prescription drugs and long-term 
care and social housing, based upon and subject to their ability 
to pay. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it perfectly clear that this year 
the budget for the prescription drug plan will increase 5 per cent 
to over $120 million. Support for long-term care will increase 3 
per cent to over $337 million, and new investment will be made 
for the first time in several years in public housing. 
 
Difficult circumstances have never stopped Saskatchewan 
people from moving forward, working together to build a better 
future for themselves, their families, and their communities. 
These challenging times are no different. This budget will help 
our province move forward in health care; education; 
modernization of our roads and information technology; 
building independence for families and children in need; 
building stronger, safer communities; building a stronger 
economy; and sustainable tax reform. 
 
First, some words about health care, the number one concern 
and the biggest single expenditure of the provincial government 
— over 40 cents of every dollar spent. 
 
That’s why I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, to announce that this 
budget increases health-care spending by $129 million . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, for a total investment of $2.3 
billion for our health care system in the coming year. 
 
All provinces face increasing demands related to health services 
— higher drug costs, new technology, the need to recruit and 
retain health care providers — at a time when the federal 

government provides only 14 cents of every health dollar spent 
in Canada compared to the 50 cents it used to pay. 
 
Our Premier has called upon the federal government for more 
financial support, but he has also urged reforms to make the 
most effective use of human and financial resources. 
 
In the meantime, Saskatchewan’s Action Plan for Health Care 
offers immediate improvements and a long-term plan for 
change. This budget begins to implement the Action Plan for 
Health Care with $10 million for upgraded medical equipment; 
$24 million for capital improvements; increased base funding to 
begin to work on key initiatives such as: encouraging primary 
health care teams of doctors, nurses, and other health providers; 
a 24-hour toll-free telephone line for health advice; expanding 
support for seniors and people with disabilities who want to 
remain in their own homes; improving the management of 
waiting times; providing more training spaces for health 
providers, and return-service bursaries for students studying in 
selected health programs; upgrading the skills of 240 
emergency medical responders to emergency medical 
technicians over the next three years; the creation of Canada’s 
first Quality Council, to promote excellence and more effective 
health planning; the formation of 12 regional authorities to 
replace the current 32 health districts, reducing administration 
and improving planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time of the release of the Action Plan for 
Health Care, the Minister of Health indicated the importance of 
health research to the future of health care in Saskatchewan, and 
he set a target of a 40 per cent increase in health research 
funding. Today I’m pleased to announce that we will be 
increasing health research spending in this budget, but not by 40 
per cent, Mr. Speaker — by 80 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we made a commitment to 
strengthen our health care system. In spite of these challenging 
times, we are going to make good on that commitment with this 
budget. 
 
While health care is the number one priority today, education 
and training is the key to a more prosperous future. In the early 
1990s, the government actually spent more each year on interest 
payments on the public debt than it could spend on education 
and training. That appalling fact has been remedied and 
reversed. 
 
In the coming budget year, Saskatchewan will be able to invest 
about twice as much in the education and training of our youth 
— 1.2 billion — as we will have to spend on public debt 
interest payments. And that’s as it should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — If only Saskatchewan had not been forced 
to spend so much of the ’90s paying for the excesses of the 
’80s, just imagine how much better off we would all be today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, renewed investment in Saskatchewan’s education 
system is paying big dividends and the results are being 
recognized nationally and internationally. Recently Statistics 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

Canada reported that Saskatchewan enjoyed the lowest 
high-school dropout rate in the nation — a tribute to the hard 
work, vision, and leadership of our educators and their 
community-based partners. 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of young people in 
Western Canada enrolled full-time in university — 23 per cent, 
above the national average of 20 per cent. 
 
We’re reaching out to children who need help through more 
community schools. In fact, Mr. Speaker, results of a national 
survey show that Saskatchewan has the most equitable 
education results in the country — the lowest difference in 
educational attainment as between children from high-income 
families and children from low-income families. That, Mr. 
Speaker, should be a source of pride for all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This year, Mr. Speaker, operational 
funding for K to 12 education, universities, SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
and regional colleges, will increase 2.3 per cent. In addition, in 
these difficult financial times, we will move schools and 
universities forward in terms of the infrastructure needed to 
enable students to learn. Amounts available to school boards in 
this regard will increase more than 50 per cent in the coming 
year, while universities, SIAST, and regional colleges will be 
allowed to access over 60 per cent more than last year. 
 
I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that the government 
cannot pay for all of this construction in one fiscal year. We 
will amortize this cost over the years. Given current low interest 
rates and existing needs and the need to boost the economy, 
now is the right time to invest in more capital for education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We are committed, Mr. Speaker, to doing 
more in terms of building schools than we can pay for in one 
year. There are those who will be critical of allowing 
mortgage-type financing for school boards and universities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would not be critical of a family that expanded 
or built their house and paid for it over time. We would not 
expect them to have the cash to pay for it in one year. We 
would say that they had faith in their future. Well this 
government has faith in the future of this province; and the 
critics can stand by and criticize, Mr. Speaker, and while they 
do we’re going to keep right on building. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re moving forward, Mr. Speaker, with 
our partners in education in building and improving our schools 
for our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll also meet our commitment to fix the roads. 
This budget invests $300 million in our highways. We’re on 
track to meet our 900 million, three-year commitment to 
upgrade them — the largest commitment to improve our roads 
and highways in the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Twinning on major highways, the Trans-Canada and the 
Yellowhead, is progressing rapidly. We’ll finish the 
Trans-Canada west to the Alberta border by the fall of 2004. 
But it’s not just the national highways getting attention. This 
year we will reconstruct 150 kilometres of thin membrane 
surface highways in rural Saskatchewan to a paved standard, 
and resurface 370 kilometres. 
 
In total, taking into consideration partnership projects and 
grading work, more than 700 kilometres of highways will see 
reconstruction and paving work this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We are currently partnering with 35 
different municipalities on 18 different initiatives, to manage 
traffic on 460 kilometres of TMS (thin membrane surface) 
highways. Mr. Speaker, we made a commitment to fix the roads 
and in spite of these challenging times we’re moving forward 
on that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Another commitment made in last year’s 
budget was to bring the information highway, high-speed 
Internet, to rural Saskatchewan. In year one we’ve connected 
530 schools, 120 health facilities, and 106 government offices. 
This year we’ll add another 460 facilities towards our goal of 
800 schools, 310 health facilities, and 256 government offices 
in more than 360 Saskatchewan towns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And with that CommunityNet as the 
anchor tenant, SaskTel will be able to expand high-speed 
service to individual homes and businesses in 191 communities 
over the next two years. 
 
This government is committed to the idea that every student 
should have equal access to the latest information, curriculum, 
and technology, whether they live in Regina or Shellbrook, 
Saskatoon or Tisdale. 
 
We’re committed to the idea that patients throughout the 
province should benefit from the latest health care technology, 
and that business people should be able to access the 
information they need to market their products and services, 
whether they live in our major cities or our rural communities. 
 
We’re committed to the completion of the CommunityNet 
program and the idea that rural Saskatchewan is entitled to 
information technology. And, Mr. Speaker, in spite of these 
challenging times, we’re moving forward with that 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, clean, safe drinking is a 
cornerstone of the health of individuals and families and vital to 
our economy. Tragic events across Canada and events here at 
home have shown safe drinking water must not be taken for 
granted. 
 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

 

That is why, in last year’s budget, our government provided 
additional funding for new staff in water monitoring and 
compliance and funding for additional staff at the provincial lab 
to help monitor the safety of municipal water supplies. 
 
We also provided assistance through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan-Municipal Infrastructure Program. More 
than $12 million was contributed last year to 57 water supply 
and waste water projects. 
 
The Municipal Financing Corporation will continue to provide 
100 per cent financing for upgrades to water and sewer 
infrastructure. 
 
And this year, we will finalize the government’s long-term safe 
drinking water strategy following Mr. Justice Laing’s report 
arising out of the North Battleford water inquiry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of these challenging times we are moving 
forward with improvements to our water system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Affordable, quality housing also is an 
essential aspect of a person’s health, well-being, and quality of 
life. Good housing is the foundation of strong, vibrant 
neighbourhoods and communities. 
 
The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation currently meets the 
housing needs of more than 67,000 lower-income 
Saskatchewan people in nearly 350 communities, but more can 
be done. 
 
A framework agreement between the federal government, the 
provinces, and the territories has been developed to address the 
issue of affordable housing. This budget launches a five-year 
plan to build up to 1,000 new affordable housing units across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is an area that is in need 
of public investment and we’re moving forward to begin to 
meet the need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we value the role played by local governments in 
our province. We have partnered with them by doing more in 
the last few years to build infrastructure together — sewer and 
water systems and local roads — through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan-Municipal Infrastructure Program. We 
have contributed to 239 local projects at a cost of $51 million in 
this budget and last year. We pioneered this infrastructure 
program and we will continue with it. 
 
And this year, the Centenary Fund will continue to help our 
communities accelerate the modernization of our public 
infrastructure. 
 
From the cleanup of contaminated sites, to new water and sewer 
services in the North, to expansions and renovations at our 
technical schools and regional colleges, to the upgrading of our 
parks and heritage properties, the Centenary Fund is helping to 
maintain jobs today while ensuring new opportunities for 

tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though our government holds the line in this 
budget on spending overall, I’m very pleased to announce that 
this budget will increase municipal revenue sharing by $10 
million, Mr. Speaker, nearly 18 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But we’ll be doing more, Mr. Speaker. 
This budget provides $7.3 million in new money added to base 
funding of $81 million to hire 26 new police officers in 
Saskatchewan communities, bringing the total number of 
additional police officers hired since 1999 to 132. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’ve also freed up the time of police 
officers by committing to a 1.2 million annual program for the 
development of specialized RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) radio communication systems and mobile workstations. 
These systems allow officers to spend more time on the road 
and less time on paperwork. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made a commitment to strong, safe 
communities, and in spite of these challenging times we’re 
moving forward on that commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That commitment extends to all corners of 
this great province including northern communities. 
Northerners want better access to delivery of goods and 
services. This budget will invest more than $34 million in 
highways and airports in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Northerners want better access to educational and training 
opportunities that many of us take for granted in more 
populated regions. This budget continues our commitment to 
Campus Saskatchewan which is helping post-secondary 
institutions work together to increase on-line learning 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Northerners want access to more jobs and opportunities in 
health care. This budget provides $756,000 in new funding for 
the northern health access program which will provide 
additional health care training opportunities. Mr. Speaker, in 
spite of these challenging times our commitment to the North is 
moving forward with this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, five years ago in my first 
budget with our Premier as Minister of Social Services we 
introduced a program called building independence, a series of 
initiatives that support low-income families to participate in the 
workforce. 
 
It includes training and employment initiatives, family health 
benefits, an employment supplement, and the Saskatchewan 
Child Benefit. These help to break down the welfare wall by 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

making it easier for people to leave welfare and find work. 
 
A year after building independence was launched, Mr. Speaker, 
I canvassed hundreds of low-income housing units in my home 
constituency of Saskatoon Mount Royal. I went to them all. I 
was very gratified when, door after door, young women told me 
that the income top-up had allowed them to go to work and still 
care for their children. 
 
Since 1997 more than 4,600 families, including over 10,000 
children, have left the welfare rolls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This year our government will continue to 
expand the reach of building independence by providing an 
additional $1.3 million in job supports for families, youth at 
risk, and people with disabilities. We will provide $1.2 million 
to increase the availability of child care services for those most 
in need, and we will make the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement available to more low-income working families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that people living with disabilities face 
particular challenges with respect to self-sufficiency and 
independence. Last year the Saskatchewan Council on 
Disability Issues presented the government with a disability 
action plan containing recommendations to support full 
citizenship of persons with disabilities. 
 
I want to reinforce our government’s commitment to, and 
support for, this fundamental concept of citizenship and 
inclusion. 
 
In response to one of these recommendations, Saskatchewan 
Health identified individualized funding for home care as an 
option that will be available in the coming year. 
 
I’m also pleased to report that in addition to employment 
supports, this budget will also provide half a million dollars in 
new operating funding for transportation services to further 
enhance independence for Saskatchewan residents who live 
with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of these challenging times, our 
government is committed to building stronger, safer, more 
prosperous communities for all the people of Saskatchewan, 
and with this budget we’re moving forward on that 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want now to turn to the 
great opportunities for continued economic development of our 
province. 
 
Many of the things I’ve already talked about — public health 
care, public education, roads and highways, information 
technology, clean water, safe communities, an inclusive society 
where everyone is welcome to participate — all of these are 
part of building our economy. 
 
But there’s more to be done in agricultural diversification, 
tourism, the development of an ethanol industry, research and 

development, investment, and personal and business tax 
competitiveness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are amongst the best in the 
world. They would excel with no problems if only allowed to 
compete on a global, level playing field. The drought, unfair 
subsidies by national governments in Europe and the United 
States which have made grain prices unrealistically low, and an 
inattentive federal government have placed Saskatchewan 
farmers in a very difficult situation. 
 
Our government provides tax exemptions and rebates for farm 
fuel, fertilizer, machinery, and a number of other farm inputs 
totalling $240 million for the coming year. And this year we 
will increase provincial funding for crop insurance from 95 
million to 109 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Last year, we began a Conservation Cover 
Program that allowed farmers to convert marginal lands to 
perennial cover. It exceeded all expectations. Nearly 11,000 
applicants converted more than half a million acres to grass and 
forage to feed their own livestock and, in many cases, sold feed 
to others. 
 
That program will be continued this year, along with a $4.4 
million program for the family farm opportunities initiative 
which helps farmers assess their situation, improve their skill 
set, and undertake diversification and development initiatives 
on their farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tourism is a vital and important part of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. This year, in spite of challenging 
times, we will maintain funding to the Saskatchewan Tourism 
Authority in the amount of $6.9 million to continue to work 
with its members and partners to support marketing, 
advertising, and travel counselling to further develop the 
tourism industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
As previously announced, this budget will provide a 15 cent per 
litre fuel tax exemption for ethanol used in ethanol-blended 
gasoline produced and sold in Saskatchewan. 
 
We hope to create new jobs and significant new private 
investment for ethanol production facilities, integrated livestock 
feedlot operations, and other developments for the agricultural 
industry. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is ideally suited to 
take advantage of a grain-based ethanol industry. Ethanol is a 
clean burning, environmentally friendly fuel and we are moving 
forward, Mr. Speaker, with a pioneering ethanol strategy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Partnership 
for Prosperity strategy sets a target for our province to become a 
world leader in research and development. 
 
As home to Canada’s only synchrotron, which is the largest 
single investment in scientific research in the history of Canada, 
we’re moving forward. 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget commits almost $132 million, directly 
or indirectly, for research and development initiatives. The 
government’s R&D (research and development) expenditures 
are primarily focused in the areas of agriculture — including 
biotechnology — medicine and health care delivery, and natural 
resource extraction and processing. 
 
Research expenditures include activities by government 
departments and agencies like the Saskatchewan Research 
Council. Money provided for research and development 
activities by third parties, mostly the universities; more than 
$62 million in R&D activities at the universities funded through 
their operating grants; increased health research funding from 
5.2 million to 9.2 million in this budget; and more than $6 
million in tax incentives to encourage private sector R&D in the 
province. 
 
And in addition, Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations are actively 
involved in R&D related to their fields of business. We believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that research and development initiatives are vital 
to ensure Saskatchewan stays competitive and is at the leading 
edge of technological advances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has taken a number of steps to 
help Saskatchewan businesses be more competitive. We’ve 
reduced the small business income tax rate by 40 per cent, and 
the level of income to which this rate applies has been increased 
from $200,000 to $300,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’ve also introduced a number of 
important targeted tax changes that have assisted specific 
segments of the provincial economy, including manufacturing 
and processing, the film industry, and our natural resource 
sector. 
 
A recent KPMG survey comparing cities from all over the 
world ranked our province’s four largest cities as very cost 
competitive places to do business. Saskatoon ranked second in a 
survey of 17 major cities in the Canadian and US (United 
States) Midwest; ahead of Calgary, ahead of other major 
Canadian cities, including Vancouver and Toronto. 
 
Even the Fraser Institute ranks Saskatchewan the third best 
province in Canada in which to invest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — This budget simplifies tax compliance for 
small business by doubling the PST filing and remittance 
thresholds. About 3,000 Saskatchewan small businesses will 
benefit. It also introduces an important change to the 
corporation capital tax that focuses on Saskatchewan businesses 
and job creation. The current $10 million threshold that 
exempts smaller Saskatchewan corporations will be increased 
by up to 50 per cent to as high as $15 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — About 100 additional Saskatchewan 
corporations will be exempted from the corporation capital tax 
rolls, and all taxable companies will be encouraged to employ 

more Saskatchewan workers. The increased exemption will 
apply based upon the proportion of total salaries and wages that 
are paid in Saskatchewan. If all of the wages and salaries are 
paid to Saskatchewan residents, then 100 per cent of the 
additional $5 million exemption will apply. 
 
This change will result in Saskatchewan having the highest 
corporate capital tax exemption level of the nine provinces with 
the corporation capital tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With this budget, Mr. Speaker, we continue 
to move forward to improve tax competitiveness for businesses 
in our province. 
 
I want now to say a few words about personal taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1999 budget address, I announced that we 
would appoint a committee to review personal income tax, that 
we would ask for a report by the fall, and that we would present 
a plan of action in the following year’s provincial budget. 
 
This announcement followed a series of reductions in the 
provincial sales tax which had reduced our rate by one-third, 
giving Saskatchewan, at 6 per cent, the lowest provincial sales 
tax rate in Canada among those provinces with a sales tax. 
 
We appointed the committee. We received their report. We 
presented a plan of action, all within that one year. 
 
On July 1, 2000, we reduced personal income taxes. On January 
1, 2001, we abolished the flat tax. We abolished the 
high-income surtax. We abolished the debt reduction surtax. 
We reduced income taxes. We introduced the child tax credit. 
We introduced the senior’s tax credit. We increased the basic 
personal credit. We increased the other credits. 
 
On January 1, 2002, we cut personal income taxes again. We 
increased the child tax credit. We increased the senior’s tax 
credit. We increased the amounts of the other credits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have done what we said we would do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We committed to lower personal income 
taxes, and families with children have received the biggest 
reductions. I’m proud to say that Saskatchewan is the only 
province in Canada with universal tax credits for dependent 
children and for seniors. 
 
So far, income tax reform has put $330 million per year more 
into the hands of Saskatchewan people. Fifty-five thousand 
low-income people are being taken off the income tax rolls 
altogether. The average family pays $854 less in provincial 
income tax today than they did in 1999, and almost a full third 
less than they did in 1993 for a total saving of $1,300 each and 
every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Our tax reform plan called for one more 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

round of personal income tax cuts to take effect next January 1. 
In these challenging times, some might expect us to put that 
further tax reduction on hold as other provinces are doing. Mr. 
Speaker, that will not be the case. I am pleased to announce that 
our budget will include $78 million in further personal income 
tax cuts for Saskatchewan people effective January 1, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We gave our word, we will keep our word. 
And we will keep our commitment to end bracket creep. We 
will index tax brackets and tax credits so that Saskatchewan 
families will receive tax breaks every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am pleased to announce that this budget contains no increase 
in the provincial sales tax, no increase in personal income tax, 
and no health care premiums, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there are those who 
would say we should cut taxes even more. They claim that it’s 
not enough to reduce personal income taxes by one-third, to cut 
the provincial sales tax by one-third, and to decrease small 
business income tax rates by 40 per cent. They refuse to 
acknowledge this progress and they say, trust us, we can cut 
your taxes even more and still improve public services without 
running a deficit budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a basic rule which police often use to warn 
consumers about the latest scams and fraudulent schemes that 
often hit our communities. They tell people: if it sounds too 
good to be true, it probably is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, a budget is a good time to 
talk about debt. I want to repeat our position on debt beginning 
with the distinction between Crown debt on the one hand and 
operating debt on the other. 
 
Crown corporations, as a matter of course, have some level of 
debt. They build power lines, take high-speed Internet 
throughout the province, and so on. These are infrastructure 
investments, the cost of which should be amortized and paid for 
over time by those who will use and benefit from them. This is 
self-liquidating debt and is quite appropriate. 
 
On the operating side, debt to pay for day-to-day operations is 
not usually a good thing. Debt to build public infrastructure for 
today and tomorrow may be. Here too we should aim for a 
reasonable approach. Public debt does not have to be zero. It 
should be some reasonable percentage of the gross domestic 
product. Our tax-supported debt has gone from 41 per cent of 
GDP in 1993 to 23 per cent today. Interest costs have gone from 
a high of $882 million to a low of $621 million last year. 
 
Saskatchewan currently has the third lowest debt-to-GDP ratio 
among the provinces. In the near future, the Department of 
Finance will be researching the possibility of targets for public 
debt as a percentage of GDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have gone from being one of the worst 

provinces in Canada when it comes to debt to being one of the 
best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Let me repeat, Mr. Speaker. We are now 
one of the best, and our position relative to other provinces is 
improving as they go into large deficits. That is why 
Saskatchewan has received nine credit rating upgrades since 
1995. 
 
We committed to getting our debt under control. We did it. 
We’re committed to doing more, and we’ll continue to move 
forward on that commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I began this address recounting the economic 
challenge. I am confident we will meet that challenge. Private 
sector forecasters agree. They see Saskatchewan’s economy 
growing by 1.6 per cent this year, and 3.2 per cent next year. 
 
Statistics Canada’s annual survey of investment plans sees an 
increase of 9.3 per cent in capital spending for 2002, the highest 
rise in investment in Canada, Mr. Speaker, including a tripling 
of investment in manufacturing. 
 
CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation) projects a 
26 per cent increase in housing starts for Saskatchewan. There 
are 10,000 more people working than two months ago. 
 
Mining, forestry, value-added and diversified agriculture, oil 
and gas expansion, information technology, and ag biotech will 
continue to move us forward. 
 
And we heard at the beginning of today’s proceedings about the 
optimism of several towns in Saskatchewan for the upcoming 
year. Mr. Speaker, while I am pleased to hear the forecasts of 
the experts, I’m even more pleased with the confidence shown 
by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, in three short years 
Saskatchewan will celebrate its centennial as a Canadian 
province. 
 
In Saskatchewan’s near century, we have survived two world 
wars, one horrible prolonged drought and depression, and a few 
other bumps along the way, and we have always come out the 
better on the other side. We have moved forward. 
 
Over the years our society and our culture have become richly 
varied. Our economy has become diversified and better able to 
withstand those bumps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this past year, other peoples in other parts of the 
world have suffered much more than a small bump in their 
economy. We are fortunate to live in this land and this province, 
as a glimpse at any newscast will remind us. 
 
I do not wish to divert attention from our very real challenges, 
but I do suggest we put them in some perspective as we count 
our blessings. 
 



March 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

 

Our government remains committed to not only meeting the 
challenges of today but also to making the decisions which will 
help our province and its people greet its second century with 
new optimism and new hope for even greater prosperity and 
opportunity. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to rise on behalf of my 
colleagues, the official opposition, to respond to the budget 
speech presented by the Finance minister this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I do that, I do want to acknowledge some 
people that are not present today that are probably watching 
television. And I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by recognizing 
three very important people in my life. 
 
Now as members of the legislature — and I’m sure I speak on 
behalf of all members here — as we try to fulfil our roles as 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, as members representing 
constituencies, many, many people have to assist in that process 
if we too are . . . are to do a good job. 
 
And this afternoon — I know she’s not watching because she is 
teaching in the Invermay School — I would like to recognize 
my wife, Gail, and my daughter, Lindsay. 
 
Lindsay’s in grade 12 this year and she’s a very good student. I 
was unable to attend her drama night last week in Invermay but 
on the weekend I had the opportunity to attend the regional 
drama competition in Yorkton. And I’m pleased to say that she 
was given a plaque for acting ability. So I want to congratulate 
her for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Those are the things we miss . . . those are the 
things we miss, and those are the things that I’m sure members 
opposite who have had children go through those things also 
understand when we say we’re sorry for not being able to 
attend. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, another person who has . . . and I just 
realized this when I’m working on my income tax this year, Mr. 
Speaker. I finally got to the column that said number of 
dependant children and I had to subtract one, my son Bryce. My 
son Bryce is a teacher in Strasbourg and I understand now that 
he has full-time employment he’s no longer a dependant. Well 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that’s not quite true — that’s not quite 
true. 
 
And I’m sure all those with children understand that as well. I 
want to thank them for their support, and their love, and 
continued encouragement. Also, Mr. Speaker, my father and my 
stepmother, Peter and Sophie Krawetz, are watching, I’m sure, 
back in Invermay. And I want to thank them for their love and 
support as well. 

My final person that I want to recognize is a young lady in the 
city of North Battleford. Young, because I understand 2002 
marks the year that she’s going to turn 88. And this is a lady 
who is extremely active in her community, who has, over the 
years, shown a tremendous love for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I want to thank Edna Pollock for all her 
encouragement as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to indicate to the . . . 
my colleagues sitting on the floor of the Assembly and all of 
our guests on the Assembly floor and in the gallery, that my 
remarks will be brief this afternoon to allow the proceedings to 
continue on later on. So I ask them to bear with me and remain 
in their seats while I make some brief remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for nearly a decade we’ve heard over and over 
again from this government that they are bound by fiscal 
responsibility and budgeting transparency. Perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, under the former premier that may have been true to 
some extent. We will let history decide on that. 
 
But what is clear from the document that has been laid before 
us today is that any pretense of fiscal responsibility and 
budgeting transparency is out the window under the current 
Premier and Finance minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in the fiscal year that will end 
on Sunday, the government will run a budget deficit in the 
range of $500 million. In the budget that has been presented 
today, it appears the budget deficit again will be hundreds of 
millions of dollars — perhaps as much as $700 million when 
everything shakes out a year from now. And that’s only if you 
accept all of the revenue projections contained in this 
document, which many will find hard to swallow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government continues to claim a balanced 
budget. The numbers, however, say otherwise. In fact, the 
minister has begun a new tradition, Mr. Speaker, adding 
hundreds of millions of dollars to the debt of the province and 
then trying to sweep it under the rug. That’s what happened last 
year and it’s happening again right now 
 
We see that the government is using $225 million from the 
so-called Fiscal Stabilization Fund to balance the budget. This 
is a fund that exists only as an accounting entry; it’s a mirage. 
Budget analysts say it, bond rating agencies say it, economic 
forecasters say it as well. They say the same thing. This is an 
accounting entry that does not exist and when it is used to 
balance a budget, you actually have a deficit. 
 
So there is a deficit — that’s been well established. But how big 
is the deficit? 
 
On top of the $225 million from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
we see that the government has taken the extraordinary step of 
removing nearly $90 million from these financial statements 
and they have moved it to the Crown sector. They have moved 
nearly $90 million in education capital spending off the books 
to further obscure their massive deficit. It doesn’t add up. 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 2002 

 

(15:15) 
 
On top of this, Mr. Speaker, we see some revenue projections 
that simply don’t make sense. Projections on revenue from 
some of the natural resource sectors seem out of line with 
reality and probably won’t stand up. Again, it doesn’t add up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we do know is that this province is staring at 
a massive deficit. What we do not know is that exact size of the 
deficit, because the government continues to use two sets of 
books with 40 per cent of the government activity unaccounted 
for in this document. 
 
By our estimate, this year’s deficit will be between 400 million 
and $700 million, depending on how well the Crown sector 
does this year. If the Crown profits fall short of projections, 
then the massive $300 million dividend to the provincial budget 
will have to be borrowed, driving up overall debt. 
 
That’s the first part of this budget, Mr. Speaker, the massive 
deficit and the fact that this document simply doesn’t add up. 
 
The second part is the utter lack of faith and optimism the 
government has for Saskatchewan’s economic future. We 
continue to see absolutely no evidence that this government has 
any plan or any desire to turn our economy around and begin to 
grow Saskatchewan. 
 
What they continue to plan, with huge investments of 
Saskatchewan taxpayer dollars, is in the infrastructure of 
Australia, Mexico, Chile, and Atlanta, Georgia. They are in fact 
planning a decline of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see the tax revenue from the private sector in 
Saskatchewan is projected to continue to decrease, signalling 
the government’s belief that we will have fewer businesses and 
fewer employers. The NDP in this document has shown that 
they have lost complete faith with the private sector in 
Saskatchewan, the driver of job creation in any economy in the 
world. 
 
Their own budget suggests only 500 new jobs will be created in 
Saskatchewan over the next year — 500 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve a message of hope and 
optimism. With the natural advantages we have in 
Saskatchewan, with the talent born here, why should we be 
planning the decline of our great province? 
 
We should be among the leaders of the Canadian economy, but 
we are not, and it appears the government doesn’t expect we 
will be. They have no plans to grow the economy, which is the 
only way to cure the current financial problems the government 
faces. If we are to work our way out of this return to massive 
deficits, we need to broaden our economy, we need more people 
in the province to share the load, and most of all, Mr. Speaker, 
we need a plan to get this done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Neither in the Throne Speech nor in this 
budget document do we see this. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the members opposite point a lot of 
fingers at others for the problem this province faces. Now they 
have only themselves to blame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many departments to make comment 
on and I would reserve those comments to tomorrow. And at 
this time, I would like to move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North: 
 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on 
Thursday, March 28, 2002. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 15:21. 
 


	Resumption of Budget Debate
	Resumption of Budget Debate

