















































Hansard: April 26, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1005 
 April 26, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Good morning, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this morning I rise to present a petition on behalf of 
constituents of Carrot River Valley concerned about the 
exorbitant increases in long-term care fees. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable, annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I apologize. This is with respect to the 
prescription drug deductible. 
 

As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And this petition is signed by the citizens of Hudson Bay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning 
on behalf of citizens of the province who are concerned about 
the exorbitant long-term care fee rate increases. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Foam Lake, Tuffnell, and Mozart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bangor and the city of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to presenting a 
petition and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the communities of Melville and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by individuals all from 
the community of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
this morning to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are deeply concerned about the huge 
increases in long-term care fees. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by the good people of Estevan and 
Lampman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about long-term care fees. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by residents of Bengough, Regina, Ogema, 
Pangman, and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens, and specifically constituents of mine, concerned about 
the issue of long-term care fees and the increase imposed by the 
government. And the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current, save for a couple from Cabri, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Findlater and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about increased fees 
in long-term care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Yorkton, Theodore, and 
Winnipeg, Manitoba. Thank you. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition of citizens 
concerned about the changes to the crop insurance program. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Allan, Colonsay, St. 
Denis, Meacham, Saskatoon, and Young. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the massive 
proposed increase in long-term care fees. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Melville, Springside, and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province that are concerned about 
the fee increase for long-term care. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise again today with a petition from citizens who are 
outraged by the long-term care service increase. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Yorkton and Saltcoats. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
papers no. 23 and 31. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what conditions would justify a 
union rejecting a qualified worker from attaining a 
membership within a said union; and further to that, what 
avenues of appeal are available to workers in this situation? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 35 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: are silage trucks in the alfalfa 
dehy industry in Saskatchewan required to use clear fuel or 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

 

can they use farm fuel? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, there’s a very special group from the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers who are here this morning to observe the 
proceedings and to . . . they have toured the building already, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly when people from the Saskatchewan Rivers 
constituency come to Regina it’s a major excursion and so 
they’ll be doing many things, I’m sure, throughout the city of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the grade 8 class from Red Wing School. Red 
Wing School, Mr. Speaker, is located about 3 miles north of the 
city of Prince Albert. They are accompanied today by their 
teacher, Chris Elchuk, and by their principal, Mrs. Donalda 
Hansen. With them also are three parent volunteers who are 
attending today to help keep the rather rambunctious young 
children, I’m sure, under somewhat control. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I hope the young people enjoy the proceedings today and that 
you enjoy your time in Regina. And at 10:30 I look forward to 
spending some time with you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to all members of the Assembly, please join me in 
welcoming the grade 8 class from Red Wing School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was asked as I 
came into the House if I might happen to know the four 
distinguished gentlemen that are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m proud to say I am, and I appreciate the 
opportunity to introduce to you and to my colleagues here in the 
Legislative Assembly, four gentlemen who are just on their way 
to Laval, Quebec. And, Mr. Speaker, they are Mr. Bill Barmby, 
Al Miller, Dan Hobbs, and Harry Parachoniak. Would you 
gentlemen please stand. 
 
These gentlemen are going there . . . They’ve won the 
provincial team Legion cribbage championships here in this 
province. And now they’re going down to bring back the 
national crown from Laval, Quebec. 
 
They will be playing up to 20 games if they get down there and 
when they do get . . . I’m sure they will. And you know, they’ve 
told me that, because I’m a member of the same Legion, Mr. 
Speaker — I’m proud to be — they told me that, they said, 
you’ve got to know, Ron, that the jokers are not only in the 
decks of cards that we play with. 
 
So I want everybody to please welcome them and wish them all 
the luck to bring back that national crown for our Legion. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce to you and to all 
members of the Assembly, someone who’s very well known to 
this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan. We have 

behind the bar on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, Gordon 
MacMurchy, who of course served in cabinet, serving the 
people of Saskatchewan for 11 years from 1971 to 1982 with 
great distinction, Mr. Speaker, as well as representing, of 
course, the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
So I wonder if all members of the House could give Mr. 
MacMurchy a very, very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery today we have some guests and representation from my 
constituency, so I’d just like to recognize Bob Ivanochko who 
does a lot of important library and historical work in the 
province. 
 
But I don’t know what happened today. Bob managed to attract 
some other guests to sit with him. And I’d like to also introduce 
Sabrina Cataldo and Sarah McQuarrie, two of the most capable 
young women you’d care to meet. So if the members could join 
me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all my colleagues in the 
legislature nine grade 5 and 6 students and their teacher, Ms. 
Sandy Jost. 
 
These students are from the Regina Huda School located in 
Regina Coronation Park in my constituency. It will be my great 
pleasure to meet briefly with this group at 11 o’clock, as I 
understand it. I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming 
this fine group of students and their teacher. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today flags on the Legislative Building fly at half-mast as we 
commemorate Saskatchewan workers injured and killed on the 
job. 
 
Back in 1988 I was approached by Nadine Hunt, who was then 
president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, to ask if I 
would introduce a private member’s Bill to make April 28 a 
statutory Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the 
job. I was very proud of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, when that 
Bill passed unanimously, making Saskatchewan the very first 
province in Canada to legislate the Day of Mourning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, April 28 was the chosen day because it was on 
that day in 1914 that Canada’s first Worker’s Compensation 
Act was passed. April 28 is a day to share the grief of families 
who have lost a father, mother, son, daughter, sister, or brother 
on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it saddens to me to report that since last April 28, 
25 people have died on the job in Saskatchewan — 15 through 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

accidents and 10 as a result of workplace-related illness. Two of 
these 25 workers were under the age of 25. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for ourselves as legislators this is a day to 
recommit ourselves to legislation and action in support of good 
occupational health and safety practices and programs. We do 
this for those who make up the backbone of the Saskatchewan 
economy — Saskatchewan workers — for them and for their 
families. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also ask all 
members in the House to join with me today in recognizing 
Sunday, April 28 as a National Day of Mourning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, April 28 is a day that we have set aside every year 
to honour and remember those workers who have been killed 
and injured on the job. Here in Canada, Mr. Speaker, on 
average three workers are killed every day and hundreds more 
injured. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, young people are the most likely to 
be killed and injured on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to imagine the despair and anguish 
felt by those who have lost loved ones through a work related 
accident. To all those that have recently suffered a loss of a 
friend or family member through a workplace accident or 
illness, we extend our deepest condolences and pray you will 
find comfort and strength with those around you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, workplace accidents can be prevented. It is up to 
all of us to make our environment as safe as possible. By 
committing to work together we can ensure that the workplace 
is safe for everyone, not only those of us working today but for 
the younger people who, Mr. Speaker, are the workers of 
tomorrow. 
 
Again I ask all members of the House to recognize Sunday, 
April 28 as the National Day of Mourning. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Avonlea Prairie Thunder Girls Triumph 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 
the Avonlea Prairie Thunder girls and their coaches, Wayne 
Watson and Brad Mohr, on becoming Western Canadian 
champions in female hockey in Calgary recently. 
 
In that series they won three games and tied one in the round 
robin to play against Manitoba in the final game, winning that 
game 4 to 0. Bobbi Ross scored all four goals. They are proud 
of their record of four shutouts against British Columbia, 
Alberta, and Manitoba, and a 1-1 tie against Hockey North. 
 
To get to the Western Canadian finals the girls defeated the 
Melville Prairie Fire in semifinals with a 15 to 3 total point 
score in two games. Then they defeated the Regina Sharks in 
the best of three final series. Once again, congratulations to the 

players and coaches of the Avonlea Prairie Thunder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wanuskewin New Learning Site 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the University of Saskatchewan signed an agreement with 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park to create a satellite campus on the 
ancient Cree gathering place. This plan has the support of the 
Elders in Saskatoon’s Native community. The goal is to create a 
greater awareness of Native issues on campus and to help 
position the University of Saskatchewan as one of the top 
universities in North America for expertise in Native issues. 
 
Michael Atkinson, the university’s vice-president of academics, 
said: 
 

It sets the stage for development of services, programs, and 
activities that we can ultimately situate in Wanuskewin. 

 
Sheila Gamble, an official from Wanuskewin who participated 
in the drafting of the agreement, believes that this will increase 
the awareness of Aboriginal people, both on and off campus 
and provide students with a greater understanding of 
Wanuskewin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an excellent initiative and one that I’m 
proud to have occur in my city. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Frank Edward William Hanton 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Wednesday I attended a funeral to say farewell to a 
long-time friend, a fellow pilot, and a war hero, Mr. Frank 
Edward William Hanton. 
 
Frank was an extraordinary citizen who had an exceptional 
career. He played briefly with the Boston Bruins prior to the 
war, then became a pilot during the Second World War. His war 
record was outstanding. He was the top Allied train buster 
during the war. He shot down nine enemy aircraft in air-to-air 
battle. He won the Distinguished Flying Cross and became one 
of the guinea pigs after he was badly burned from crash landing 
a damaged aircraft. 
 
The guinea pigs, by the way, were nicknamed because of the 
many new surgical procedures that were used on these patients 
— they were in the experimental stage — including plastic 
surgery. 
 
Post-war, Frank flew with Trans-Canada Airlines before joining 
the Manitoba government air services, until 1978 when he 
moved to Regina to become the director of Saskatchewan 
government executive transport and air ambulance service. 
 
In addition to being involved in the Canadian Fighter Pilots 
Association, the Air Force Association, and numerous other 
associations, Mr. Hanton also served two terms as aide-de-camp 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

 

to a Lieutenant Governor and was honorary colonel of the 
Flying Training School at Moose Jaw. 
 
Frank accumulated some 37,000 flying hours during his career. 
For anyone that flies, they will realize that this is quite a 
outstanding achievement. Frank Hanton was truly a Canadian 
hero. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Girl Guides Annual Meeting and Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you. During volunteer week, we’ve 
recognized many, but not nearly all of the volunteers who help 
make our province the best place in Canada to live. 
 
Well I want to mention yet another group. Last Saturday I 
attended the annual banquet and awards evening of the 
Saskatchewan Council of Guides Canada, an organization 
lovingly maintained since 1910 by literally thousands of 
volunteers. It was a very enjoyable evening, Mr. Speaker, and 
to me a very educational one. 
 
The evening was expertly chaired by a constituent of mine, 
Claire Brown. During the evening Claire and the provincial 
commissioner, Sheila Fahlman, told me a number of facts about 
the Guides, some of which I pass on to you. 
 
Did you know, for instance, that the first Girl Guide unit in 
Canada was formed in Moose Jaw in 1910? And did you know 
that those cookies we all buy and should be buying again this 
week were first baked in Moose Jaw and sold there and in 
Regina and surrounding area? 
 
Did you know that annually the Guides in Regina collect about 
50 tonnes of food for the food bank? And that they are partners 
in the Second Glance Magazine Reuse program which assists 
over 35 community agencies in a variety of literary purposes? 
 
And much, much more, Mr. Speaker. For nearly a century the 
Guides have been an integral part of our provincial as well as 
our national community. 
 
As I left the Guides meeting, I was given a badge that said 
simply: you go, girl. And they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

IMC Esterhazy Donation of $40,000 to Yorkton Hospital 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hats off, Mr. 
Speaker, to International Minerals and Chemical, Esterhazy, 
who made a $40,000 donation to The Health Foundation of East 
Central Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this $40,000 went towards the purchase of a much 
needed hemodialysis unit for the Yorkton hospital. 
Hemodialysis is literally a life-saving treatment and each 
treatment can take three to four hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of having to make the long journey to 
Regina or Saskatoon three or four times a week, and thanks to 
IMC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation 

(Canada) Ltd.), eight more local area patients can now receive 
their hemodialysis treatment in Yorkton. 
 
IMC Esterhazy’s gracious donation will be very much 
appreciated by not only the requiring . . . those requiring 
dialysis, but also by their families and friends as well — people 
who would often have to accompany them on their round trips. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House know that rural 
residents are faced with long and tiring journeys to access much 
needed health care. IMC Esterhazy’s gift will make a difference 
in the lives of many east central residents. 
 
But IMC Esterhazy’s gift also means much more, Mr. Speaker. 
In the words of general manager Don Hood: 
 

We need facilities and equipment that not only provides 
vital services to our residents, but that can attract and hold 
onto (our) doctors. (This is our) . . . key to our health care 
success. 

 
Mr. Speaker, again I ask everyone to join me in thanking IMC 
Esterhazy for their gracious donation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canora Credit Union Grows at Twice 
the Provincial Average 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, more good news from rural 
Saskatchewan. With the end of winter things are starting to turn 
green. But in Canora, Kuroki, Sturgis, and Wadena, there’s 
twice as much green. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, credit unions are thriving in 
rural Saskatchewan. But the Canora Credit Union is having a 
particularly good year. This year the Canora Credit Union’s 
growth was twice the provincial average. 
 
Total assets reached a new record of $130 million, a growth of 
$14 million, or 12 per cent. Member deposits increased by 13 
million to a new level of $122 million. 
 
Strong growth was experienced by all branches located in 
Canora, Kuroki, Sturgis, and Wadena. The overall growth of the 
credit union reached 12 per cent. 
 
Strong growth and sound fiscal management, a strategy 
employed by this government, returned the sum of $275,000 to 
members. This raised the total of patronage payments over the 
past four years to over $1 million. 
 
Furthermore, it was announced that the construction of the 
Canora office building is nearing completion. The plans to 
move to the new location in May, with a grand opening in June, 
are well underway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, strong growth, sound fiscal management, 
increased jobs, and a climate for investment. Sounds like a 
recipe of success to me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Long-Term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday we raised the concerns of Ken Stevenson and the 138 
per cent long-term care fee increase that he faces. 
 
He works full-time and after his payroll deductions, his net 
income will fall over $500 short of what he’ll have to pay for 
long-term care after October 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health says that situations like 
Ken’s will be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Well the 
information the Department of Health circulated to long-term 
care residents and their families certainly didn’t indicate that at 
all. 
 
And I’m sure that there are many other disabled people in Ken’s 
situation who would like to know exactly where they can line 
up to get the exemptions that they require. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the minister elaborate on exactly who in 
the Department of Health will make the decision on how much 
disposable income a person in long-term care should be allowed 
to keep? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there has been a system for 
many years that deals with the assessment of long-term care 
fees. It’s done with the information being gathered in the health 
districts by the people who actually work with the individuals 
who may end up in long-term care. That information is sent to 
an assessment department in the Department of Health here in 
Regina and they work with the information, work with the 
people, make sure that all of the parameters are understood, and 
then a fee is assessed. 
 
And that’s the process that’s been there for many years. That 
process will continue because there are more questions now; we 
have had some more people working together with them. 
 
But we have to remember it’s October 1 when this comes into 
place. We have a number of months for people’s individual 
situations to be assessed so that an appropriate fee can be set for 
that person. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an obvious question. 
The minister says that long-term residents may have their 
financial situations assessed on a case-by-case basis that’ll 
determine what the appropriate difficulties that people are going 
to have to experience as a result of this enormous fee hike 
increase. 
 
Well what are the guidelines for this assessment? Does 
someone in the department have the minister’s permission to 
determine that one long-term care resident can have an 
exemption when another one can’t? Is there someone who 
determines how much a long-term care resident spouse is forced 
to live on when they are not in the unit themselves? Is there 

someone who’ll decide if they can reduce Ken Stevenson’s fees 
so he won’t have to go into debt in order to pay them? 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is the person in the department that is going 
to act as judge and jury to determine how much money 
long-term care residents can keep? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this process has been in 
place for a number of years. And it does have base policy points 
that it works at. For individuals who have a concern, they send 
the information to the department, working with the local health 
district officials often, and the information is gathered and it’s 
done on a basis that follows the policies and the regulations that 
are set out in this particular area, and the fees are calculated. 
 
And that’s the process we’ve had for many years. We will be 
using this same process here. I ask the member opposite if he 
gets people who have concerns to make sure that they raise the 
questions with the appropriate people, because unfortunately 
the kind of information and the way that the members opposite 
raise these issues just causes problems for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Premier said that no one is going to have to pay 
more than their net income for long-term care fees. But, Mr. 
Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member 
may start over. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier said yesterday 
that no one will have to pay more than their net income for 
long-term care fees, which means — which means, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The members opposite are trying to mask 
the fact that what the Premier was saying was that indeed they 
may take all of their net income and that was quite all right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty 
obvious that this government did not consider what they were 
doing when they decided to move the fee increases from 50 per 
cent of income to 90 per cent. The minister says, we’re going to 
carry on as normal. Well, Mr. Speaker, taking 90 per cent of 
people’s income is not normal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is pretty obvious that this government 
clobbered together this fee increase in order to balance their 
budget. Mr. Speaker, instead of having half the department 
working on creating exemptions, why doesn’t this minister do 
the right thing and simply cancel this outrageous fee increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we increased the amount in 
this particular area from $10 million . . . by $10 million to $337 
million. Those are Saskatchewan taxpayers that pay that. We 
don’t get any federal funds on this amount at all. 
 
And what we are doing is we are asking some of those people 
who have a little more income to contribute more to the cost of 
the long-term care. But there isn’t anybody who will be asked 
to take any of their assets to pay for this. We’re only taking it 
from their income . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I would ask 
the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley to maintain order — 
help us maintain order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been a curious week. 
When we talk about money and increased cost to taxpayers, we 
usually hear very strongly from a fellow named Mr. Richard 
Truscott and the Canadian Taxpayers Federation. We haven’t 
heard a peep from him. We haven’t heard from any of these 
people at all about the taxation issues as it relates to this whole 
issue. Because what we’re trying to do is work within the 
resources that we have and ask some of the people who have a 
few more resources to contribute in this particular area. 
 
So I ask the members opposite: their plan in ’99 said, let’s 
freeze Health. Well they’d be way behind now. What are they 
doing now? Are they saying let’s increase taxes to deal with 
this? Where are they going to get the money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
know what the government is trying to do, but why don’t they 
do the right thing and roll this program back to where it was? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health keeps saying that he hasn’t 
received any letters regarding long-term care that we’ve been 
reading in the House. But, Mr. Speaker, in the majority of 
cases, the letter has gone directly to the minister’s office and 
has been cc’d (carbon copy) to us. 
 
In fact, I have a copy of an e-mail right here in my possession 
dated April 23. It’s addressed to the Minister of Health and to 
the Premier. And in it, Mr. Det Gaul writes, and I’m quoting 
now: 
 

On March 28 I e-mailed both of you expressing my 
concerns on the unfair large increase in long term care fees. 
As of this time I have not received a reply from either of 
you gentlemen. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s almost one month since Mr. Gaul e-mailed his 
concerns to the Premier and to the Minister of Health. 
 
Why has he not received a reply from either members of the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) cabinet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when we receive letters 
from the public, we respond to those letters. And we do so in an 

orderly fashion to make sure we get the right information. 
Because so often they are writing because they’ve received 
some kind of misinformation from the members opposite. Now 
we will be responding to the individual that is mentioned. 
 
But my point from before was not that we don’t get some of the 
letters, it’s just that there appear to be many letters the members 
opposite read, but they don’t send them over here. So I would 
appreciate them providing me a copy of the letters that they 
have read in the House so that I could make sure that we do 
have them so that we can respond to them. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what being government is all about; 
it’s responding to people, making sure that they get the 
appropriate information, and making sure that the kinds of 
misinformation that the members opposite spread all over the 
place is countered by the logical, practical points that are 
needed to deal with the particular problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
be happy to table a copy of the letter that I just quoted from for 
the minister’s sake. 
 
Furthermore, the list of complainants must be fairly long if it’s 
taking more than a month to answer those very important 
letters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s response to the 
people who have concerns about the long-term care fees should 
contact his office for information is really pretty tough to 
swallow when people can’t even get a response to their original 
letters. 
 
Mr. Gaul makes several points in his e-mail which I hope was at 
least read by the minister or his staff. He says and I quote again: 
 

. . . you state the wealthy should pay more. This is the 
rhetoric I expected from you. The fact is someone with 
$50,000 of income is NOT Wealthy. You targeted people 
in middle income (ranges) more than wealthy people. 

 
(Here’s an example) Someone with (a) $24,000 annual 
income will pay 86 . . . per cent of his income in fees . . . 
Someone with $77,000 (of) . . . annual income will pay 66 
per cent of (that) . . . income in fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Gaul describes this tax grab perfectly. 
 
Will the minister explain why the NDP believes someone 
earning $24,000 a year is wealthy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are putting in $337 
million out of a total cost for the long-term care system of $445 
million. We are . . . And this money comes from the 
Saskatchewan people and that, I think, shows a very strong 
commitment to the people that require the long-term care. 
 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

What we’ve done is we’ve asked some of the people who have 
a bit more income to contribute toward the cost of this 
particular service. And we will continue to work with people to 
make sure that the appropriate fees are set to relate to their 
particular situation. And what I would remind the member 
opposite is that these kinds of increases are coming into effect 
October 1. 
 
We are working with people to assess what their particular 
situations are. Many of them, it’s fairly straightforward. Other 
times, there are some challenges. And what we need to do is 
make sure that we continue to work with everybody to get the 
right kind of fee set, so that people can get the appropriate care 
and that we can have a system that’s sustainable in the 
long-term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I have another letter from a 
person concerned about the long-term care fee hike. It’s an 
e-mail from Mr. Cliff Belter who asks and I quote: 
 

What happens to a couple making $3,300 per month in 
pensions with one person in a care facility? 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 

What happens is that the payment to the health Board is 
$828 plus 90 per cent . . . for a total of $2,903. (This) . . . 
information on rates was taken from the Sask Health site. 

 
He says: 
 

My question is how does the one not in the facility survive 
on $397 per month and what will your party do about it if 
you are the next Government? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will answer the last question for Mr. Belter by 
assuring him that the Saskatchewan Party will cancel this unfair 
tax on long-term care for the residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — But, Mr. Speaker, it’s up to the minister to 
answer the first question. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Would the member go directly to the question. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, it’s up to the minister to answer 
the first question: how does the spouse at home survive on $397 
a month? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely disappointed 
in that particular member because I think he has more common 
sense than what that particular letter that he read. Because this 
is exactly the issue that . . . This is exactly the issue that has 
been discussed over the past month. 
 
The system works whereby if the party that goes into the 
long-term care home has a lesser income, then you use that 

smaller income. So for example if it’s the wife that goes in and 
basically she just has her old age pension and maybe a 
supplement, that amount is used for calculating the fee. 
 
If the husband or the person with the higher income goes into 
the home, then you look at, well what are the total income 
between the family, and you divide that income between them. 
And if there are challenges there, there are other programs 
around special support or drug plan or other things that can be 
of assistance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it does no good for any of us to have a 
member, who I think knows what I’ve just said, come and read 
a letter like this when he could explain that to the person 
himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Agreement with Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Liquor and Gaming. Yesterday the NDP announced the 
government has signed a new gaming agreement with First 
Nations. This agreement is for 25 years, by far the longest 
agreement in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole issue of gaming in Saskatchewan 
received intense scrutiny after the financial scandal at SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) was revealed. But 
there are still questions about Liquor and Gaming department’s 
role in the controversy, and the public trust surrounding this 
deal is very fragile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why a 25-year agreement 
was necessary and why the people of Saskatchewan should 
believe that being locked into this deal for 25 years is a good 
thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be happy to 
respond to the member’s question. She did raise the word trust 
and that’s a key word here because there is trust between this 
side of the House and First Nations. And we respect that mutual 
trust. 
 
The 25-year agreement, Mr. Speaker, still allows us to speak to 
one another on a variety of issues. We have stricter 
accountability issues written into the agreement. Mr. Speaker, 
this is good for the First Nations community, it’s good for the 
people of this province. It’s necessary First Nations continue 
. . . have a predictable and stable network. Communities benefit, 
the Aboriginal community benefits through employment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what their position is of the 
opposition now. At one point the leader said, this is great; let’s 
get it signed immediately; let’s hurry up. And all of a sudden 
there seems to be a change in the word trust. Who do they not 
trust, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the recent histories of 
problems both with Liquor and Gaming . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The recent history of 
problems both with Liquor and Gaming and with SIGA and the 
fact that there are still many questions about the investigation 
into former SIGA members is the reason that there are concerns 
about this new agreement. 
 
There has been absolutely no public consultation by the NDP or 
the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) about 
the new gaming agreement and what it would involve. The 
people of Saskatchewan should have had input into what the 
NDP was proposing to commit them to. And they should have 
had input into the steps that the government would take to 
ensure regulation of the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP not held public consultations 
across the province about this new gaming agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member, 
and I’m sure the members will know, that in business 
agreements . . . There are a lot of them — Weyerhaeuser — 
agreements that we sign with people as a matter of mutual trust, 
confidence in one another, respect for people whose efforts are 
to create economic activity for the benefit of their people, for 
this great province of ours, and to contribute to a great number 
of programs that a number of the members opposite continue to 
criticize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m really not sure whether these folks support 
economic activity and opportunities for First Nations people. 
There seems to be a question in the opposition’s mind about 
whether we should be trusting First Nations or not. We do, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve proven they want to be our partners and we 
will continue to have confidence in them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 

Use of Proceeds From Lottery Licences Issued by 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask another 
question on another topic. I have here a copy of an application 
for a lottery licence from Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. It 
says right on the liquor licence application, and I quote: 
 

The Criminal Code of Canada requires that proceeds from 
charitable gaming be used for charitable or religious 
purposes only. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister of Liquor and Gaming confirm 
that this is the law, that lottery licences are issued if the 
proceeds are used for charitable or religious purposes only? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
whether the member is talking about charities or whether she’s 

talking about our gaming industry. There are laws and 
provisions for lottery licences and there are . . . they are in 
place. And any time that people request licences, for a variety 
of lotteries, for charities, they are dealt with on the basis of each 
individual circumstances. And we’d be happy to respond to 
those inquiries and determinations, under what circumstances 
the lotteries and what charities are involved within the context 
of those applications. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I have a letter from the member 
from Saskatoon Meewasin to her NDP supporters. She is asking 
them to sell lottery tickets with the proceeds to go to the NDP 
election campaign. The letter also notes that the Saskatoon 
Meewasin NDP has been issued a lottery licence by 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that licence application form clearly states that 
proceeds from a lottery are to go to charitable or religious 
purposes only. Yet proceeds from this lottery are going right 
into the NDP’s election war chest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how did the Saskatoon Meewasin 
NDP association get a lottery licence from Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is typical of 
the opposition. They come in with some facts — and we do not 
have all the facts, they haven’t shared those with us. I’ll be 
happy, I’ll be happy, I’ll be happy to have that response . . . I’ll 
be happy to respond to that question if that letter is tabled. I’ll 
be happy to review if there are some misappropriation, we will 
certainly deal with it. 
 
I want to see those letters. We get lots of those letters and we 
deal with them. If they’re within the guidelines, within the law, 
by all means we approve them. If there’s any question about 
them, they’re not approved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I need the letter. I need the details. I need all 
the facts before I can stand in this House and factually respond. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sending a copy 
of the letter to the minister of Liquor and Gaming. The facts 
are, Mr. Speaker, that proceeds are only to go to charitable and 
religious organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lottery licence clearly states that that’s where it 
must go. As far as I know, the NDP is not a charity or a 
religious organization. Yet somehow SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) gave them a lottery licence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear this money is to be used for the NDP 
election campaign. It says right in the letter, as the minister will 
see, one of the main ingredients for the victory is money. The 
profits from this lottery is designed for political education in 
preparation for the next election. 
 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, how did the NDP get a lottery licence when 
lottery licences are only supposed to go to charity or religious 
groups? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
questions and I appreciate the concerns. And I believe we have 
one side of the story. Here we have the facts and I appreciate 
very much the letter — I will look into it. 
 
All of these requests do not always come through the minister’s 
office, but I would be more than happy to look at . . . not unlike 
the ’80s. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind everybody in this House 
again that sometimes we forget the reasons we were sent here. 
My understanding is we were elected on behalf of our 
constituents to come here to work together to solve problems 
and issues, not to indicate mistrust . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that these 
situations are brought to our attention. And we deal with them 
— we deal with them on a daily basis. If there’s a concern, we 
try to work together to resolve any issues or concerns and make 
sure that things are done properly. I welcome members opposite 
if they have any kinds of these situations brought to their 
attention, I will certainly review them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious issue taken 
somewhat lightly by the minister of Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issues are, one, the letter states that the main 
ingredient for victory is money. The profits will be used for 
political education and preparation for the next election. 
 
Based on these facts, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the 
minister stand in the House today and tell us how he thinks this 
should be dealt with, and whether the NDP association from 
Meewasin should have received a lottery licence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has my 
assurance that I will look into this in depth. Now that they’ve 
been good enough to supply me with the details and the 
information, it will be reviewed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

The Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m very pleased to rise in the House today in my 
capacity as the Minister of Learning. 

Mr. Speaker, in a few moments, it will be my great pleasure to 
introduce the first reading for the new provisions to The 
Education Act, 1995, authorizing the government to establish 
the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this time last year the Premier announced the 
scholarships as the province’s gift to the Prince of Wales during 
his visit to Saskatchewan. These scholarships reflect the special 
interests of His Royal Highness in youth and in education. 
 
In his remarks on April 28, 2001, His Royal Highness 
expressed his delight in the Premier’s choice of the Prince of 
Wales scholarships as a gift and added, and I quote: 
 

I much look forward to meeting my scholars in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province’s new Prince of Wales scholarships 
are available to grade 11 community school students to assist 
them in completing their secondary education. There will be 10 
annual scholarships at a total . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, students will be nominated for scholarships during 
grade 11 and will receive their award in two payments, in the 
fall and in the spring, during their grade 12 year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nomination forms have been provided to 
community high schools. By the end of the current school year, 
the first recipients to receive scholarships from the program will 
be selected by representatives of Saskatchewan’s community 
schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, guided by the spirit of the Role of the School Task 
Force we have more than doubled the number of community 
schools across Saskatchewan. Last fall we expanded the 
program into secondary as well as rural schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are now 17 community high schools in 
Saskatchewan, as well as 11 K to 12 community schools where 
grade 11 students are eligible to be nominated for this Prince of 
Wales scholarship. Mr. Speaker, community schools are having 
a positive impact in meeting the diverse needs of children and 
youth, their families, and their communities. With the future 
vision of SchoolPLUS, we are encouraging the adoption of the 
community school philosophy in all schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of Saskatchewan Learning to 
administer the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund with the 
support of community partners. Individuals and organizations 
will have the opportunity to make additional contributions and 
eventually increase the number of scholarships awarded 
annually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through community education and with assistance 
from the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund, we are building on 
student success at school and we are building on the future of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We were privileged 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

 

last year as a province to have a royal visit here, and it was also 
exciting to see the positive response that we received there 
when the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund was announced. 
 
The role of the community schools in Saskatchewan was part of 
what this is all about. It’s just unfortunate that this concept’s 
been around since about ’91-’92 and it’s taken this government 
until the last year or two to actually get involved in that 
particular program. 
 
The scholarship program, the Prince of Wales, is available to 
grade 11 community school students to assist them in 
completing their secondary education. There will be 10 of those 
annual scholarships at a total value of $500 each. 
 
Now the Community Schools is an excellent program and I 
think this works in very well with that particular program to 
give special students with special needs in situations, to give 
them the opportunity to complete their education. And it’s one 
of the highlights I think of this session that we’re probably 
doing, is to do this sort of thing for the youth of tomorrow, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 34 – The Education Amendment Act, 2002 
Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 34, The Education Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member . . . Minister of Labour on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly 
to make a statement in regards to the Day of Mourning. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Sunday is the National Day of Mourning for workers killed or 
injured on the job. 
 
April 28 is a day to mourn, a day to remember the men and 
women who have given their lives to build this province and 
this nation. And it’s a day to renew our commitment to doing 
everything possible to reduce the terrible toll taken by 
workplace injuries and deaths. 
 
Twenty-five Saskatchewan workers have died in the last 12 
months as a result of workplace accidents or illnesses. 
Thousands more have been injured. Our heartfelt sympathy 
goes out to all those who have experienced a workplace 

tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to read the 
record . . . read into the record the names of the 25 people who 
have died on the job this year. I also ask that when I have 
finished reading the names that the hon. members would rise 
and observe a moment of silence in their honour. 
 
Merle Henry, Murray Lautermilch, David Ouellette, Kimberley 
Ginther, Aaron Toms, Aaron Kennedy, Kevin Malaryk, Brian 
Thera, David Surine, David Cardinal, John Davies, James 
Chase, Bruce Thimm, Joseph Kainberger, Gerald St. Amour, 
Lawrence Parchewsky, Allan Kuffner, Ray Marriott, Richard 
Labiuk, Cory Nedelec, Kevin Kindrachuk, Albert Fix, Roy 
Ferguson, Alan Boyden, and Bertrand Blais. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to reply. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour today 
to rise and speak to this very important issue regarding the 
National Day of Mourning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House are also aware 
of the significance and impact of this Sunday, April 28. Every 
year, April 28 is the day that Canadians from across the country 
honour their friends and colleagues who have been killed or 
injured on the job. 
 
April 28 is the day that we take time to pause and remember not 
only those who are no longer with us but also those whose lives 
have been forever changed because of these most tragic of 
incidents. We also remember those who have suffered a serious 
work-related injury or illness and are now struggling to come to 
terms with the many life changes that this signifies. 
 
April 28 is also a day for remembering that workplace safety 
begins with each of us, not only as individual workers but also 
as members of a team. By committing to work together with all 
sectors, we know that workplace accidents can be prevented. 
 
In Canada, approximately 1 worker out of 16 is injured at work. 
Or in other terms, that means about every 10 seconds someone 
is hurt at work. On average 3 workers are killed every day. Here 
in Saskatchewan 25 people were killed last year and many more 
were injured. 
 
It is also deeply troubling to know that many workplace 
accidents often involve young people, the workforce of 
tomorrow. In fact nearly 17,000 young people between the ages 
of 15 and 19 are injured every year. These young people are 
often still attending school and working at part-time jobs. 
 
All of these are sobering statistics and ones that cannot and 
must not be ignored. It’s crucial that ongoing education and 
prevention training is provided to ensure a safe work 
environment for everyone. 
 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

It’s interesting to know that Canada was the country responsible 
for initiating the Day of Mourning back in 1914. Nearly a 
century later, April 28 has become an international day of 
remembrance. Nearly 100 countries worldwide recognize the 
Day of Mourning. It is a day observed by unions, labour bodies, 
and councils and all levels of government. 
 
For Canadians, 2002’s Day of Mourning marks the 10th-year 
anniversary of the Westray Mine disaster in Nova Scotia that 
killed 26 miners. For North Americans, the Day of Mourning is 
also an excellent opportunity to remember the hundreds who 
perished trying to save the lives of others during September 11 
attack on the World Trade Center. 
 
Coping with losing a loved one is not easy. Coping with losing 
a loved one through a work-related accident is absolutely 
devastating. There are so many questions that must be 
answered, so many to be taken care of, and so many memories 
left to deal with. 
 
To those who have lost a family member or friend or a 
colleague through a work-related accident, we extend our 
deepest condolences and pray that you will continue to find 
strength and peace from those around you. 
 
To those who are struggling to come to terms with the 
after-effects of a work-related illness or injury, we extend our 
sympathies and best wishes for a speedy recovery. 
 
On April 28, the National Day of Mourning, what better time 
for all of us to commit to work together to reduce workplace 
accidents and fatalities. We will be safer and more productive 
for it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 20 — The 
Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Consumer 
Protection Act basically is or does exactly what the title in this 
case indicates. And it places requirements on companies doing 
business over the Internet and that’s why this Bill becomes so 
necessary or at least the consideration of it does. 
 
Over the Internet to supply a sales contract within 15 days. So if 
someone does something over the Internet, basically there has 
to be some hardcopy has to come back within 15 days. And it 
also gives the consumer an opportunity to cancel Internet 
purchases up to 7 days after receiving the contract or if goods 
are not delivered within 30 days. 

Now we have similar pieces of legislation in place for things 
that happen within our province, sales that happen within the 
province, where within a certain number of days if we find out 
that that deal is not what we thought we should get involved in 
or that we want to get involved in, the opportunity to cancel it. 
 
This also allows for courts to stop unwarranted cancellations, so 
that if someone is cancelling for things that are of no specific 
value or reason, the courts can sort of say that cancellation isn’t 
valid. 
 
With the changing face, as I said, Mr. Speaker, of commerce 
and people doing all kinds of business on the Internet, whether 
it’s with major companies, whether it’s sort of through private 
sales where we’re talking about the eBay and this sort of thing, 
this is becoming something that’s fairly necessary. Internet 
commerce is a growing force. And even though it’s only 
probably in single digits as far as a percentage of business that’s 
being done in our province, this is no doubt going to grow. And 
so it’s good that we look at some preventative measures for, 
you know, things that are going on that might be of a shoddy 
nature. 
 
We’re only understanding what’s . . . what could go wrong and, 
as I said, we have protections for people doing business in our 
cities and our communities and in rural Saskatchewan. This at 
least, what it does do, is put some of those protections on to 
paper. It requires, as I said, that purchase agreements must be 
provided within 15 days, because you made the deal over the 
Internet and now you need some paperwork to ensure that. 
These are necessary features and I guess we support those 
particular features. But there are a few other things that we need 
to mention as well. 
 
Some of the changes here relate to stolen or lost credit cards 
and some of them . . . and some limits that are being put on 
liabilities that are there for the credit card holders in those cases, 
as I said, of lost or stolen cards. And I don’t think any of us 
would have any concern with that. 
 
The minister stated that this piece of legislation is a result of a 
template agreed on by the ministers of Justice across the 
country. And I believe we’re probably going to end up with half 
a dozen to a dozen pieces of legislation in the House this 
session, Mr. Speaker, where, because of this meeting of the 
Justice ministers across the province], we’re looking to sort of 
streamline and do things in similar fashion in each province. 
 
And to a large extent, we support that, provided that those 
particular initiatives are actually valid and are good initiatives. 
Just because we happen to have, you know, just a little less than 
a dozen Justice ministers get together to contemplate these 
things doesn’t mean that they’re always what the people of the 
provinces or the people of Canada want. 
 
We do have some questions about the enforcement of this Bill 
in the wake of a global marketplace. So you make a deal with, 
you know, some company, some organization in Texas or 
Australia or China, wherever else, and if we find out that that 
purchase, that deal that was made, that interaction of business 
isn’t what we thought it should be and we feel that we’ve 
suffered an injustice there, what in the world can the province 
of Saskatchewan do to address companies in other countries, in 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

 

other parts of the world. 
 
And so when we look at that we have some problems. 
 
Does this have an effect on international commerce? What are 
the enforcement mechanisms? And I think that’s the key thing. 
 
It’s nice to stand here as individual legislators and say we have 
concern for people doing some purchasing through the Internet 
— and yes, we all do. But just to go ahead and say here’s a 
piece of legislation — and we now say that this can’t be done 
— but the people we are talking about are out of country, it 
doesn’t give us any opportunity to enforce that. Those are 
important questions. 
 
International rules are very, very difficult. We see that with the 
difficulties that happen on all international scenes throughout 
the world. 
 
And so we’re waiting back for some more word from people 
who are consulting on this Bill. We have some definite 
concerns about it; the concerns that I’ve mentioned right here. 
And we’re going to want to have some information from the 
government side on what they think the opportunities are to 
enforce this on a worldwide scale. And that part hasn’t shown 
up in this particular piece of legislation at all. 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn this Bill at 
this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 21 — The 
Collection Agents Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Collection 
Agents Amendment Act. This one I think is one that will need a 
lot of discussion because there are ramifications to this 
particular Bill that I really feel the government hasn’t looked at 
at all. 
 
At first blush they would probably say, well, we just don’t want 
the average consumer to be harassed by a collection agency. 
Okay, if the operative word there is, being harassed, I don’t 
think anyone would be concerned about that. However, there 
are some other things that need to be taken into consideration 
here. 
 
We have in those situations someone who’s purchased 
something and they’re not paying for it. Now, as far as the 
business person’s concerned there is very little difference in the 
effect of purchasing something, charging it, not paying for it, 
and just taking it and walking out. The financial impact on that 
particular business — there’s absolutely no difference between 
whether it’s stolen or not paid for. 
 
And so I think we have to look at the gravity of the situation, 
Mr. Speaker, when we’re asking what is the total effect going to 
be. 

On the one side I don’t think we need to pass or we ought to 
pass any piece of legislation that allows consumers to 
willy-nilly go and purchase something, not pay for it, charge it, 
and essentially being given a very soft attitude toward those 
ongoing charges which they are refusing to pay for. 
 
Businesses throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, have some of 
the old tradition still left that this province was built on, and 
that’s a tradition of trust. And it’s a very, very important thing 
in this whole business concept where the person comes in and 
says, okay can I charge this? I want the product but I don’t want 
to pay for it today; I’d like to pay for it at some particular time. 
And in general, Mr. Speaker, what business will do, they will 
have some date on that month and a certain number of days 
from there at which that payment is supposed to be made. 
 
Now usually that will give the person who gets the credit some 
place between maybe 20 days to maybe 60 days at the most, in 
most cases, leeway in which to pay that bill. Now what’s 
happened is that that person who’s had the product has had use 
of the product, has not paid any usage, has not paid any interest 
on it for that period of time — that cost has been borne by the 
business person and now it becomes due. Okay? So a notice 
will have gone out saying you need to pay this. 
 
First of all the person who purchased it knows very well they 
walked out of that business with that particular bit of product, 
and they know the commitment was made that this is charged 
for a certain number of days. So they’re very well aware of that. 
The paperwork comes through — they still decide not to pay for 
it. Now it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that we need to leave 
almost every recourse open to the business to get the money for 
that product. If not, the effect on that business is absolutely no 
different than if that particular item had been stolen. 
 
And that sounds very serious but it is very serious because there 
are many businesses that have very large charge accounts, and 
if they can’t collect that it is some very serious hardships on the 
business. Not only is that a hardship on the business it probably 
comes back to be a hardship on other good customers; 
customers who pay their bills either directly, immediately, or do 
not misuse their charge capabilities. Because the company in 
order to stay in business has to get the money from some place 
they then are forced to get it from the paying customers. 
 
(11:15) 
 
And so your good paying customer actually has to subsidize the 
ones who are intending to renege on their bills. Now this 
particular Bill comes down a whole lot to, you send a letter or 
sue them, and it closes the door on a lot of options, many 
options that collection agencies had. And, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
not sure if the members opposite are aware of that because most 
of them seem to have a very small knowledge of business 
transactions. 
 
Businesses do not like to go to collection agencies because 
collection agencies, Mr. Speaker, are moderately expensive. 
They take a good-sized cut out of what they’re going to collect. 
And they need to do that, Mr. Speaker, because they’re not 
going to be able to collect on every particular bill that they’re 
given to collect on. Which means that on those that they can’t 
collect on . . . The agreement is usually such, if we can’t collect 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

on it, I guess we’re not going to charge the business for the 
work that we did. So they have to have some fairly high fees on 
those sorts of things. 
 
So business would just as soon not have to go to a collection 
agency because it cuts into the money that they could possibly 
make. In fact is in most cases they’re left with less than their 
wholesale cost of goods if they do collect through a collection 
agency. 
 
So this is not something that businesses enter into willy-nilly 
and say, well we’ve got some bills over here, let’s just fire them 
off to a collection agency and they can go ahead and collect it. 
Because they’re not going to get back enough money to have 
made that transaction worthwhile in the first place. 
 
So I think we need to understand that, and I don’t think the 
people opposite have any concept of exactly how that operates. 
 
Now once it’s given to a collection agency, they need to have 
numerous tools at their disposal to be able to collect these bills. 
They need to be able to find out where is this person at, because 
they may not have given the correct address when they charged 
this. 
 
Because there are individuals, Mr. Speaker, who when they go 
in to charge something, have absolutely no intention of paying 
for it. There are others, Mr. Speaker, who do intend to pay for it 
and then due to some circumstance in their personal lives, find 
it unable . . . find themselves unable to make those payments. 
 
Now in most cases, and I would say almost all cases, if they 
find themselves in those circumstances and they go to the 
business and say, okay I charged this. I intended to pay for it; 
my circumstance, however, is now totally different. I’ve lost a 
job, there’s been a disaster in the family, and so I can’t make 
this payment. Can I make some sort of arrangement, some sort 
of accommodation? 
 
And the business, as I said earlier on, is going to say, I’m better 
off to make this accommodation and pay the bank some 
percentages on the money that they have to use to cover that 
rather than go to a collection agency immediately because that’s 
a fairly major cost. 
 
So businesses are not going to want to do that. They will make 
those arrangements with the person who did . . . created the 
charge account in almost every case. 
 
So the collection agencies by and large go after those particular 
groups who really may not have had much of an intention of 
paying for it in the first place or, once the situation has changed, 
has said, I think I can walk away from this. So there are some 
very, very definite concerns. And as I said, businesses only use 
this as last resort. 
 
Now unfortunately there are probably a few collection agencies 
around that are a little rough around the edges. And I think 
that’s what is hoped is going to be addressed in this. However I 
think this has gone way too far, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have to look at a few other things that are involved in 
this. It says the most serious amendments prohibits a collection 

agency from discussing the debt in the workplace. 
 
So what they’ve done is say, here’s a whole list of places where 
you can’t try to collect the debt; here’s a whole list of times 
during the day when you can’t collect the debt. 
 
Well we would hope that the collection agency isn’t going to 
come at 3 o’clock in the morning. However why would they 
want to do that? They’ll be paying someone overtime for that 
work. So they’re not going to want to do that either. And so 
some of those arguments aren’t there. This goes far overboard. 
 
It for example says that the window that the debtor is allowed is 
between 7 and 8:30 in the morning. So the person obviously 
knows this because this is going to be public. If you’re gone 
before 7 o’clock in the morning the collection agency can’t 
touch you — can’t touch you till 5 o’clock in the afternoon. 
And those sorts of things do not make any sense in this. 
 
However if we look at what’s all . . . also is well covered in 
here we’ll find out that this isn’t just businesses that have 
something to lose. We’ll find out that banks, lending 
institutions, and in fact even some of our Crown sectors may be 
affected by this. 
 
There are very . . . some very serious concerns around the 
province dealing with this, Mr. Speaker. This particular piece of 
legislation at best needs to be amended in a very serious sort of 
a way so that we’re not taking away from good business people 
the opportunity that they have to collect. 
 
The Speaker: — Now why is the member from Swift Current 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . leave of the Assembly to introduce guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you also to my 
colleagues in the Assembly and to the member for Rosthern 
whose speech I’m interrupting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you, a 
very distinguished couple from the city of Swift Current sitting 
in your gallery. In your gallery is Dr. Ted Khonje and his wife, 
Mrs. Persis Khonje. And we certainly want to welcome them to 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members may know that their son Frederick is one 
of the pages this session and doing an excellent job, a job that’s 
greatly appreciated. And we also know that the Khonjes have 
contributed greatly to our community in Swift Current, certainly 
to the health care of the community, but to the community in 
general. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I just ask all members to join with 
me in welcoming them here to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Collection Agents Amendment Act, 2002 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As soon as this 
piece of legislation was introduced, I received numerous phone 
calls from people that have some definite concerns about it; 
including a letter, Mr. Speaker, from the Credit Bureau of 
Saskatoon Collections Limited. 
 
And I think when we have those kinds of concerns that are 
raised — some of which I’ve voiced today, not in a whole lot of 
detail — this particular Bill needs to be looked at, as I said, in a 
major sort of a way, possibly put on hold, and have the 
government reassess it again for another time. Or at the very 
least, very seriously — very seriously, Mr. Speaker, amended. 
 
So having said that, I move to adjourn debate on this particular 
Bill at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 23 – The 
Registered Plan (Retirement Income) Exemption Act/Loi 
portant insaisissabilité des régimes enregistrés (revenu de 
retraite) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this morning to make a few comments of Bill 
No. 23, The Registered Plan (Retirement Income) Exemption 
Act. 
 
It appears on the surface, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is going to 
implement an exemption from the enforcement measures by 
creditors for registered retirement income plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we’re well aware that throughout the province 
there are literally tens of thousands of people who have . . . 
through their life and their career, do not have an appropriate 
type of pension plan. And, Mr. Speaker, in the communities in 
the Prince Albert area that you and I come from, there are 
businesses there — some small, some quite large. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the one very large business in Prince 
Albert that both of us are well aware of — that both of us have 
friends working there and are certainly well acquainted with — 
do not have the appropriate type of pension plans that are going 
to be able to assist people to retire and move on in a 
contributory way as they retire from their careers. 
 
So what they do, Mr. Speaker, is that many of these people — 
or all of these people virtually — have taken out registered 
retirement plans. And so for all intents and purposes a 
registered retirement plan is their pension; it is their pension. 
 
And one of the side non-benefits so to speak, Mr. Speaker, from 
having a registered retirement plan is that, should somewhere 

along the line in your career and in your life that what could 
happen is that should a creditor find it necessary, has the tools 
in place today to be able to access that so-called pension plan, a 
registered retirement investment. 
 
And so how do people then be able to protect themselves should 
something go awry in their lives? A case in point, Mr. Speaker, 
would be the massive increases for long-term care homes. 
People may have to be forced to dip into the registered 
retirement plans. But maybe what’s needed is some sort of a 
way to protect a registered retirement pension plan so that they 
would have the same consideration, Mr. Speaker, as pension 
funds. 
 
Certainly we know in this House that, through some of our 
checkered past, that there has been members in this House who 
have crossed the line so to speak in carrying out their duties for 
the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve been forced to pay a 
penalty for that. 
 
But one of the things that was mentioned in our checkered past, 
Mr. Speaker, as we talk about registered retirement income, is 
that there had been thoughts at one time that maybe what should 
happen is that, in order to pay their debt back to society, is that 
there should be some garnishee of their pension plan. 
 
And of course, as we well remember, what has happened in this 
House is that the former premier vehemently defended that 
pension plans need to be exempt; people need to be protected 
for their retirement. Many of them don’t have that rich a 
pension plans. But if they’re going to be contributory members 
of society after their retirement, their pension plans need to be 
in place. And so, why wouldn’t you be able to do that with a 
registered retirement plan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So then we see here that on the surface maybe that the Justice 
minister had presented something here that may be able to take 
a look at and work with. Now certainly, Mr. Speaker, we sent 
this out for consideration throughout communities in 
Saskatchewan to see what people think about it, and they have 
brought their opinions back to us. And certainly what we’ve 
been hearing is that people who are involved in small business 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which of course as we all know 
which provide about two-thirds of all employment in 
Saskatchewan, is that most of these people involved in small 
business in fact are creating a pension plan for themselves 
through a registered retirement plan. 
 
And so what we see here, Mr. Speaker, is maybe an opening 
that this side of the House will be able to encourage the 
government in this sitting to be able to, with some adjustments 
to this Bill, bring about some protection for people whose 
retirement is going to be based upon a RRSP (Registered 
Retirement Savings Plan) or an RRIF (Registered Retirement 
Income Fund) or a deferred profit-sharing plan, that they will 
also receive the same type of protection as those people who are 
in the full-fledged secure pensions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there was mention, of course, both by the minister in his 
prefacing of the Bill is that of course this Bill may appear to be 
kind of following under a uniformity with what the Government 
of Canada is doing and what other provinces are doing in a 
uniform basis, Mr. Speaker, throughout the country. That would 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

be very good. 
 
And of course what the Minister of Justice has also told us, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there has been some consultation on this Bill 
and specifically, more specifically, with the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan. And we certainly 
want to commend the government for at least once listening to 
the people of Saskatchewan because we certainly heard that 
they do that very, very seldom. 
 
And when we of course . . . we certainly want to make mention 
of the long-term care home fees. They’ve heard many 
comments on that. They certainly don’t seem to be listening to 
that. 
 
(11:30) 
 
But at least with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, there seems to be some 
sort of an indication, maybe in some small way, that they 
actually have listened to somebody. And actually, maybe, 
maybe — even though the NDP have a tendency to want to 
boast in this House about fairness — is that maybe, maybe, 
when we get a chance to talk to the minister about this in 
Committee of the Whole at some time in the distant future, is 
that there actually is a Bill on the order paper this year that will 
promote fairness. And actually as the Justice minister called it, 
this Bill will be simply fair — simple being the key term, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now when we talk about the fairness, the appearance of fairness 
in this Bill, it would certainly be noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, that 
we should also mention that some of these other Bills that are 
being brought forth and some of the changes that are being 
brought in regulations in this province through the budget is 
we’re not seeing a lot of fairness. So do you suppose, Mr. 
Speaker, by some strange coincidences that they finally got it 
right, at least once? 
 
The Minister of Justice made a rather remarkable comment. 
Remarkable indeed, Mr. Speaker, that the Justice minister from 
that side of the House, in a move that seems contrary to the 
mood on that side of the House, on the NDP side of the House 
— the government side of the House, that is propped up by a 
couple of independents — and what the Justice minister has 
said, Mr. Speaker, is that what happens here is that we take a 
look at people who are retiring, have spent 30, 35, 40 years of 
putting together a registered retirement savings plan or a 
registered retirement income fund is that these people, in 
fairness, need to have some protection from creditors, just as 
people with . . . in general pension plans such as you and I are 
going to be able to enjoy, Mr. Speaker, and other members of 
the House upon our retirement from here. 
 
But what the Justice minister said . . . and he was speaking 
about the public interest. We find that extremely noteworthy on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that what the Justice 
minister said that it is in the broader public interest that retiring 
members of our community not be left destitute. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that seems extremely contrary to what has 
been happening in this province, and we . . . when we were 
investigating the budget . . . that this does not seem to line up, 
Mr. Speaker. It does not seem to line up with what the NDP 

government is doing to seniors in long-term care homes in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What we see here is a government in confusion. On one part we 
see a Justice minister, the member from Saskatoon Fairview, 
making a statement, talking about protecting retiring members 
in a broad, public . . . broad, public interest that they not be left 
destitute. 
 
And what did we hear this morning? Is that we heard the 
member from Regina Lakeview, we’ve heard the member . . . 
we’ve heard the member in past from Saskatoon Mount Royal, 
and we certainly heard most vitriolically this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle that it is the 
right thing to do to attack seniors’ pensions, registered 
retirement savings plans, and registered retirement income 
funds and, Mr. Speaker, to attack deferred profit-sharing plans. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, who is running this government? You have a 
minister saying one thing and in the public forum another 
minister saying another thing. We’re going to be hugely 
curious, we’re extremely curious on this side of the House, that 
when we get a chance to speak — maybe in June or July or 
August — with the Minister of Justice about this Bill, Bill No. 
23, just what does he mean when he’s talking about, it is in the 
broader public interest that retiring members of our community 
not be left destitute. 
 
So does that mean that on the NDP side of the House there’s at 
least one member over there that has a clear understanding that 
seniors should not be left destitute? And is he alone over there? 
Well we’re certainly very curious about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to be taking some significant time, sometime 
in the distant future, to be able to talk to the minister. And 
certainly the member from Rosthern will be spending some 
time in the next couple of months putting together a myriad of 
questions, Mr. Speaker, to deal with this issue and to make sure 
that everyone clearly understands, is this a Bill that’s going to 
protect seniors from creditors. And then how does that line up 
with trying to protect seniors from the NDP government? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those of us on this side of the House have 
spent the last few weeks speaking to the business community, 
speaking to people who are most affected with pension future, 
that is going to retire on RRSPs and RRIFs and deferred 
profit-sharing plans, Mr. Speaker. They have questions that 
they’re bringing forward and certainly the member from 
Rosthern has been gathering those questions. 
 
Other members on this side of the House have been also 
working diligently so that we’re going to take some time and 
work with this Bill to see if it actually stacks up as exactly as 
the minister may be indicating. Or is it just a smoke-and-mirrors 
type of Bill, Mr. Speaker, that is going to fall more in line with 
the attitude on the other side of the House that actually doesn’t 
seem to match what the NDP is doing to attacking seniors, 
especially those living in long-term care homes. 
 
And since, Mr. Speaker, that we have these questions lined up, I 
think it would be best that . . . maybe it would be more 
appropriate at this time that it’s time to start moving this Bill 
into Committee of the Whole. 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials and then, if he wishes, make a brief statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased 
to be joined today by Deputy Minister Neil Yeates. Seated next 
to him is Don Head, who is the executive director of the 
corrections division. Behind us, Maureen Lloyd, the acting 
director of youth justice services and Mae Boa, the executive 
director of management services. Behind the bar we also have 
Tom Young, who’s the executive director of protection and 
emergency services, and Nick Surtees, who is the executive 
director of licensing and inspections branch. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, 
welcome to the minister. And I think this is his first time as a 
minister in estimates and I’m sure he’s going to enjoy it. And 
also welcome to his officials this afternoon and this morning. 
 
This is sort of a change from where we’ve gone in this province 
for quite a number of years where the whole justice thing and 
corrections was all under one roof. And so what I’d like for the 
minister to do — and I’d like for him to do this in some detail 
— is outline first of all the purpose of the separation as it’s 
taken place and what he sees as specifically his mandate and his 
mission that he sees with Corrections and Public Safety as he 
now has it under his charge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I 
appreciate the opportunity to explain a little bit about the 
reorganization, the rationale behind it, and some of the things 
that we do hope to achieve here in the department. 
 
There are two main issues that have caused us to look at dealing 
with the corrections portfolio separate from the Department of 
Justice where most of this was housed before. 
 
A big part of this has to do with changes that are coming at the 
federal level in terms of the criminal youth justice Act which 
will be brought in . . . has been passed and will be implemented, 
I understand, in early 2003. 
 
This allows us to start to deal with young offenders issues in 
particular in a slightly different way. And one of the responses 
that we want as we get ready for that legislation is to be able to 
look at a greater corrections focus, more of an integrated 
approach, in terms of corrections. 
 
So this particular reorganization brings together in it different 
agencies that have been in different departments. Certainly we 
have adult corrections which has come over from Justice, the 
young offenders operation which was previously in Social 
Services, and then a variety of licensing functions that were in 

Municipal Affairs. 
 
There are a series of corrections issues that I’m sure we’ll have 
a chance to discuss over the next several times that we’re in 
here, in terms of the approach and certainly some of the items 
that are happening at the federal level that have caused some of 
these changes here. 
 
The second big change in the way that this department has been 
set up is to deal with emergency measures. Certainly one of the 
issues which I think has been at the top of people’s mind over 
the last six months in particular —eight months — have been 
the . . . how we respond, particularly to public safety issues, and 
what kind of emergency preparedness we have. By 
concentrating this area, by moving it into this corrections 
branch, we believe that we are better able to focus on how our 
communities respond, how we respond as a government to 
these kind of issues and the potential situations that may arise 
from them. 
 
There is an additional area that we are looking at here. And that 
is one of the other reasons for the reorganization, is that it 
provides the Department of Justice with an opportunity to 
refocus on crime prevention and the issues around prosecutions 
without having to be dealing necessarily with the corrections 
aspect. 
 
So those are really the three main reasons why we’ve 
undertaken this reorganization. It is, as I’m sure the member 
opposite can appreciate, taking us some time as we pull together 
the department and change the administrative structure so that 
we are able to deal with the issues. This is a reorganization that 
has been in place now for about a month and we are still 
moving the pieces together to make sure it’s a very seamless 
transition. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Okay, thank you. 
 
I was going to go down a different road first, but I think you 
just changed my mind. The emergency measures part, I think, is 
one I’d like to spend some time on. And that’s not a one I had 
planned on, but I think it’s an interesting one. 
 
When you’re dealing with the emergency measures, are we 
looking only at sort of major crises such as we’ve seen in the 
United States and that sort of thing? Or basically how far do 
these go before we just say, this is just an accident or where 
does the emergency measure component sort of kick in as far as 
something happening? 
 
For example, if you have a five, six, eight car pileup on the 
highway, does your department work with how that’s going to 
be dealt with, or this only on a major scale where whatever 
skyscrapers we have in Saskatchewan are attacked or 
demolished? 
 
(11:45) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — For leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Just 
to point out we have a very special visitor and guest in the west 
gallery, Mr. Chair. I’d like to take this opportunity to you and 
through you to introduce Mr. Dwight A. Dorey. 
 
Mr. Dorey is the national chief of the Congress of Aboriginal 
Peoples and he was elected to the position at the organization’s 
annual general assembly on April 29, 2000 for a three-year term 
of office. 
 
Chief Dorey is a Mi’kmaq from Truro, Nova Scotia, and he has 
more than 24 years of experience in Aboriginal politics at the 
provincial, national, and international level. 
 
And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming Dwight A. Dorey, the national chief of the Congress 
of Aboriginal Peoples, to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To answer 
the question that has been posed, there is a — as the member 
opposite and I’m sure all members appreciate — there’s a tiered 
response to how we would deal with these issues. 
 
There are obviously issues which are dealt with at the 
individual level, at which point people may go on to the 
municipal level. After we have gone past the municipal level, if 
the municipalities are not able to respond, there is a provincial 
response, and there are certainly some areas that the federal 
government would be responsible for. 
 
I should note that one of the areas that we have moved into this 
department is responsibility for the 911, the Sask911 program, 
in terms of how we handle coordination of those kind of 
situations. So this is a case where we are looking at more of a 
provincial coordinated way of dealing with municipalities and 
coordinating our issues with the federal government as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer. 
 
The question that comes up from a lot of municipalities that 
exist along some of our major highways — and I’m trying to 
decide from what you said, whether this fits into your 
jurisdiction, exactly how closely it fits — if there is an accident 
on a particular highway and the fire department and EMO 
(Emergency Measures Organization) is called out but it’s a fair 
distance away from that community, so it’s definitely out of 
their particular sphere but the need is there and they send 
someone out, what responsibility does your department take for 
the help that was given? Or do you just say to that municipality, 
thanks for your charity and the costs and the expenses and all of 
those things, that’s your responsibility? Or do you work with 

the municipalities to help cover their costs when they sort of go 
out of their communities to provide these services on public 
highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this is a . . . Perhaps to 
work through the example that the member opposite has put 
forward. If there is an accident on the highway, what would 
happen is that they would . . . we would assume that someone 
would phone the 911 system, at which time the appropriate 
response would be determined. 
 
Now that may be a case where the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) are called on; we may end up having a 
ambulance dispatched. It may be a case where the fire 
department is . . . a fire department is needed. 
 
The response is determined really by the nature of the incident 
and this is part of what, obviously, we’re trying to do through 
the 911 implementation. 
 
Now to speak to the question of liability and cost. Most of the 
municipalities, as we understand, have some kind of a shared 
responsibility on this in that we, in our case, simply call who is 
the most immediate to respond. In this particular case, it’s not a 
question of cost, it’s a question of the immediacy of response. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think I need to follow that 
one a little further because it is — to the municipal bodies — it 
is an item of cost. Because obviously, if they’re going to send 
their people out there, their equipment out there, that’s at a fair 
expense. 
 
And living in a community that that exists along highway 11, 
which has a very bad accident record because of the high traffic 
that’s there, we do have these groups often called out because 
there’s an accident there. 
 
And they’re finding that when they submit, submit a bill for the 
service provided, not to their constituency but provided to the 
greater constituency along the highway, they’re not being 
remunerated for that. And it seems to me from what we said at 
the start that this may be under your department. 
 
And so I’m going down two roads here. One, is this your 
responsibility; and if it is, then why are some of these 
communities not being paid for their services? 
 
To sort of say, well, we’re going to keep our fire department 
and our EMO (Emergency Measures Organization) sitting here 
when someone’s called in, but it hasn’t quite gone down 
through the Regina route or wherever 911 takes them, they 
might find themselves being substantially late at the accident to 
do the immediate service that’s needed, because by that time a 
fire could have broken out and taken a lot of lives. 
 
So is that under your particular department, the way it’s set up 
now; and if so, what can they do for remuneration they’ve 
applied for — on the highways, not in their local jurisdiction — 
that they haven’t been paid for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is obviously an important issue 
and certainly one which is complicated. The municipalities have 
responsibility for a policing cost and for a, where it is available, 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

 

a fire suppression — costs associated with this. Because the 
municipalities . . . And we’ve got on top of this then health 
districts which are . . . have a different set of boundaries; 
coordination is a main issue, is one of the key issues. 
 
In the case that we’re dealing with, the 911 system, the issue 
that the province worries about is how we get the response. This 
does not directly address the issue of the reimbursements. And 
this is a complicated one. In addition to it, obviously there is an 
issue of liability that we run into as well. 
 
The question of mutual aid between municipalities and the 
response is still one which has to respect municipal authority. 
But certainly we understand the issue that the member’s raised. 
 
Now in a particular case, if it happens along a provincial 
highway — the responsibility — this is something that we can 
certainly look into and get back to you on. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think that’s one that the 
communities would like to have clarified because it seems like 
sometimes they’re being remunerated for these and sometimes 
they’re not. And if at the end of the day that they’re going to 
have to bear most of the cost most of the time, they’re just not 
going to show up for those. Just the way the provincial 
government doesn’t send a fire truck out to a small town, we 
don’t expect them to. 
 
If you know the public highways, which is the purview of the 
province, if it isn’t covered there they will probably just 
withhold that which is something as a person who travels a lot 
of miles on the highway — and we all do — I don’t think we 
want to see. 
 
Back to emergency measures. Numbers of years ago most 
communities in Saskatchewan, I believe, were required to create 
EMO plans, emergency measure plans. That would have 
probably been, I would imagine, 8 to 12 years ago; somewhere 
in that vicinity because I remember working through some of 
those. 
 
Do all communities have those? Do they need to be updated? 
Or once they were made 10 or 12 years ago, can they sit on a 
shelf? Where is the government at with that? Do they need to be 
reviewed and what is the situation there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
opposition spokesman certainly is starting with the tough 
questions first. This is a very good question he has raised. 
 
We have about 60 to 70 per cent of the population which is 
covered by current emergency measures plans. The difficulty is 
of course particularly in smaller communities. In terms of the 
number of the communities that are covered, we need to do 
some more work with smaller municipalities. 
 
Now part of this obviously also gets us into the question of how 
we manage the risk. Certainly in the larger centres, there is a 
potential for a larger-scale response and so in that regard the 67 
per cent of the population within the larger centres and near 
larger centres tend to be covered. This is nevertheless an issue 
that we need to work with the municipalities on. Part of it is a 
resources issue that we need to deal with them on. 

But I think that certainly the member has identified an 
important issue that we need to continue to work with the 
municipalities on. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as I said earlier on, I was on 
a town council numbers of years ago when this was set up and I 
know how much work actually is involved in it, because it isn’t 
just, it isn’t just taking and saying does their fire truck work and 
do we have an EMO thing. It involved having lodging for 
people in case of a disaster. It involved having trucks ready, and 
we had farm people involved, who sort of had their trucks, sort 
of identified as individuals we could call if we needed those 
sorts of help. So it does take a lot of work. 
 
And as you mentioned, the smaller the community, the more 
difficult it is to get all the components in place when there just 
aren’t enough individuals to sort of fit into those particular slots 
that are needed. 
 
And I wasn’t intending, by bringing up that particular topic, to 
make the minister in his new portfolio, give him a difficult 
situation. It just happened to be something that I had some 
background with and that’s why that came to light. 
 
Going back to sort of an overview situation. With the changes 
that have taken place in the Justice department and now your 
department as Corrections and Public Safety, what links with 
Social Services are in place and which ones have been changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I think I, at the start, 
had mentioned that one of the things we have tried to do is take 
our time as we put together these functions. Obviously how we 
deal with young offenders and how we deal with the 
corrections, we need to make sure that there’s a seamlessness as 
we construct the new department out of its existing unit. 
 
At the current time, the young offenders program still has a 
very strong linkage with Social Services; in fact, it has not yet 
been moved directly under Corrections. We anticipate this will 
be the case in the next month to six weeks, that we’ll be in a 
position to bring them under the administrative responsibility of 
this particular department. 
 
Once that is in place, obviously we’re going to need to maintain 
the linkages that are there, particularly with child protection 
services in terms of the way that these programs work. But for 
the time being, it is business as usual. And certainly as we move 
young offenders operations under this department we anticipate 
it will be a very seamless, seamless operation. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, it’s my opinion that some of the 
directions that you’re going by taking some of the Social 
Services aspect and putting them underneath your umbrella has 
possibilities, I think, of having some positive response from the 
public. 
 
Because I think very often the public looked at this and said, 
well Social Services is dealing with this, what’s the mentality of 
Social Services? How much is security of the public a part of 
Social Services’ mentality and mandate? And whether or not it 
was there wasn’t always the issue, the perception was there was 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

that wasn’t a Social Service mandate. 
 
And I think with the events that have happened in 
Saskatchewan over the last decade or so, when we’re talking 
about crime and those sorts of things, have made this a much 
more of a major topic and thought pattern in the minds of the 
public. 
 
Probably a fairly specific question, and either it’ll be that you’re 
responsible for this or you aren’t. Some time ago when there 
was an initiative made to change what was happening with the 
car thieves in Saskatchewan, and particularly in Regina, a 
member of that core group — and how many there were in that 
core group seems to vary from 30 to 80 — a number of that 
core group was sort of picked up and isolated. 
 
Now are they under your jurisdiction now? And if they aren’t, 
would they be under your jurisdiction in the situation that when 
your change in the departments is finished, would they then be 
under your jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Certainly we have these car thieves at 
this point. They are in the secure custody, a large number of 
them are, so in that regard there is a role here. Justice is the lead 
agency in terms of the policy for dealing with the auto theft 
strategy. 
 
I might take this opportunity just to inform members of the 
situation today. Certainly car . . . the car theft issue is an 
important one. And it is one which — certainly here in Regina 
in particular — is of concern to those of us who represent these 
seats, and I know it’s a concern across the province. 
 
A year ago, in April of 2001, we were experiencing in this city 
on average about 16 car thefts a day, which is quite a staggering 
number. As a result of the strategy which has been put in place 
by the government, both in coordination with Justice and Social 
Services, we’re seeing that today we’re at about a quarter of that 
in terms of the daily thefts. Certainly there is no good number 
of car thefts. And we don’t want to say that by any means 
there’s an acceptable number. I think the acceptable number 
would be zero. 
 
But we have seen that this approach has worked. It has not been 
without its detractors from the start. There are those who 
thought we should have taken a different approach. And there 
were, I know, some concerns within the community as to 
whether this was tough enough and whether it would be 
effective. 
 
I want to say that I think that the work that has been done by the 
Department of Justice officials, by Social Services, and very 
much by the city police has really done a very good job in terms 
of helping bring this down. 
 
We will see over the next several months — obviously this is 
still a new policy — we’ll see over the next several months how 
this works and whether we are able to maintain this. 
 
But certainly the approach that has taken to get these habitual 
offenders off the streets and then with the other ones to make 
sure that there are constant curfew checks done to make sure 
that they are not out returning to their former pattern of 

behaviour seems to be having some, some degree of success. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And you mentioned there was 
some detractors to the program and I am probably one of those. 
And we’ll get into that either later on today or in October. 
 
There were a number of those hard-core offenders just picked 
up within . . . on that weekend I think. How many were picked 
up? And how many are still in a custody? And what form of 
custody are they in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, one of the . . . 
this is actually a very interesting set of statistics and I think that 
all members will find it of interest. There are about 23 chronic 
offenders who have been identified and who have been picked 
up and held in secure custody. Approximately half of those are 
still in secure custody. I think this is an interesting statistic in 
that it shows that we have half now who are out of secure 
custody and we are still being able to maintain the reduced rate 
of theft. 
 
One of the key components of the program is certainly the 
curfew checks that are being performed. On an average week, 
we’re performing very close to 200 curfew checks. Last week it 
was about . . . almost 180. Of those 180, there were only 22 
potential breaches identified. 
 
So this is a case where I think the youth are understanding that 
we are serious about this. The police and Social Services 
officials are doing an exceptional job in terms of making sure 
that they are doing the curfew checks. And obviously we still 
have approximately half the habitual or chronic offenders in 
secure custody. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as I mentioned in a bit of a 
discourse that I had here on Tuesday, I believe, I discussed with 
the members opposite and then for a time specifically with the 
Minister of Justice. That particular meeting where he 
announced the new program, and there was a mother there who 
expressed loud, and long, and very eloquently her dismay with 
the system that you have of checking up on . . . for the curfew 
checkup. 
 
And even though I think we’re somewhat happy that the 
numbers have gone down in car thefts, there’s still a concern 
that maybe you just have the worst 12 in there. 
 
You mentioned you had 22 custody violations. Now is there any 
assurance that those 22 custody violations weren’t also linked 
directly to 22 car thefts? If they were, then that custody 
violation — or curfew violation, pardon me — becomes much 
more critical than just going down to the local place for a soda. 
 
So I would like some detailed discussion on how this curfew 
monitoring works and what assurance there is that those 22 
violations weren’t sort of a parallel situation to 22 car thefts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I certainly had the 
opportunity to listen to the member’s comments on Tuesday 
night in terms of the presentation he was making about this, that 
concerned a parent. 
 
I want to say that on Tuesday night I think the member was 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

 

noting that there was a concern that what was happening is if 
the police and corrections officials were simply phoning up 
these youngsters and seeing whether or not they were there. 
 
In fact, the check is actually done in person. And it is random 
— it is random in terms of the day, in terms of the time. 
Certainly we are aware that this puts some pressure on the 
families. It means that they may be woken up at hours that 
they’re not used to being disturbed to make sure that the young 
offenders who are involved in this are where they’re supposed 
to be. 
 
I don’t think that we have a direct number of those 22 potential 
breaches and whether they were . . . in fact, what the nature of 
the breach was and . . . (inaudible) . . . they’re not there. 
 
What I can tell you is this, is that it is the approach of our 
government that if someone steals a car in Saskatchewan, that 
they will be held responsible for it and that they will go to jail. 
 
This is what is happening. We have had 23 of these young 
offenders in secure custody. More than half of them are still in 
secure custody. And this has been the approach. 
 
Now if the behaviour is changing — and certainly I think we 
have seen by the sustained reduced rate of thefts that in many of 
these cases they have gotten the message — then I would say 
that this policy is working. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I would like to underline the 
change that’s been happening in this government in the area of 
Justice. I don’t support a lot of where this government’s going. 
There is some movement at present in the Justice department to 
be a little more firm than they have been in the past, and I think 
that . . . I’m quite prepared to say that that movement is good. Is 
it far enough? I would say no, but that’s for another time. 
 
You spoke earlier on with . . . having some interaction with 
police officers and police forces. And I’m wondering when you 
. . . where exactly is your policy at, as far as dovetailing with 
the advice you’re getting from police officers on how to deal 
with these situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, as I’d mentioned in 
one of my earlier responses, certainly we have a partnership 
between the Justice department and Corrections. Justice deals 
actually with the policing action and so the Minister of Justice 
may be in a better position to discuss how that relationship is 
moving forward. 
 
Certainly, once the offenders have been identified, once they 
are in secure custody and have moved out and are into a curfew 
situation, this involves directly the Department of Corrections. 
 
Have I myself had an opportunity to sit down with the police on 
this issue? I’ll have to tell you that in the short time that I’ve 
been the minister, the answer is no, that we are letting the 
policy work itself through. And I have no doubt that my 
colleague, the Attorney General, has been working with the 
police on this. This may be an issue that is better addressed 
when he stands up again. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I do understand that as we 

go through this we sort of tend to move into the other person’s 
area a little bit, the other minister, and may do that from time to 
time. 
 
When you’re talking about working with some of the 
professionals out there, such as police officers and those 
individuals, I would probably just ask that you pay very close 
attention to what they do tell you. 
 
We just had a situation in Saskatchewan, in the last two days, 
that showed very specifically that this government doesn’t 
always pay close attention to good advice. And that was with 
the situation that came up with SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) deciding that if you’ve got a seven-year, perfect 
record or whatever else, you get a break on your licences, and if 
you’ve got a worse record, you’re going to pay some penalties. 
 
The bizarre thing on that is we all know the effect that high 
speed has on accidents. We know the effect that high speed has 
on school ground accidents — you know right in front of school 
grounds, playgrounds, and those sorts of things. And yet when 
the police voiced some very serious concerns that that wasn’t 
include in the mix, SGI just chose to ignore that. 
 
So I would hope that when you get to the point where you’re 
discussing that with some of your professionals . . . 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And with 
apologies and thanks for the grace of the member from 
Rosthern for yielding the floor to me at this time. 
 
It’s my pleasure, although something of a surprise, but anyway 
it’s good to see you anyway. It’s my pleasure to introduce to the 
members of this legislature, a group of students from Scott 
Collegiate, which is located in the beautiful riding of Regina 
Elphinstone, and is two blocks away from my house. So I get to 
see the students doing all sorts of good things. 
 
They’re with their teacher, Mr. Heuck, and I would urge the 
members of this place to give them a warm welcome. Give 
them a round. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I too would like to join with 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

the member from Elphinstone welcoming some teachers and 
students. It’s always good to have them here and see how the 
process of the House works. It’s nice to see students come when 
we’re not in question period and up to our so-called 
shenanigans, and see that when we’re in some more serious 
debate that we actually do accomplish a lot I think in many 
cases. 
 
I would like to move to some extent away from where we’re at, 
at this particular point, and some things relating directly to 
corrections. And I’d like for the minister to sort of outline what 
sort of correction facilities we have in Saskatchewan and how 
many people are basically involved in each one of those as 
inmates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, certainly there 
are, I should say, two things here. 
 
First of all, as the members know that we are looking at changes 
to The Correctional Services Act and this is changing some of 
the terminology that we use. And that Act is currently under 
debate and no doubt we’ll have an opportunity to discuss some 
of this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . This is rare that the 
members are asking me to speak louder but I will take 
advantage of the opportunity. Certainly one of the things that 
we are changing is some of the language around the facilities 
and that’s in . . . will be under discussion under The 
Correctional Services Act. 
 
At this point we have, in the adult offender population, we have 
incarcerated in Saskatchewan today about 1,100 adults; there 
are another roughly 5,400 that are under supervision. We have 
within the youth population about 330 in custody and this is 
pretty standard on a daily basis. There are about 2,600 youth 
however involved in the young offender system. 
 
So perhaps we can start there and if the member has additional 
questions I’ll do what I can to answer them. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think when we look at this 
we need to compare this with other provinces and see what 
percentages are of incarceration, this sort of thing. 
 
Probably following through on that adult one first of all, you 
had two categories there. How does that compare nationally on 
a per capita basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Certainly our rates of incarceration are 
high on a national basis in terms of the approach. As you can 
appreciate, this is a result of various factors — from the way 
that the enforcement is done, to the type of sentences that the 
justice system hands out. But certainly this is . . . We are high in 
terms of the number on a per capita basis that would be 
incarcerated. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Kind of a vague answer to what 
was a very specific question, but for today we’ll accept that. 
 
The minister gives two reasons, I believe, for that number. He 
says it’s our enforcement and it’s how our judicial system deals 
with them once they’re in the courts. And I suggest that those 
are exactly the wrong reasons. 
 

The reasons that there are so many in there is because the crime 
rate is so high in Saskatchewan. If our crime rate goes down to 
zero, I’m sure any amount of enforcement isn’t going to catch 
any criminals. If our crime rate was zero, there’s no way our 
courts would be putting anyone into jail. 
 
So I think we need to go back to that and say that this is 
something that’s been happening in Saskatchewan and our rates 
have been climbing over the last decade or so. And that’s 
something this particular government needs to take more 
responsibility for. Now it isn’t specifically the Department of 
Justice that has to be responsible for this. This is essentially the 
whole front row of government that has to take this 
responsibility. 
 
Because what exactly has created that attitude that has allowed 
crime to be so rampant in this province? Is it because our courts 
have been unbelievably lenient? Maybe somewhat lenient, but 
not to the extent to create that. Has it been because our 
enforcement officers haven’t done their job? I believe not. Now 
we’re down on enforcement officers. We know that, and that 
obviously is a part of it, but definitely it can’t be the major part. 
 
And I think the major part of the blame has to go solely on the 
shoulders of the cabinet as such to say we have, for different 
sorts of reasons, created in this province an environment that is 
responsible for this, and I think that’s one of the unfortunate 
things. 
 
Spending some time on the correctional centre in Saskatoon — 
and I’d like for the minister to go through in some substantial 
detail, what would exactly take place to someone who enters a 
correctional centre in Saskatoon that would fall under the 
category of rehabilitation. 
 
We’ll deal with security and some of those things in another 
question. But what exactly takes place there that we can say, 
well these people are incarcerated, and when they come out 
they are less likely to have criminal tendencies than they had 
when they entered. So what is taking place there to rehabilitate 
the people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, let me start by 
saying in terms of the specific numbers that the member 
opposite had asked for in terms of the crime rate, we will 
endeavour to provide that on a province-by-province basis. I 
don’t have that available today, but we will make that available 
to members of this Assembly. 
 
I want to start by — before I get to the specifics of the 
Saskatoon situation — I want to talk a bit about the . . . respond 
to the issue raised by the member about the causes of crime. 
 
I don’t want my previous answer to be taken that to say that 
incarceration is not related to the crime rate. Quite obviously it 
is. And if I had not mentioned that in my previous answer, I 
want to correct that. The question that we have to deal with 
though, and we have to understand, is that there is a dynamic 
here between the way that we handle enforcement, the way our 
justice system responds in terms whether they decide that we 
should deal with an offender through secure custody, or through 
open custody, whether we have a probation put in place. These 
are issues largely outside of the government’s control. 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

 

Now I think that the member opposite is correct that the 
community’s approach to these issues is changing. Certainly I 
believe that this as well, that there is more of a sense that the 
justice system needs to look at the nature of the offence in a 
more serious way. 
 
Crime rate is obviously also another issue that the Attorney 
General can address at some length. But there are often cases 
where one offender may have committed multiple offences in 
the conduct of the crime. So this is not unusual. We will have 
many charges — maybe one particular incident that results in 
four charges. 
 
This is one of those things which drives some of the response. 
And I know that the enforcement agencies do this in part to 
identify what has happened, to outline the seriousness of it, in 
hopes that the justice . . . the justices will mete out an 
appropriate sentence. 
 
One of the things that we need to focus though on, and I think is 
important and the member opposite is right, that there is 
responsibility for our governments. One of the reasons why we 
have governments is to deal with these kind of issues. 
 
Members on this side of the Assembly are quite proud of the 
fact that the work we have done tackling what we think is one 
of the most important causes of crime, and that is poverty in our 
province. And what we have . . . we certainly take great pride in 
the work that has been done through the departments like Social 
Services, in terms of building independence, in terms of the 
work we’ve done on the child welfare programs. And the result 
has been very clearly to bring down the number of children 
living in poverty. 
 
Now we certainly hope that through that, through things like 
community schools, that what we’re putting in place is the kind 
of social infrastructure that will help these people grow up into 
responsible, productive citizens. 
 
The choice to go into . . . to undertake crime is an individual 
one. This is not a societal one. It is an individual one and as a 
result the individual bears the consequences. 
 
Whether or not the consequences of the actions are sufficient is 
certainly a public debate and it is one where I suspect members 
on both sides would find themselves leaving . . . would not find 
a strict party separation but really is one more based on their 
own particular views and the views of the constituency they 
represent. 
 
That is now . . . that is to address the earlier issues made by the 
member. 
 
And what I want to do now is specifically deal with 
rehabilitation issues within the Saskatoon Correctional Centre. 
We have a number of different programs and I guess I should 
start by saying we need to . . . one of the, one of the things that 
we need to understand is that when a person is sentenced to one 
of the correctional institutions, these tend to not be for 
particularly long periods of time. 
 
This is not a case, for instance, like we would have with the 
federal penitentiary where there’s a longer period of time to 

deal with the deviant behaviour and the dysfunction that may 
have caused the criminal activity. 
 
There are a number of different issues that come to play here in 
. . . that may have contributed to this and that we believe are 
necessary in terms of dealing with the rehabilitation. I can 
simply read off the list for the members. 
 
Certainly there is programming available for substance abuse. 
We see this to be a very significant cause and contributing 
factor in terms of the issues. Anger management — violence, 
aggression is another one which is clearly an issue that needs to 
be dealt with. Cognitive skills issues. Employment skills are 
often something that need to be dealt with. There are cases that 
we will deal with where there is . . . the crimes are involving a 
sexual abuse and . . . or we may need to deal with them in terms 
of their behaviour that way. Domestic violence is certainly an 
issue which is troubling in our community and there is 
programming there. 
 
There are other . . . two other areas that we deal with that I think 
are fairly important in terms of dealing with the individual and 
trying to help them return to being productive citizens. One is 
the basic education and literacy issues. This is often just a core 
part of what we try to do to help these people return to society 
and be able to move on beyond crime into normal productive 
life. 
 
And then additionally there may be other issues that we need to 
deal with — everything from life skills to parenting skills to 
understanding their impact on victims. These are, these are 
different issues. As well, we’ve got vocational programs. 
 
So there’s quite a long list and obviously it’s not a case that one 
size fits all. We had about 365 people enrolled in programs at 
the Saskatoon Correctional Centre last year. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’d like to zero in on one of the 
rehabilitation programs to see exactly what’s happening in that 
program. 
 
As you mentioned, and I appreciated that, that essentially at the 
end of the day to be involved in crime or not to be involved in 
crime is an individual decision. And that’s why we have people 
from the poorest families turning out to be the most productive 
citizens, and individuals from the families that seem to be the 
most blessed turn out some hardened criminals. So there was an 
individual decision that took place there. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Having been a vocational teacher back in a different life, it 
always is something that interests me substantially because it’s 
one of those areas that provides employment opportunity. And 
if one of the concerns that we have is that the reason that people 
become incarcerated, and that’s because they were involved in a 
life of crime, is because maybe they weren’t given an 
opportunity to be productive members of society — and the 
vocational training is obviously a part of that — what kind of 
vocational training opportunities are provided, let’s say again, 
in the correctional centre in Saskatoon? And about how many 
hours would someone spend in that if they were there for, let’s 
say, two years less a day? 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In the specific example of the 
vocational shops and the kind of work that we may have 
inmates involved in, there are as I understand two shops that, in 
Saskatoon, two different programs that we may be able to work 
through. One is a woodworking operation, the other is metal. 
 
Obviously this isn’t perfect for all, all inmates. There are certain 
skills; people have to be adept with their hands and they have to 
be able to deal with this specifically. We do not have built into 
this — and part of it is because of the nature of the time that we 
have people in custody — there is not necessarily a certification 
process. 
 
The programs are focussed more on skills building. And 
obviously as well, it is not a case like we might be able to run 
through SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) or something that we would be more familiar with, 
where you go through the constant or a regular set of skills. 
This is very much dependent on the kind of work which is 
available within the . . . within vocational shops. 
 
So it varies a little bit in terms of what the specific skills are 
they will learn. But certainly the focus is on building the skills. 
And this is, in the example that you use, where we have 
somebody in for two years, obviously these skills that they 
would be able to gain would be more significant than somebody 
who’s in custody for perhaps only 12 or 13 months. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. So I need to take it from that, I 
think, that the vocational isn’t a key component of what 
happens there. 
 
You listed earlier on quite a number of programs, probably half 
a dozen to a dozen. Is it voluntary for inmates to become 
involved in those based on the advice they’re given? Does that 
affect how long they’re there? Or how is this organized for 
rehabilitation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — When an inmate is brought into 
custody, certainly one of the things that is done is an assessment 
of what kind of programming may assist him. 
 
Now in some cases these may be court ordered, in which case, 
participation is set out; there is no option here, but obviously 
participation is up to the individual. It is a case where . . . Let’s 
take as an example substance abuse. If this is one of the issues 
which it’s believed will assist the inmate in terms of dealing 
with their criminal behaviour and help rehabilitate them, 
certainly they are made available to this. 
 
It is, I think, important for the Assembly to recognize that one 
of the changes that we are looking at making through The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act is to change the way that 
we deal with remission for good behaviour, I guess is what it’s 
called. It I think is known at this point that basically the inmates 
are expected to serve two-thirds of their sentence before they’re 
eligible for . . . to have the remission. 
 
Under the new amendments, one of the changes that will be 
made is that they will be required to earn the time off, so that 
things like these programs that we’ve outlined — participation 
in them and completion of them — will be given more weight 
in terms of whether or not they are ready to return into the 

community. 
 
Obviously once the sentence is served — whether the inmate 
has undertaken any program or not — once the sentence is 
served, they are put back into the community, and this is a 
different set of issues that we deal with at that point. 
 
But for most of the situations we deal with, the programs are 
available and it is a long list of options available to them. 
Certainly one of the most significant ones though is the 
question of the substance abuse program and the anger 
management/violence issues. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And probably want to go into the 
substance abuse some time as well. 
 
You mentioned that the early release after two-thirds of the time 
was served is now going to be based on good behaviour. And I 
think that’s something that’s going to get a lot of support from 
the public. So it isn’t just, I can lounge around here and 
two-thirds is saved and out . . . I go out the back door. 
 
But I do have a question relating to that. Like I said, I believe it 
has public support. However is this going to then bring about 
the fact that you’re going to have individuals who have served 
two-thirds of the time but haven’t earned it because of good 
behaviour and therefore need to stay in longer, which has a lot 
of public support, however that will obviously then put stress on 
facilities and overcrowding and budget. 
 
Now have you been provided with a budget to deal with this 
and do we have the facilities to deal with this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The member is quite right that there is 
a potential here for it to put pressure on us in the facility 
management issues. However we believe that the changes to the 
Act, while also being popular within the community I think in 
terms of moving the correctional system closer to where the 
community thinks it should be, I think it also does put in place a 
set of incentives for those in custody to participate in the 
programs and earn the time off. 
 
I think it would be a rare circumstance where an inmate would 
look at simply serving their full sentence and not try to earn the 
remission. Undoubtably there will be exceptions and that is . . . 
I think we should just accept that there are some folks who will 
have that attitude and it’ll be hard to change. 
 
But we do believe the amendments will encourage participation 
and completion of these programs. And as a result, through 
rehabilitation, they’ll be better capable to deal with their 
situation when they return to the public. 
 
Is there a particular estimate as to how much additional pressure 
this will put on the budget? At this point it’s not believed to be 
significant. We do believe that we will continue to work 
through and we will be able to put the pressure on the inmates 
to participate in the programs and moving through to 
completion. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And dealing with the issue of sort 
of overcrowding and this sort of thing, in the correctional centre 
in Saskatoon when people come in there’s sort of a — and I’m 



April 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

 

not sure what the official word for it is — but there’s sort of a 
holding cell that has half a dozen or so cots in there and they’re 
held in that area till there’s room for them to find a room sort of 
for themselves. 
 
Two questions: what’s the average number of people that are in 
that particular cell on a per day basis and are there any 
programs available to them while they’re in that cell or do they 
have to wait till they get into a room? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The specific room that the member 
opposite refers to is generally used, as we understand, it tends to 
have its highest occupancy rates over the weekend, where 
people have been arrested and are held in basically a remand 
operation until such time as they can be . . . have their case . . . 
have the charges heard in court. So this is a very short amount 
of time that we would see having that kind of a multiple, 
potential for multiple, bunking. 
 
Certainly facility management issues are an issue that we’re 
going to need to deal with. In your particular case that the 
member opposite raises around Saskatoon, there are some 
questions about how we handle . . . We do have some 
dormitory-style operation there as opposed to single unit cells. 
These are for longer term stays. There is no doubt about this. 
 
I think we’re all familiar with the pressures which are here in 
Regina with the age of the facility that we’re dealing with as 
part of the Regina Correctional Centre. I can tell you that there 
are no particularly easy answers in terms of how we deal with 
this. 
 
And I think, on Tuesday night, the member opposite had some 
discussion about what was happening in other provinces. This is 
something all provinces are trying to grapple with in terms of 
how we handle the incarceration; how do we handle the amount 
of time people are required to stay. And there are various 
different issues. We have here a dormitory-style operation set 
up to a certain extent and we have . . . I mean there are a 
number of different options that could be looked at. But the 
member is quite right, that there are certainly capital pressures 
here. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I know the overcrowding is 
sort of a many-edged sword because we’re looking at do we 
need more facilities, there’s a cost for the facilities, does that 
money come out of policing, and this sort of thing. So the 
answers are not always, not always easy. 
 
I want to spend a little bit of time on basically security. A 
couple of years ago there was a fairly major breakout out of the 
. . . out of some of the centres. When one of those occurs, what 
sort of measures are taken to apprehend the individuals? For 
example how . . . because these are two-years-less-a-day 
individuals, is it sort of, well I’m here, you’re there; would you 
please just come sit down in the back of the car and I’ll take 
you back. Or is there some point where, you’re coming with me 
now or something fairly serious is going to happen to you. 
 
Like what amounts of force are the prison individuals allowed 
to take in order to apprehend an escapee and bring them back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well there isn’t a negotiation that goes 

on with these escapees. It’s not a case of we try and entice them 
back with . . . It is a case of once they have escaped the prison 
property certainly this is an issue where we will advise the 
police immediately in order to have the police participate in 
this. If the corrections officials however are able to see the 
incident occur, they are obliged to pursue in order to attempt to 
keep the inmate in custody. 
 
There are undoubtedly cases where the corrections officials do 
not see this, at which point once the unlawful absence is noted, 
the police are advised and we go through the normal process. 
This is fortunately not a common occurrence. It does happen 
from time to time and it is certainly a concern. But the 
corrections officials are responsible for making sure that if they 
do see inmates attempting to escape that they use reasonable 
force to keep them within custody. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — In that effort to apprehend an escapee, what 
other devices, sort of, are at their hand? I mean, do they 
availability of using dogs or firearms or what sorts of things? Or 
is it just again take them by the elbow and leading them home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The correctional officers do not carry 
sidearms and so they are not armed. However, they do have the 
other tools that are common in police work today, including 
restraint devices, and pepper spray is available. I think that 
certainly these are reasonable measures that they should be 
allowed to use and we would believe would be effective in 
helping to keep the inmates under control. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — One of the . . . the key program that you 
mentioned was substance abuse. And there was an article in the 
paper probably a month or three ago about a rather unpleasant 
incident in Prince Albert. 
 
What is the prevalence of drugs in prisons and what steps are 
being taken to decrease the prevalence of drugs in prisons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is certainly an issue which is of a 
concern to us and a concern to me. I certainly don’t want us to 
have any use of drugs within our facilities. Certainly there are 
cases though where this does occur and we are aware of some 
rather unpleasant situations in terms of the lengths that some 
inmates will go to obtain drugs. 
 
One of the sets of changes that we are proposing under The 
Correctional Services Act is for us to be able to move forward 
with urinalysis, which we think will be a very important tool for 
us to be able to make sure that where inmates are involved in 
substance abuse programs, that they are sticking to the 
programs and they are not taking in illegal substances. But this 
is an ongoing — an ongoing — challenge. 
 
The member will also be aware, and I think all members will be 
from reading the Bill, that there are additional measures in there 
which allow for enhanced search procedures of all people 
coming and going into the correctional facilities, including 
workers, visitors, and the inmates. 
 
So these are difficult measures. They are certainly tough 
measures. But I think that they respond to a very necessary and 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2002 

 

important issue that we have to try and deal with on a very 
serious measure within the correctional institutes. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think there’s a few 
directions that justice in Saskatchewan seems to be going down, 
that they need to probably go a whole lot further down there, 
but I want to sort of make sure that we support those initiatives. 
 
You mentioned earlier on that the checking on curfew, a lot 
more stringent than it used to be. You’re prepared to wake 
people up in the middle of the night to make sure that they’re 
there. Don’t be afraid to go a whole lot further down that road. 
 
When we’re talking about the drug abuse, we will go more into 
that on another day. I think the urinalysis that is in a piece of 
legislation I think is very necessary. And on another day we’ll 
need to discuss in much detail a possibility such as boot camps 
and some of those things to work toward rehabilitation. 
 
Having said that, it being well on into the afternoon at this time, 
I’d like to thank the minister for his participation in his first day 
here. I can assure him we’ll try to make it much more exciting 
the next time that he comes back with his officials. And thank 
you, too, to his officials. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate 
certainly the questions, the thoughtful questions, put forward by 
the member for Rosthern today. And the patience of members 
as we try to pull together a new department here. Obviously 
there are issues that we will return to the Assembly with more 
information on. 
 
I too look forward to the opportunity to have some discussion 
about what additional measures we may want to take. I 
appreciate the prelude to that discussion on Tuesday night 
during the . . . some of the member for Rosthern’s speech. 
 
And with that I’d just like to thank my officials for their help 
today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:54. 
 


