















































Hansard: May 03, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1153 
 May 3, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents of Carrot River Valley who 
are concerned about the government’s intentions with respect to 
long-term care fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the citizens of Hudson Bay and 
Prairie River. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan who are concerned about the fee 
increases in long-term care. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Peterson, city of Humboldt, the community of 
Cudworth, Naicam, and St. Benedict. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan regarding 
long-term care fees in the province. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, each of these signatures, and there are a number of 
them, are from the fine community of Elrose in the constituency 
of Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today by people who are concerned about tobacco 
legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found guilty of 
such an offence should be subject to a fine of not more than 
$100. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Kuroki, and Watson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning 
on behalf of citizens of my constituency who are concerned 
about the government’s changes to the crop insurance program. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Kinistino, Gronlid, Wakaw, and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of constituents concerned about overfishing 
at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The communities involved in the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
Esterhazy, Gerald, Churchbridge, Rocanville, Bangor, 
Tantallon, and Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with crop insurance 
premium rate hikes and reduced coverage. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Moose Jaw, Caronport, and Caron. 
 
I so present. 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I have a petition signed by residents from the 
community of Eastend concerning changes that were made to 
the recent . . . recently to the drug plan. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition this morning from concerned citizens of this 
province concerned about the changes to the prescription drug 
plan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from my constituency, namely the 
city of Estevan. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Francis, 
Weyburn, Lampman, and Odessa. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
the long-term care fees. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of the town of Bengough 
in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people who remain concerned about the issue of increasing 
long-term care fees. The prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for the 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the great 
city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
dealing with the same issue. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Girvin, Davidson, 
and Craik. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I have 
a petition from the citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the harmful effects of smoking in public places. And the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be found in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine 
of not more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the good people of 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increase in crop insurance 
premiums and the reduced coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the good citizens of Borden, Vanscoy, Cando, 
Radisson, and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition of citizens concerned about the extremely 
dangerous conditions of Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And again the petitioners demonstrate how well travelled this 
highway is. They are from Imperial, Simpson, Watrous, 
Nokomis, and Airdrie, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition in regard to the 
Besnard Lake situation, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 

And the signatures on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Lanigan, St. Gregor, Annaheim, Winnipeg, Saskatoon, and 
Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province concerned about the 
increases in long-term care homes. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Unity, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise with a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about crop insurance and where it’s going. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Eastend, Dollard, and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petition has 
been reviewed and is hereby received as an addendum to a 
previously tabled petition being sessional paper no. 17. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce and welcome school safety 
patrollers from across Saskatchewan seated in the east and west 
galleries. 
 
I had the pleasure earlier this year of declaring April 29 to May 
4 as School Safety Patrol Week, and CAA (Canadian 
Automobile Association) Saskatchewan, as part of that week, 
has a big jamboree here in Regina. And today we have over 180 
school safety patrollers and chaperones in the galleries. 
 
And what I’d like to do is introduce from the 22 communities 
represented by school safety patrollers and at the same time 
have their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) stand 
up. 
 
We have patrollers and chaperones from Carrot River — and 
would they stand, please. We have patrollers and chaperones 
from Estevan. We have patrollers and chaperones from 
Gravelbourg and Hudson Bay and Kindersley; Lanigan, 
Nokomis, Maidstone, Martensville, Moose Jaw, Nipawin, North 
Battleford. Prince Albert — we’ve got a big crowd from Prince 
Albert — and Regina, there we go. And Rosetown and Rouleau 
and Saskatoon, there we go; Strasbourg, Turtleford, Unity, 
Warman, Watrous, and Weyburn. 
 
Here we have our school safety patrollers and their MLAs, and 
I’d ask everyone in the Assembly to welcome them here this 
morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Minister of Learning in welcoming the school safety 
patrollers here, on behalf of the official opposition. We like to 
think we’re doing an important job here in the House, but we all 
know that you’re doing the important job and that that’s making 
sure students go safely to and from school. So welcome to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

(10:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly through 
you, a visitor from Aurora, Ontario who’s seated in your 
gallery. Her name is Carol Bohner and she has never visited the 
West before. This is her first visit west and of course her first 
visit to Saskatchewan. But we hope it won’t be the last and I 
hope all members will join with me in welcoming Carol to our 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce someone sitting in your gallery, Ms. Maureen Murray 
who works for CAA and does a tireless job in organizing the 
school patrol for the province. I’ve had the opportunity in my 
past life to work with Maureen on a number of committees 
dealing with traffic safety, whether it was school bus safety 
courses or a number of things. She’s a great promoter of safety 
in the province, and especially anywhere around the streets of 
our . . . streets and highways of our province. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome Maureen Murray. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women of Distinction Award Winners 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night at the 
Centre of the Arts, the Minister Responsible for the Status of 
Women, the Minister for Industry and Resources, the member 
from Regina Dewdney, and myself attended the 21st annual 
YWCA (Young Women’s Christian Association) dinner 
honouring the nominees and winners of the Regina Women of 
Distinction awards. 
 
Last evening was a celebration of women’s exemplary 
contributions to their communities. Also, this event is a major 
fundraiser for the vital programs sponsored by the Y. 
 
Just to be nominated, Mr. Speaker, is to be a winner but the 
awards last night went to the following: for arts and culture, a 
tie between Andorlie Hillstrom and Donna Lowe; the award for 
business, labour, and professions category went to Sandy 
Larson; the community or humanitarian service award was tied 
between Melissa Rezansoff and Wendy Sinclair. 
 
For her contributions to a rural community, Kim Engel was 
recognized; for health and wellness award, it was presented to 
Dr. Shannon MacNeill; and for a lifetime of worthy 
achievement in teaching, writing, and community involvement, 
Dr. Eleanor Bujea was applauded. 
 
Science and technology went to Heather Stanley; sports and 
recreation to Mart Kroupa of Esterhazy; and the Young Woman 
of Distinction was Crystal Clark, a young woman who is a 
friend of many of us here. 
 
Our congratulations to all nominees and to winners. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to join the member from Regina Wascana in 
recognizing the very important and prestigious event that took 
place in Regina last night, being the 21st annual Women of 
Distinction Awards taking place at the Centre of the Arts. 
 
Women from all over southern Saskatchewan, from all age 
groups and backgrounds, were recognized for their outstanding 
contributions to their professions and their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition attended this event 
along with the member from Humboldt, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, the member from Melfort-Tisdale, and 
myself. I understand that there were a few members from 
government present as well. 
 
I would like to acknowledge all of the winners of this most 
prestigious award. Mr. Speaker, the YWCA promotes women 
as equal partners in society and supports the economic, 
physical, and social well-being of women. It has been an 
important part of Regina and the surrounding community since 
1911. 
 
The YWCA has had a positive effect on the lives of many 
women and children, particularly those who have faced family 
violence. The Saskatchewan Party supports the YWCA’s efforts 
and congratulates all of the nominees and the award winners in 
each category. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Safety Patrol Jamboree 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
hon. colleague the Minister of Learning has proclaimed, as we 
have learned, the week of April 29 to May 4 as School Safety 
Patrol Week in the province. 
 
Throughout this week schools and communities throughout the 
province have recognized the more than 6,000 patrollers for 
their outstanding contribution to safety, the safety of their 
fellow students. 
 
As part of the activities, 185 school safety patrollers and 
chaperones have assembled in Regina for the kickoff of the 
Annual Provincial Safety Patrol Jamboree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event is hosted by CAA Saskatchewan and is 
the 12th such jamboree. Participants from 22 communities have 
enjoyed visits to the legislature, will be going to the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) training academy, IMAX 
theatre, and Science Centre. 
 
The RCMP tour, always a favourite for patrollers, includes a 
first-hand look at equipment and techniques used in emergency 
situations. Mr. Speaker, the tour also includes a demonstration 
from the Regina Police canine unit, which definitely shows the 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

 

patrollers how they take a bite out of crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CAA Saskatchewan has been sponsoring school 
patrols in the province for more than 50 years, and the success 
of safety patrol reflects on the teamwork and dedication of all 
the people involved. I am sure all the members of the Assembly 
join with me in saluting the efforts and appreciate the role of all 
these safety patrollers. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

2002 Relay for Life 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the launch of the 2002 Relay for Life took place at the Nipawin 
Credit Union April 9. Jean Eberle, a 43-year cancer survivor, 
was on hand to cut the ceremonial cake. Jean has also been 
named honorary chairperson for this event. 
 
The event is being held May 31 to June 1 in Nipawin. The 
Relay for Life is a 12-hour overnight relay with the purpose of 
raising funds for cancer research and support services for 
people living with cancer. 
 
Organizers are confident they will meet their goal of having 250 
to 300 people participate. If that goal is achieved, Mr. Speaker, 
funds raised would exceed $34,000. 
 
One hundred and fifty cancer survivors from the Northeast are 
expected to participate in the relay and almost 300 volunteers 
have been recruited. 
 
A highlight of the event will be the special luminary ceremony, 
in which candles surrounding the track will be lit in memory of 
persons who have succumbed to cancer and in celebration of 
those who have survived. Representatives of each of the 
10-member teams will continue to walk around the track 
throughout the night. There is a full night of activity planned 
while the relay is in process. 
 
I would also like to mention that Lorna and Gar Williams are 
co-chairpersons of the Nipawin Relay for Life. And I have 
heard from many people they have put a great deal of time and 
effort into making this a successful event. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in wishing the participants 
and the organizers of the 2002 Relay for Life all the best in their 
upcoming event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Aboriginal Diabetes Awareness Day 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today, May 3, is National 
Aboriginal Diabetes Awareness Day. 
 
One of the purposes of this day is to draw attention to the silent 
killer, a disease that affects thousands of people across this 
nation and within our province. Diabetes especially affects 
those within our First Nations communities — it being the 
number one killer amongst our Aboriginal people. 

Consequently, this day is for communities, for families, and for 
friends to join together to walk in the name of diabetes and to 
remember the ones who have passed on due to the effects of 
this disease. 
 
On this score, in Regina, the organization, Linking Voices, is 
working to promote a healthy lifestyle to prevent and manage 
type 2 diabetes. And tomorrow, Saturday, May 4, Linking 
Community Voices will be hosting a community walk in north 
central Regina. They invite everyone to support this day by 
running, biking, or rollerblading. 
 
And I had the privilege of taking part in this . . . in last year’s 
walk, Mr. Speaker, and I know from experience that the event 
coordinator, Tammy Mirasty, and the many volunteers put on 
an excellent event. And it’s time well spent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The seriousness of diabetes is often overlooked, as is the high 
rate by which our Aboriginal communities are affected. This is 
why today is a very important day. It is a day to recognize the 
danger of this disease. And I encourage the members of this 
Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan to get out there and 
support National Aboriginal Diabetes Awareness Day. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Safety Patrol Week 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, School 
Safety Patrol Week is wrapping up in Saskatchewan. And all 
across the province, schools and communities have been 
recognizing the important work done by local safety patrollers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past week, more than 6,000 patrollers have 
been honoured for their outstanding contribution to ensuring the 
safety of their fellow students. Their tireless hard work and 
dedication to ensuring everyone’s safety is indeed something to 
be proud of and all members of this House salute them. 
 
One of the highlights, Mr. Speaker, of School Safety Patrol 
Week is the annual provincial jamboree hosted by CAA 
Saskatchewan. This year marks the 12th annual jamboree. Over 
the past couple of days, the city of Regina has grown by 185 
young people and their chaperones who’ve descended upon our 
fair city to enjoy some of the sights and sounds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, jamboree participants representing 22 
communities across the province have visited the RCMP 
Training Academy, the IMAX theatre, and the Science Centre. 
And of course, no visit to Regina would be complete without a 
stop at the legislature and we welcome you all here today. 
 
This year also marks the 50th year that CAA Saskatchewan has 
sponsored school patrols in the province and we applaud them 
for their continued support for our young people. Again, a 
special salute to school safety patrollers across Saskatchewan 
and a big thank you for all your hard work right throughout the 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

Melville Legion Members Victorious 
in National Competition 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One week ago, I 
was pleased to stand and introduce in your gallery four 
distinguished gentlemen from Melville Legion No 61 who were 
travelling to Quebec for the Royal Canadian Legion national 
cribbage tournament. 
 
Well this Friday, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that 
Dan Hobbs, Harry Parachoniak, Al Miller, Bill Barmby, all 
from Melville, have returned from Quebec and they have 
returned victorious. These . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — These four men . . . These four men placed 
third at the Royal Canadian Legion national cribbage 
tournament in Laval, Quebec. In all, they managed the mental 
stamina and physical endurance of 18 games over three days to 
claim the third day prize. 
 
And I have reliable sources, Mr. Speaker, who tell me that, 
although they are back, they have already reclaimed their seats 
in the Legion lounge and are practising for next year’s nationals 
in Abbotsford, British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would welcome and ask all members to help me 
and congratulate these four fine gentlemen from Melville 
Legion No 61 in Melville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Response to United States Trade Sanctions 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture now 
is not the only sector of our economy under attack by unfair US 
(United States) trade measures. 
 
Yesterday, a US panel voted to go ahead with a 27 per cent 
tariff on softwood lumber exports. Our lumber industry could 
be devastated by this action. Our agricultural industry could be 
devastated by the new US farm subsidies and yet, the federal 
government has been slow to respond because these trade 
actions might — and will definitely — affect Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for Western Canada to develop an 
unprecedented, united front. Today I am proposing that in 
response to these attacks on our farming and forestry industries, 
that Saskatchewan should host a conference of all Western 
premiers and opposition leaders to develop a common position 
to propose to Ottawa on these two major trade issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have made the Premier aware of this initiative 
prior to question period, and I ask, will he support this 
initiative? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — On the absence of the Premier, I’d 
like to respond to the member’s question. He did, as he 

indicated, give us a copy of the resolution that they were 
proposing to put before the House, as it relates to his comments, 
just a couple of minutes before question period. 
 
I indicated to their House leader that we wanted to have the 
opportunity to have a look at the resolution, that I felt it was a 
potential strategy that we could use, that we would look at it. 
 
I haven’t had time to share the contents of this with my 
colleagues. I had indicated that we would be willing to look at 
the potential for such a motion on Monday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make 
a good argument for the case: imagine the power of speaking to 
Ottawa with the united voice from all four Western provinces, 
all four governments, all four opposition parties speaking with 
one voice against the unfair US attacks on our major industries? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our agriculture and forestry industries are both 
under attack, our province is under attack, and in fact, our entire 
region is under attack. Ottawa must respond. If these trade 
actions primarily affected Ontario or Quebec, I’m sure they 
would respond; but individually they find the Western 
provinces easier to ignore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have notified the government that immediately 
after question period, I will move an emergency motion calling 
for this special conference of government and opposition 
members from all four Western provinces. Will the government 
please support this action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as we all know, these are serious questions for the 
province and in fact for the country. 
 
And let me just give the member some indications of what’s 
been taking place on the softwood lumber issue. The member, I 
think, will know that there has been a united front on the part of 
provinces and territories and the federal government in 
proceeding with the Americans. There was every effort made to 
find a solution prior to the recent deadline. That was 
unsuccessful because the Americans refused to respond in any 
positive way. 
 
We have legal actions before the WTO (World Trade 
Organization) and NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement), where we have won before and where we expect to 
win again, in particular at the WTO, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the meantime, there are significant challenges for our 
industry, and that’s why many have been calling on the federal 
government to respond . . . to protect workers and to protect 
mill owners across the country. 
 
We have significant investments with Aboriginal people in the 
North. This is a serious problem. We’re working on it together 
with the Minister of Foreign Trade who has been, I might say, a 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

 

very strong supporter of the Saskatchewan position. 
 
We have to be united — we will be united. And the member is 
right that we need to be united on agriculture as well. And my 
belief, Mr. Speaker, is that we are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, the 
Minister of Justice has accurately reported that things have 
deteriorated over the past day as the softwood lumber ruling 
came out yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will provide any 
assistance that we can in putting together this conference. In 
fact, we have already started to make calls to ministers and 
opposition members in the other provinces. We are prepared to 
work with the government on this effort. 
 
The new US farm subsidies and the softwood lumber tariffs are 
a major threat, not only to these two industries but to our entire 
economy. 
 
Is the Premier working with the other Western premiers to 
develop a united front? Has he spoken to other Western 
premiers since the US farm Bill issue and the softwood lumber 
panel ruling came forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think as the 
member knows, the departments of the government — 
Agriculture, Government Affairs, the Premier — have been in 
contact with ministers and with the Prime Minister and with 
other ministers across the country. 
 
This is not a matter, Mr. Speaker, that comes as a huge surprise, 
and so people have been discussing these questions and 
responses over the last months. That will continue, Mr. Speaker 
— an effective strong and united force is being generated as it 
is in the softwood lumber issue, Mr. Speaker. And I think the 
member can be assured that every single effort will be made by 
this government to make sure that the lumber industry and the 
agricultural sector in this province is being protected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 
the minister’s answer. But I particularly would like to know, in 
light of the fact that the panel ruling on softwood lumber came 
out yesterday, and of course, the US farm Bill went through 
approval the day before, has the Premier contacted the four 
Western premiers since the softwood lumber dispute ruling 
occurred? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There have 
been constant and continued discussion about this matter across 
not only Western Canada but across the country. The member 
mentioned that if this was a matter for Ontario and Quebec, 
then it would be a serious matter for the federal government. 
Mr. Speaker, it is a matter for Ontario and Quebec as well as for 

all of us. 
 
And ministers will be meeting on Monday, Mr. Speaker, to 
discuss the impact on the . . . from the US farm Bill. I think the 
member should be assured that we are working on this with full 
diligence. We look forward to the support of the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will keep them fully informed and we look 
forward to a united response in dealing with this question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t quite 
clear on the minister’s answer but it sounds hopeful. Did the 
Premier not only speak with the four Western premiers, but 
premiers of Quebec and Ontario since the softwood lumber 
panel ruling occurred? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know 
that there has been communication with the Prime Minister’s 
office and there has been constant communication with other 
. . . with the other provincial governments at a number of levels, 
and we’ll endeavour to deal with the specific question the 
member asks after question period. 
 
I’m not exactly sure, but we know there’s been continued 
pressure across the piece from the Minister of Agriculture here, 
from the Minister of Government Relations, and many other 
departments too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate 
the minister’s answer. Mr. Speaker, our federal government 
can’t simply sit in Ottawa and take this urgent matter lightly. 
They need to consider all the options and develop an 
appropriate response. 
 
Obviously, they must find new money to defend Western 
agriculture. And they also need to consider some form of trade 
retaliation against the US. These are options that need to be 
very carefully considered at this special conference so that all of 
Western Canada can speak to Ottawa with one strong and one 
united voice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time to simply . . . it’s time to go beyond 
simply asking the federal government what they’re going to do. 
It’s time for the West to come together and decide what we 
think they should do. Will the Premier take our suggestion and 
work with the other Western provinces to develop a united 
position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to tie this to the 
softwood lumber issue is an issue in which not only Western 
premiers and Western economies and Western provinces have 
got together but all have. I think the member makes a valuable 
point that if we had a Western position we could be much 
stronger, not only in Ottawa but also with the Americans. 
 
I might ask the member that . . . if he has any influence at all 
with his colleagues in Alberta to develop a consistent Western 
strategy, that would be very helpful, Mr. Speaker, because that 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

is the one place where we do not get a united Western front, Mr. 
Speaker. Because the Alberta government treats these things 
very much differently than we just mentioned — the Wheat 
Board and a number of other, a number of other issues. 
 
But every effort will be made to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we 
do have a united front to deal with the Americans and with the 
federal government. And as I understand, Mr. Speaker, the 
Agriculture ministers are meeting again on Monday. 
 
I might say, if the member has any ability to pull together his 
colleagues in the other Western provinces in opposition or those 
who are more favourable to his point of view, perhaps he could 
do that. And then we could have a united front. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would assure 
the minister that we have already begun making calls to our 
colleagues, both government and opposition in other provinces. 
And the initial responses are very positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian government is now challenging the 
US softwood lumber tariffs, as the minister indicated, through 
the World Trade Organization. One idea that has been proposed 
is that the federal government pay the tariffs until the challenge 
is considered by the WTO, and if the Canadian challenge is 
successful, the money would be refunded so that the 
government would not actually lose anything. However there 
has been no word yet that the federal government is prepared to 
act on this proposal. And the new softwood lumber tariffs take 
effect this May 23. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the kind of options that need to be 
considered. And, Mr. Speaker, this could be considered at a 
special conference of Western premiers and opposition leaders. 
 
Will the Premier join with us in calling for this conference and 
developing a strong and united response to these unfair US 
trade attacks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House 
and to the members opposite today that there has been an 
extensive engagement in what happens with the trade injury and 
with the issues as they relate to disparity with our united . . . 
with our American friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a quarterly basis the premiers of Western 
Canada get together for a discussion about a whole range of 
issues. So they come together to discuss softwood lumber; they 
come together to discuss trade; they come together to discuss 
agriculture. They talk about what the common front should be 
when they go to Ottawa to negotiate with the federal 
government around a variety of different fronts. So we have a 
mechanism today where the premiers are involved in that 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Along with the motion on the agricultural piece today, Mr. 
Speaker, which is tragic not only for Saskatchewan but for 
Canada, our Premier has already communicated a message to 
the Prime Minister in correspondence, and saying to the Prime 

Minister’s Office the kind of devastating issues that this creates 
for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
So there should be no motion today, Mr. Speaker. 
Intergovernmental affairs offices and departments across the 
nation come together on a regular basis, led by our member, and 
they talk about all of the international trade issues that affect us 
and what strategy Canada and Saskatchewan needs to use to 
advance our positions. 
 
So there are many mechanisms today in place that our province 
is engaged in with various different departments and ministries 
to proceed with that process. And we’ll continue, Mr. Speaker, 
to take those issues on, front and centre, as they affect 
Saskatchewan and Canadian communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With all due 
respect to the Deputy Premier, I think that the escalation of the 
American trade actions call for something more than regular 
quarterly meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that the West needs to make a strong 
stand and underscore the importance of the US farm Bill on our 
major industry of agriculture and on the panel ruling on 
softwood lumber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan 
whether or not he agrees that a special meeting to deal with 
these two particular issues as soon as possibly could be 
convened by not only the four Western premiers, but also the 
four opposition leaders of the Western provinces to speak 
strongly to Ottawa and to have repercussions in the United 
States that we mean business, this is a serious matter, we are not 
going to take this matter lying down. 
 
Will the Deputy Premier respond? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we should not assume for a 
minute that the issue that we’re facing today in Canada with . . . 
as it relates to the grains and oilseeds is somehow immune to 
the kinds of issues that we’re faced with across Canada today as 
it relates to the WTO. 
 
And what we have on a regular basis, Mr. Speaker, today — 
and I assure the members opposite, I assure the member 
opposite today — our Premier, ministers on this side of the 
House, are engaged every day, Mr. Speaker, with the national 
government in terms of how we deal with the issues at it relates 
to the WTO — every day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this isn’t a Saskatchewan issue alone, or a western 
Canadian issue, Mr. Speaker. Last year in Canada we almost 
. . . we had a challenge on the tomato industry out of Ontario. 
And a challenge on the tomato industry out of British 
Columbia. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, we had a challenge on the softwood 
lumber. 
 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

 

And last year, Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert . . . or the PEI, 
Prince Edward Island economy, the potato economy was almost 
destroyed completely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not a Western Canadian issue, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
national issue at which provincial premiers, the federal 
government, and ministers are all engaged in making a 
difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do not 
doubt for a minute that the Government of Saskatchewan and 
other provincial governments and even those governments 
beyond Western Canada have been on an ongoing basis dealing 
with these issues. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the Deputy Premier that it’s 
right now that the country is focused on these issues. It’s right 
now that the national news is discussing what we’re going to do 
about the US farm Bill and how we’re going to respond to the 
softwood trade panel ruling. Mr. Speaker, it’s now that we need 
to respond strongly and to move our case forward. 
 
And so I would call on the Deputy Premier to agree that this 
conference would add our voice of support for our industries of 
agriculture and forestry at a crucial time, a critical time, to have 
it impact on the decisions and the actions that will be taken by 
our federal government and the possibilities of being more 
successful. 
 
Will the Deputy Premier agree with this argument? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t disagree 
with the member opposite on the approach to engage Canadians 
today in the discussion about the importance of a . . . of 
mitigating the kinds of issues that we’re dealing with at the 
World Trade table. I’m not discouraging that at all, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, on this side of the House, 
governments across Canada today are fully engaged with the 
federal government in discussions as they relate to the World 
Trade negotiations — and for mitigation and trade injury, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re all engaged at that process today. 
 
And we have extensive documentation today from each of the 
provinces on a variety of different commodities, on a variety of 
different industries in Canada that are affected by the WTO and 
by the disparity that we think exists between the Europeans and 
the Americans and Canada. We have that on the table on a 
regular basis, Mr. Speaker, and those consultations are going on 
as we speak here today. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you need to too engage like 
we are. We need to engage in Canada today. We need to engage 
in Canada today, all political leaders, Mr. Speaker. And I say to 
the members opposite, if in fact you can get your . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Deputy 
Premier knows, we have asked for federal cabinet ministers to 
come to this province and to meet with us to discuss these 
issues. And they’re wondering whether or not we’re really 
serious about the matter. They’re wondering whether we’re 
united or whether we’re just playing politics. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity, if we bring together the 
four Western governments and the four leaders of the 
opposition, to have NDP (New Democratic Party) 
representatives in place, to have the Saskatchewan Party 
involved, to have the Liberal government in British Columbia 
involved, to have the Leader of the Progressive Conservatives, 
the Leader of the Opposition in Manitoba involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the opportunity to make a very strong 
statement to the federal government that we’re prepared to work 
co-operatively with them to solve some problems that are of 
vital importance to the economy of Saskatchewan and to the job 
creation of this province. 
 
Will the Deputy Premier agree that this should be a first 
priority, we should have the emergency debate, and we should 
call on this conference to occur at its earliest possible 
convenience? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House we 
did again recognize some unprecedented action in terms of 
where opposition parties and government come together to 
recognize the importance and significance of an issue of how it 
not only impacts Saskatchewan but how it impacts Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re all acting on this process today. We’ve now 
requested that the federal ministers from the four different 
departments come to our province, have a conversation in our 
province — and I understand that one of the ministers is in our 
gallery today, Mr. Speaker — to listen to what this debate is all 
about, and to say to us in the next little while that they will be 
here, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the kinds of issues that we’re 
going to present before them and to take back to the national 
table, so that they can go forward into the international arena to 
negotiate the kinds of issues, Mr. Speaker, of which we’re all 
concerned about today. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s motion out of this 
resolution that we . . . or the day before, Mr. Speaker, was not 
about only but most importantly for Saskatchewan, but it’s 
about the effect that we have that this particular trade Bill and 
the injustice that exists today in the trade disparities that we 
have are Canadian issues, Mr. Speaker — that’s what I thought 
that exercise was about. 
 
And so we’ll continue with the members opposite to work 
together, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that our federal government 
understands the kinds of pressures that we have in Canada and 
in Saskatchewan. 
 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re not disagreeing with the comments that are made by the 
Deputy Premier. What we’re trying to underscore is that we 
need to take more immediate action and stronger action and 
more unified action to speak with the federal government and to 
make an impression upon the Americans that what is happening 
is not acceptable, that we will not take it lying down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back on March 23 — even before this panel ruling 
on softwood lumber was finalized — the mayor of Prince 
Albert, Don Cody, said that this duty would spell disaster not 
only for Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan but all of 
Saskatchewan. A domino effect would take place as more and 
more people leave the province to find work elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an urgent matter. We know we need to 
create jobs and strengthen our economy in Saskatchewan. And 
we know that the softwood lumber ruling will have the opposite 
effect. And it’s going to come into effect on May 23. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from farm leaders the 
importance of a response to the US farm Bill. Will the Deputy 
Premier agree that calling a conference of the four Western 
premiers and the leaders of the four official oppositions at its 
earliest convenience would be a very positive step to move this 
argument along? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I think yesterday or the day 
before in this Assembly, we recognized the importance of 
collegially working together in bringing about some changes 
that exist today in our international trade rules. And that when 
the member opposite talks about urgency, absolutely there’s a 
tremendous amount of urgency as it relates today to the 
agricultural file. 
 
And on Monday, Mr. Speaker — or Sunday night — we’re 
arriving in Ottawa. We’re going to be meeting with all of the 
Canadian agricultural ministers from each of the provinces; 
we’re going to have Mr. Vanclief at our table. And we’re going 
to be talking front and centre right about this very issue, Mr. 
Speaker. So the urgency and the immediate action on this issue 
is happening within two or three days after which time we 
raised this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we already have seen, Mr. Speaker, in my view, some 
movement on the part of the federal government in terms of 
addressing this issue. Today, Mr. Speaker, I read and hear that 
Mr. Vanclief is engaging a conversation with the US trade folks 
to have a conversation exactly about this very issue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I hear that the federal government is giving recognition, Mr. 
Speaker, to take a look at trade injury. For the first time now . . . 
In the past several months I’ve not heard the federal 
government say that they’re prepared to make any kind of 
difference on trade injury. Today I’m reading that they’re 
prepared to make some indication, Mr. Speaker, of trade injury. 
 
So just, just by making that kind of intervention over the last 

couple of days in this House and the work that we’ve done 
collectively as agriculture ministers and ministers of the Crown 
in various different provinces, we’re beginning to see some 
movement, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to continue to work 
on that effort, both from the opposition’s perspective and ours, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Deputy 
Premier knows, Canada is a vast and diverse country and the 
federal government has to deal with competing interests and 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the federal government wants to deal 
as constructively and as strongly on this issue as they possibly 
can because an attack on the agriculture sector in Canada and an 
attack on the lumber and softwood industry in Canada hurts us 
nationally as well as it hurts us provincially. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to give the federal government all the 
support and all of the reason to act that we possibly can. And so 
I ask, one more time — our time in this question period is about 
to expire — I ask the Deputy Premier: will he and will his 
government agree to work with the official opposition in 
convening a conference as soon as possible amongst the four 
Western premiers and the four leaders of the opposition to work 
on a plan and a strategy to help the federal government to 
counteract the unfair trade practices by the United States? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to state to the House and to the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the House, and with the official 
opposition, when you just look back at what’s happened here in 
the past two and a half years, Mr. Speaker, you will see that 
there’s been a tremendous amount of co-operation on various 
different fronts. 
 
On this very Assembly of the House, Mr. Speaker, not more 
than two years ago, we had a delegation that we led to Ottawa 
collectively, Mr. Speaker. Just a couple of days ago, we have 
the resolution, Mr. Speaker, that’s passed unanimously by this 
House — the opposition and the government — to Ottawa 
requesting that we work collectively to make a difference in 
Canada on trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I recall personally, Mr. Speaker, on two occasions that I’ve 
travelled to Ottawa with the previous member from Kindersley, 
the Agriculture critic, where we talked about the kinds of trade 
injury that needs to happen. 
 
There should be no doubt here, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government and this opposition from time to time have worked 
very, very hard collectively to make a difference. And this isn’t 
going to change today, Mr. Speaker, and collectively we’re 
going to work for Canadians in this province to make a 
difference in the way in which we need to and be approaching 
our federal government for the kind of support that we need to 
make a difference. 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like today to introduce to you and through you to 
all members of the House a guest in our gallery, a guest that I 
would want to say I’m very pleased to welcome here today. 
He’s a former member of this legislature. He is now the 
Government House Leader. The Hon. Ralph Goodale has joined 
us here this morning to hear the discussion. 
 
And so on behalf of all members of the House, I’d like to very 
much welcome him to the legislature. Welcome back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Rosetown-Biggar 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — As you might guess, Mr. Speaker, also 
with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would too like 
to join, on behalf of the official opposition, in welcoming the 
federal minister from Saskatchewan, Mr. Goodale, to the 
Assembly. We appreciate his interest in the matters that are 
under discussion here in the House and that he would take the 
time to sit in the gallery and watch. I think that’s an excellent 
sign. 
 
I had the opportunity to serve with Mr. Goodale, of course 
again on opposite sides of the House, but I can assure this 
Assembly that Mr. Goodale was always concerned about 
agricultural issues when he served as Agriculture minister in the 
House of Commons. And I think it’s a good sign that he’s in the 
House today and we welcome you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from North Battleford on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you. By leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
join with my colleagues in taking this opportunity to welcome 
Saskatchewan’s representative in the federal cabinet. 
 
And this does indeed demonstrate that if we are to make a 
progress on the very serious issues facing our province and our 
nation, it will require the best efforts and best will of members 

of all political parties. And I think that is being demonstrated in 
this House today and by Mr. Goodale’s presence. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Permission for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery today 
there’s a group from the town of Davidson — a youth group 
from the United Church lead by my constituency assistant, Mr. 
Clark Puckett. Mr. Puckett had set up last fall a youth activities 
within the church to encourage youth activities, such as to come 
to here and to view the legislature today, and different 
activities. They go out through Regina today. They’re going to 
visit some other spots, I believe. 
 
I’d like to introduce them. They’re Drew, Mitch, Tara, Derek, 
Shannon, Jessie, Crystal, Shandra, Matt and Ashley Lockwood, 
and Ashley McNabb. And also helping Clark today is his wife 
and his daughter, Tarah. 
 
So to you and through you I’d like to welcome them here today 
and I hope they enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a motion 
of urgent and pressing necessity under rule no. 46. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Before Orders of the Day, Mr. 
Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move that the Assembly 
move to item 1 under Private Bills and then revert back to 
government business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move Bill 
No. 301, The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan 
Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I stand today 
to respond to written questions no. 146 and 147 on behalf of the 
government and to table responses. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 146 and 147 have been tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I wish to 
convert for debates returnable both questions 148 and 149. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 148 and 149 converted to motions 
for return debatable. 
 
(11:00) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Liquor Consumption Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Liquor 
Consumption Tax Amendment Tax, 2002. This Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, will amend The Liquor Consumption Tax Act to raise 
the liquor consumption tax rate. This was announced during the 
March 27 budget address and the rate will increase from 7 per 
cent to 10 per cent effective April 2, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the liquor consumption tax rate has not been 
amended since April 1991, at which time it was in fact 
decreased from 10 per cent to 7 per cent and now it’s going 
back up to 10 per cent. It was decreased in 1991 because the 
government of that day wished to harmonize Saskatchewan’s 
sales tax with the GST (goods and services tax) and they 
lowered the tax rate in anticipation of harmonization which was 
then cancelled by the NDP government which was subsequently 
elected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you may recall, the people of Saskatchewan 
spoke out and made it clear that they did not want to harmonize 
their taxes with the federal government’s. However when the 
harmonization initiative was abandoned by the New Democratic 
Party government in October 1991, the liquor consumption tax 
rate remained at 7 per cent. 
 
By returning the liquor consumption tax rate to 10 per cent we 
will generate an additional $15.6 million annually. This much 
needed revenue will help us to continue to fund priority areas 
like health care and education. So, Mr. Speaker, I move that an 
Act to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax Act be read a 
second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s never a good day when governments raise taxes. I 
don’t think there is a taxpayer across the province of 
Saskatchewan that applauds whenever he hears . . . he or she 
hears that taxes are going up. So again, Mr. Speaker, this is 
another one of those days when the governments are raising 
taxes. 
 

You know, there must be other solutions, Mr. Speaker, to the 
problems of financing a government other than simply reaching 
again and again and again into the pockets of taxpayers. Mr. 
Speaker, those pockets are not bottomless. The fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, the hoteliers and the tavern keepers of this province 
are concerned that this tax will help their . . . will hurt their 
industry. Quite a number of them, Mr. Speaker, are struggling 
as we speak. They do not have limitless resources that the 
government seems to think they have. Neither do their 
customers, Mr. Speaker, have limitless resources. 
 
And they believe . . . they feel that this increase in taxation will 
mean that there will be fewer customers in their establishments 
and those customers will make fewer purchases that do attend, 
Mr. Speaker. So in the long run it may very well have a 
negative impact on the government’s finances rather than a 
positive impact. 
 
Now we do have a concern, Mr. Speaker, when you find a 
situation where people who consume alcohol drive and we in no 
way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker, encourage that activity. If 
having fewer people consume alcohol means fewer people are 
drinking and driving then that would be an overall benefit for 
society. But that’s not an argument that’s being put forward in 
this case, Mr. Speaker, by the government. 
 
This is simply another tax grab and, Mr. Speaker, that in itself is 
another sad day for Saskatchewan. The hoteliers, the tavern 
keepers, Mr. Speaker, wish to have time to consider the impact 
this is going to have on their establishments and, Mr. Speaker, 
have time to talk to the government about that impact. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Tobacco Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise also 
to move second reading of The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 
2002. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite just said that nobody 
ever likes tax increases and I think that’s true. 
 
But I’d like to point out to the House that when we were talking 
to people before the budget many reasonable and fair-minded 
people in the province felt that we needed to put more money 
into health care and education, and many of those people told us 
that if we needed to find extra revenue somewhere, that the 
liquor taxes and the tobacco taxes would be the first places that 
they would look to. And that’s what we have tried to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in recent years there has been a growing 
concern among health professionals over the harmful effects of 
tobacco and the need to introduce strong measures to reduce 
tobacco consumption, particularly among our youth. This 
Assembly has recognized these concerns and we responded last 
year with an all-party special committee report on tobacco 
control. This report led to the implementation earlier this year 
of The Tobacco Control Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill takes another major step to further 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

 

reduce tobacco use by implementing the largest tobacco tax 
increase in the history of Saskatchewan. This measure will be 
particularly effective in helping to reduce tobacco usage among 
younger people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final report of the Special Committee on 
Tobacco Control recommended the adoption of a 
comprehensive tobacco reduction strategy aimed particularly at 
young people. 
 
The purchase of tobacco is price-sensitive, and we believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that the tobacco tax increases announced in this Bill 
will result in about a 20 per cent decrease in tobacco purchases 
in this fiscal year alone. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, will contribute greatly to the Tobacco 
Control Committee’s stated goal of decreasing the percentage 
of tobacco users by 50 per cent over five years and by another 
50 per cent in the following five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill increases the tax on cigarettes from 8.6 
cents per cigarette to 16 cents per cigarette, and the tax on loose 
tobacco from 7.7 cents per gram to 16 cents per gram. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, this Bill increases the tax on expensive cigars from a 
maximum of $2.50 per cigar to a maximum tax of $5 per cigar. 
 
The changes contained within the Bill, Mr. Speaker, are 
expected to yield an additional $60.5 million in tobacco tax 
revenue in the upcoming fiscal year which will help fund 
priority areas like health and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Tobacco Tax Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act Bill, 2002, Bill No. 31, is an 
issue again, that as my colleague talked about, about the liquor 
consumption tax, is just another . . . is another tax. 
 
I was quite interested to hear the minister’s speaking notes 
towards the Bill. And it was quite interesting that he was . . . it 
really, to me, it sounded like he was trying to balance two 
competing issues. 
 
He mentioned the fact that, you know, prior to the budget that 
they were going to have to bring in more revenue into this 
province, and one of the ways was to increase not only the 
liquor consumption tax, but also the tobacco tax because they 
found themselves in a very tight budget situation. We’ve 
already been through that a number of times in this House, how 
the budget really is, is, is if, at anything, a very slim, balanced 
budget. But when you look at all the numbers it really isn’t. It 
isn’t a balanced budget. 
 
But he’s talking about bringing money in on one hand, but he’s 
also then justifying the Bill on the fact that it’s going to 
decrease the amount of people using tobacco products. You 
know I’d be very interested to know: which one is it? Are they 
looking at it for a revenue generator, to balance their budget, or 
are they really looking at it — which I would think would be 
the proper way of looking at it — as a way of decreasing the 

amount of tobacco use in the province? 
 
But that’s not how the minister started his speech. He said that 
because we are looking to increase the revenue in our province, 
this is one way. He finished off his speech by mentioning that 
he anticipates it increasing the revenue of our province by $60.5 
million extra taxation brought in from these products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hesitate, if a government is looking at 
using this as a revenue generator, and at the same time hoping it 
decreases the use of tobacco — be it in cigarettes or loose 
tobacco, i.e., Copenhagen — that he could use both of them. 
Because if he’s using it as a way of reducing the usage, he can’t 
also then depend on the revenue that it’s going to be bringing 
in. He’s getting himself boxed into a corner here dependent on 
revenue of something that he’s trying to reduce the use of. And 
it just doesn’t fit. 
 
Definitely when you look at health issues and some of the 
health issues in our province and the health budget, tobacco 
usage can be a huge problem. And it does create increased 
expense and increased burden on the health care system. 
 
I really truly believe over the last number of years that people 
are realizing the problem that tobacco has caused. But it’s 
interesting, you know, 30 years ago when people started 
smoking, I don’t think too many people realized that it could be 
a burden on their health. Definitely they’ve got to this point and 
are having perhaps trouble quitting, and now they’re getting it 
. . . forced to pay more tax to support a government that 
unfortunately over the last 10 years has created no new growth 
in the province to help strengthen their budget. 
 
They look at the old measures to try and bring in revenue, i.e., 
fuel, in liquor consumption, and tobacco tax. But unfortunately, 
had they looked at it over the long term and said had we been a 
little more co-operative with growth, had we done a little bit 
more on creating a business climate in this province, perhaps 
these so-called sin taxes would not have to be hit so hard, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I guess in closing, I would certainly agree if they’re looking 
at it to reduce the usages, but I’d really question when they are 
looking at it to balance a budget. 
 
So right now, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
31. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today as 
well to move second reading of The Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2001 will long be remembered in history as a very 
traumatic year due to the events of September 11. These events 
triggered a global downturn in an already slowed economy. 
This downturn was severely felt at home here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatchewan, a stalled global economy was felt even more 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

when combined with a devastating drought that affected more 
than 60 per cent of the province, lower oil prices, and the 
ongoing softwood lumber dispute, not to mention the American 
farm Bill. 
 
While it appears that the economy is recovering, we’ve now 
been hit with an even worse American farm Bill, and it will take 
a number of years to regain the growth we experienced in the 
1990s. This year forecasters are predicting economic growth of 
1.6 per cent this year and 3.2 per cent in 2003. 
 
The downturn of 2001 is forcing the government to amend two 
sections of The Fiscal Stabilization Act. The amendments are 
quite simple, really. They would allow access to monies saved 
in previous years and help smooth out recent fiscal fluctuations. 
These funds are necessary to continue to provide services to the 
public without imposing excessive tax increases. 
 
Presently, Mr. Speaker, under the legislation as it stands, the 
government would be required to leave $298 million in a 
savings account at the end of this fiscal year even if there were 
public needs. Mr. Speaker, we do not think that is a reasonable 
requirement under the circumstances. No other government in 
Canada has this requirement and it is not appropriate in difficult 
times. 
 
(11:15) 
 
The choice we have is to draw down our savings or to cut 
services or to increase taxes. Mr. Speaker, we believe the 
reasonable thing to do is to draw down our savings. That’s what 
we’re going to do. We’re not in favour of increasing taxes other 
than the liquor and tobacco taxes at the present time, and we 
believe that it would not be appropriate to cut health, education 
or our plan to fix the highways. 
 
So we’d like to use some of those savings in this time of 
difficulty. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that most reasonable and 
fair-minded people will think that that is the appropriate thing 
to do at this time. So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, it’s interesting 
that the minister is standing in the House today to amend an Act 
concerning the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, a fund which does not 
exist, never has existed, but the minister seems to want to 
amend it. 
 
And as the . . . as the Saskatchewan Party has stated for a 
number of years, and now the media has picked up on the fact 
that this Fiscal Stabilization Fund does not have any money in it 
and never has had any money in it and this is just a way for the 
provincial government to pretend that they have balanced their 
budget. 
 
And it is true, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has gone and is 
going through some rough economic times, but I believe that 
the Saskatchewan people realize what the government is doing 
and saying with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and they, quite 
frankly, understand that there is no money in the savings 
account. 

The government now, two years in a row, has borrowed money, 
raised the overall debt of the province, and they pretend that 
they have never ran a deficit budget. And it’s just not true, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As we know, in 7 out of the other 10 provinces plus the federal 
government do not have a fiscal stabilization so-called fund on 
their books; they report their revenue and their deficits and 
surplus as they stand. So that everyone not only in the province 
of the taxpayers but also the banking community, the money 
markets where governments have to go to get a favourable 
credit rating, which is very important to the amount of tax that 
the provincial government would have to pay on debt that is 
owed to the money market . . . and we have talked to banking 
institutions and when they looked at the provincial 
government’s budget and the books and how . . . concerning the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, they do not take that into account at 
all. 
 
They have told us in meetings with the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus that when they look at the Saskatchewan budget in the 
last two years, they consider it a deficit budget and look at their 
credit ratings according to what they feel is actually taking 
place. And as we know, the government is running a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very important that the government 
rearrange its bookkeeping style, let’s say, and really make it 
very clear to everyone concerned — the people of 
Saskatchewan, the voters of this province, the people that pay 
the taxes, and as well as the money market — that this 
bookkeeping type of system that is being done is cleared up and 
looked after so that everyone is on the same page and 
understands where the finances of this province are at this time. 
 
And we would like to continue to discuss this issue and bring 
forward our concerns with the whole concept of a Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. And I would like to adjourn debate at this 
moment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to move second reading of The Corporation Capital 
Tax Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
I’d like to briefly explain how the corporation capital tax is 
determined. The corporation capital tax is basically a tax on the 
wealth of the corporation. A corporation determines its tax 
based on amounts reported on its balance sheet. A corporation 
is permitted a $10 million deduction from its tax base, which 
ensures that the . . . only the largest corporations pay this tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the capital tax is an important source of revenue 
for the province. This year it is estimated to rise . . . raise, I 
should say, approximately $340 million. 
 
In my budget address I announced that we would amend The 
Corporation Capital Tax Act to increase the standard exemption 
from $10 million to as high as $15 million for 
Saskatchewan-based corporations. Mr. Speaker, this Bill 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

 

provides the authority to increase the standard exemption to $15 
million. The formula for determining the increased amount will 
be provided in the regulations. 
 
The amount of the exemption will be based upon the proportion 
of total salaries and wages that are paid in Saskatchewan by a 
taxable corporation and its associated corporations. 
 
And I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that part of the rationale 
behind this change is to say that, if you are a large corporation 
that has a higher percentage of your employees in 
Saskatchewan as a percentage of your total employees, then you 
will get a higher tax exemption. 
 
So it’s part of an effort to encourage companies to have more 
employees in Saskatchewan, which I think most people would 
see as a reasonable thing to do. And that’s what we’re trying to 
do. 
 
And I might add that this is actually the second year of a 
multi-year strategy to improve business taxation in the 
province. Last year we changed the small-business income tax 
rate from 8 per cent to 6 per cent; and as of January 1 this year, 
we changed the limit of income for which small businesses 
could claim the small-business rate, which is lower, from 
$200,000 to $300,000. 
 
So we’re giving some companies that employ more people in 
Saskatchewan a tax break, we’re giving small business a tax 
break, and we’re encouraging small business to employ more 
people in the province as well. 
 
I might add, Mr. Speaker, while I’m talking about the 
small-business income tax rate, that that has gone from 10 per 
cent in 1991, when the New Democratic Party government 
came in, to 6 per cent today. But now it applies to a higher rate. 
So in other words, the New Democratic Party, and now the 
coalition government, has lowered the small-business tax rate 
by 40 per cent over the last 10 years. 
 
And I think that’s significant progress, Mr. Speaker. There are 
always those who will say that . . . there are always those, Mr. 
Speaker, who will say that we should do away with business 
taxation generally to encourage jobs and so on. And we try to 
decrease business taxes in a reasonable way if we can. 
 
But balanced off with the need to get revenues from business 
taxation, which will help us pay for the education system, that 
certainly supports business by providing a skilled workforce; 
the health care system, which certainly supports business by 
providing a health care system to employees; and also the 
highways system, Mr. Speaker, which is necessary to move our 
goods to market — highways and transportation is very, very 
important in terms of ensuring that business can do business in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so when we’re talking about the corporation capital tax, 
although business would always like the tax to be lower and we 
would like to lower it as we can, we never want to lower the 
taxes so quickly that we’ll jeopardize the education, health care, 
or transportation systems that the public is expected to pay for. 
 
So that is some of the thinking that is behind changing the 

corporate capital tax exemption to encourage employment in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And also I wanted to reiterate how it’s 
related to what we’re trying to do for small businesses as well, 
again to encourage employment within the province. 
 
Now I might just close, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this Bill 
will result in Saskatchewan having the highest exemption of the 
nine provinces with the corporation capital tax. So of the nine, 
we’ll have the best exemption. And about 100 Saskatchewan 
companies will be removed from the tax roll altogether. But as I 
said, it will encourage all taxable companies to employ more 
Saskatchewan workers. 
 
This tax applies to about 1,350 corporations, most with their 
head offices outside Saskatchewan. The increased standard 
exemption will result in significant tax savings for 
Saskatchewan-based corporations, about $4.5 million per year. 
And that will go a long way to benefit those corporations and 
encourage corporations to employ more people in our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I now move An Act to Amend the Corporation 
Capital Tax Act be read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, today the Finance minister has stood in his place and 
raised . . . presented two Bills that raise taxes; he’s presented 
one Bill that muddies the water on his . . . the way he does his 
books, Mr. Speaker; and then he brings in a Bill that lowers 
taxes. 
 
Lowering taxes, Mr. Speaker, is very good. Just as the two 
taxes, Mr. Speaker, that he’d raised earlier are . . . have a 
negative impact on taxpayers, this one will have a positive 
impact, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a very miserly impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in raising . . . the minister says he’s changing the 
exemption from $10 million on capital for businesses to 15 . . . 
to up to 15 million. And, Mr. Speaker, there is the catch — it’s 
up to 15 million. Because, Mr. Speaker, very few corporations 
are actually going to benefit with this. And it’s certainly not 
going to go very far, Mr. Speaker, in bringing new businesses 
into this province because it’s tied to the percentage of 
employees employed in Saskatchewan versus the employees in 
the entire corporation. 
 
So let’s say Ford Motor Company or GM (General Motors) or 
Dodge or Mitsubishi or whoever think about bringing to 
Saskatchewan some of their businesses. Those 2, 10, 100 
employees, whatever they might wish to employ in 
Saskatchewan, are then measured against their entire corporate 
interests either in another province or around the world to gain 
access to this additional 50 . . . additional $5 million of 
exemption. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you employ 10 people in Saskatchewan 
versus 1,000 people someplace else in your corporation, that 
percentage is miniscule in lowering that tax, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s virtually no benefit there. They’re certainly not going to 
come to Saskatchewan to gain access to that miserly amount. 
Miserly amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

Now if the minister wanted to do something beneficial to 
encourage businesses to establish themselves in Saskatchewan, 
to move to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, he could have moved it 
to $15 million of exemption and that would have had a major 
impact on local businesses, Mr. Speaker. But no, he has to . . . 
he wants to take the credit by bragging about it while actually 
not forgoing very many dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a much greater impact would have been to lower 
the small-business tax down to zero. He says Saskatchewan, on 
the small-business tax, is the ninth lowest. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
our major competitor, our next-door neighbour, is zero. 
 
So it puts us in a very disadvantageous position, Mr. Speaker. 
How do we compete with zero when ours is so much higher, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
So while the minister may want to brag about this tax reduction, 
it’s a very miserly tax reduction. And he talked of the need, Mr. 
Speaker, to have this tax in place to pay for education while at 
the very same time, Mr. Speaker, he’s downloading the costs of 
education onto the local school divisions which in turn either 
cut programs, fire teachers, or increase the mill rate to their 
local property taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not the way to grow the province. The 
minister is raising taxes and even in those areas that should be 
beneficial, there’s such a miserly attempt that . . . to be 
negligible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province need more time to 
absorb the meaning of this very small change. Therefore, I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(11:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I 
have the same officials as last time. No matter what I do, they 
keep coming back. 
 
To my right, John Whyte, deputy minister; to my left, Doug 
Moen, the executive director of public law and community 
justice. To John’s right, Murray Brown, the acting executive 
director of public prosecutions. Behind me is Colleen 
Matthews, who’s the executive assistant to the deputy minister; 
Elizabeth Smith to her right, who’s the director of 
administration. 
 
And there are a number of other officials at the back: John 
Baker, who’s the executive director of law enforcement 
services; Keith Laxdal is the associate deputy minister of 
finance and administration; Darryl Bogdasavich, who’s the 
executive director of civil law; Laura Bourassa, policy planning 

and evaluation. And I think that’s it, Mr. Chair. And if it isn’t, 
then I apologize for whoever I left there. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon to the 
minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to start my questioning in estimates by 
asking you whether or not, in fact, you are still the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I am still the Minister of Aboriginal 
Affairs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the reason 
I asked that question is because you are the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs, as you have just stated, under whose 
jurisdiction gaming agreements fall. Yet you are not the 
minister who actually signs those agreements. 
 
Now why has this been allowed to be set up in this manner and 
what kind of a message do you think it’s sending to First 
Nations and non-Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the minister responsible for 
Liquor and Gaming is the minister responsible for the 
negotiations between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, dealing with 
gaming. So the proper minister to direct questions on that issue 
would be the minister of Liquor and Gaming, who is also the 
minister of government affairs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well it’s not surprising, I guess, to myself or the 
general public, Mr. Minister, that you have a sort of confusing 
arrangement going on over on that side of the House. That there 
are a number of different questions, for instance, that would 
come to my attention from the Aboriginal people of 
Saskatchewan regarding these gaming agreements and it sort of 
falls under Justice also. And so I’m wondering whether or not 
you’re going to be willing to answer questions on gaming and 
any other Justice matters that come before you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I’d be only too pleased to try to 
answer any questions. In fact, I think I tried to answer some on 
corrections not very long ago. But the . . . I think the most 
appropriate time to raise questions dealing with gaming — if I 
may suggest this — is when the department of government . . . 
well and then when the government affairs and Aboriginal 
Affairs, we will be here at the same time. So you can maybe 
decide which questions are appropriate there for that estimates. 
And then when the minister of Liquor and Gaming is here, you 
can talk to him about Liquor and Gaming maybe. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I have a number 
of options. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, looking at the estimates for this year, I notice that 
First Nations gaming agreements are up nearly $10 million over 
last year. And I’d like to know what the reason for this is — 
that would be, I believe, on the expenditures side. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Can I ask the member which 
department she’s talking about? 
 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

 

Ms. Julé: — I guess this proves my point, Mr. Minister, that the 
way you have arranged your departments is really very 
confusing to everyone. It’s under Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I think, Mr. Chair, that we are 
here to discuss Justice estimates, so feel free to ask any 
questions about Justice. We’ll be back dealing with Aboriginal 
Affairs shortly, whenever in fact you ask us to come back. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, you had just indicated to me that you would be willing 
to answer any questions that pertain to Aboriginal Affairs. This 
is definitely Aboriginal Affairs that I’m asking you about. 
 
And I really do think that the backbenchers behind you could 
trust you to answer these questions. And I think you could relay 
to them that you really don’t need their help. 
 
But nonetheless, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to try to answer 
those questions if possible, because it is under Aboriginal 
Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I don’t mean to be difficult, Mr. 
Chair, but we have . . . we understood that it would be the 
estimates of the Department of Justice today, so we have Justice 
officials here. When we’re here as a . . . When I’m here as the 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs along with the minister of 
government affairs, then I think that would be the most 
appropriate place to address those specific questions. 
 
But I’d be happy to entertain today any questions dealing with 
the Department of Justice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, would you 
be willing to entertain questions that pertain to the Bill No. 2 
that we have before the Assembly and that we discussed in 
Committee of the Whole yesterday? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’d be happy to do that. More 
particularly, happy to do that in relation to the specific issues 
which are of importance . . . no, not importance, but relevance 
to the activities of the Department of Justice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Those are the kind of 
questions that I expect to put to you and I hope you will provide 
some answers for. 
 
Mr. Minister, in Bill No. 2 there is a reference to emergency 
protective intervention. And I did ask the Minister of Social 
Services yesterday if he could explain to me will the same 
principles that apply to victims of domestic violence apply here. 
 
And I guess what I’m asking you, is there a provision for the 
victims to be able to access this legislation to in fact help 
protect them against any assaults that they may be fearful of? 
And specifically, when a peace officer is acting on an 
individual’s fear of assault as is stated in The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act, that is permissible and it is encouraged 
by that Act. 
 
So in the case of children that may be afraid of victimization or 
assault, could a peace officer act in the same manner regarding 

child sexual abuse? Or does the peace officer have to wait until 
after the abuse has taken place, at which point the Criminal 
Code of Canada would then apply? 
 
And I guess we need to understand whether or not this Act in 
fact is there to protect children and give them some privileges in 
order to defend themselves, or if this Act is basically there to 
have an application for a protective intervention order against 
the offenders. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — If I understand the member’s main — 
she may have asked a number of questions — but one I think 
she asked: is it possible for there to be intervention prior to 
actual violence committed against the child; in other words, in a 
preventative way. And the answer to that question is that if 
there is a potential risk to the child, then police and others can 
intervene. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, Mr. Minister, could the child victim 
themselves make an application in order to prevent an assault 
against them if they are fearful of an impending assault? Can 
they do that and who would they make the application to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The procedure which is followed here 
is that in order for an application to be made, that application 
can be made by a peace officer, by a child protection officer, or 
by an outreach worker. So the process would be that that . . . 
one of those three people would identify, presumably along 
with the child, that there was a need for an intervention order. 
And then one of those three categories of people would make 
that application on behalf of the child to a Justice of the Peace. 
 
I can say that there . . . we don’t envisage any challenges as a 
result . . . any difficulties as a result of this. There would not be 
situations in which children who are in need of protection 
orders would not be able to be protected because the peace 
officers, the child protection officers, and the outreach officers 
will work to resolve that and then make that application to the 
Justice of the Peace. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, it is my understanding that Bill No. 2 . . . It’s my 
understanding that Bill No. 2 is predicated on The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act and that Act allows for an individual 
themselves, any individual, to make application to protect 
themselves based on fear of assault. 
 
So if in fact Bill No. 2 is predicated on The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act, it would follow then that a youth under 
the age of 18 would be able to make that application on their 
own behalf. If that is not true, if they need to have a child 
protection officer or someone else to do it, then in fact this Bill 
is not predicated on The Victims of Domestic Violence Act and 
it doesn’t seem to have any application. So I’m wondering if 
you would comment on that, please. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member’s right, Mr. Chair, 
in indicating that this legislation is modelled on The Victims of 
Domestic Violence Act. In those cases we are dealing with, in 
the vast majority of cases, people who have reached the age of 
majority. But certainly older people. 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

And in this context dealing with children, I think we might ask 
ourselves, how would a child know how to make an application 
to a Justice of the Peace and so on. What process would they 
follow? How would they know what to do? 
 
So it’s a recognition merely of the need to assist children to 
ensure that they are protected and to ensure that someone with 
the knowledge of how to proceed assists in that process. So in 
the process of their work, peace officers or child protection 
officers or outreach workers would identify that children needed 
help and needed intervention and would ensure that the 
appropriate intervention order was obtained. 
 
So it’s not an effort to try to stop children from moving forward 
in their own best interests, but to ensure that . . . to ensure that 
those who know how to move the issue forward do in fact do so 
on behalf of the child. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as you 
well know, there are a number of people who could be 
considered victims that are in a marriage. And these individuals 
may be 17 or 16 years old — in fact under the age of 18 — and 
they have access to the . . . to assisting themselves through The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Act. 
 
In respect to that statement, there are also youth on the streets 
who are 17 years old and sometimes maybe even a 
common-law marriage and may have their spouse putting them 
out on the streets. So I’m wondering why it would not be 
feasible that they could then make an application on their own 
behalf without having to have a . . . going through a child 
protection worker or a peace officer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
the normal procedure under The Victims of Domestic Violence 
Act is also that the application would be brought on behalf of 
the victim by normally a police officer, but could be by some 
other, a social worker as well. 
 
The department and others spend a lot of time working with the 
police, training and so on, to ensure that these applications are 
successful as much as possible. They are, because of their 
nature, we do need to make sure that they are as successful as 
often as possible rather than run the risk of that person being 
subjected to greater violence. 
 
So when you try to do those things yourself, as a victim of 
domestic violence or even as a child within the context of the 
sex trade, there is a much greater likelihood of it not being done 
properly and in a way which would render success. So what 
tends to happen in all these cases is that the police, certainly in 
victims of domestic violence situation, the police would begin 
the process, take the information, and then would instigate the 
order at that time, rather than the victim themselves doing it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the definition 
of a child in this Act is someone who is or appears to be under 
the age of 18, yet the age of consent is 14. One of the 
recommendations from the Child Sex Trade Committee is that 
the age of consent be raised from 14 to 16. What actions have 
you taken to date on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the question of 

whether or not . . . or the situation . . . raises the situation of the 
age of majority and whether or not that age might be raised 
from 14 to 16. 
 
The member will probably know that there is consultation about 
this issue with the federal government. The age is in the youth 
criminal justice Act . . . oh, it’s in the Criminal Code. I’m sorry. 
So the extent to which . . . if that, if that age was to be reduced 
. . . the discussions about whether that age might be reduced in 
the province are taking place at the present time. 
 
This is by no means an easy matter because one of the things 
that it would do, if we raised the age from 14 to 16, is it would 
generate challenges for perfectly normal sexual relations 
between people who are in that 14 to 16 age group. 
 
And the . . . so it is not the easiest question. It doesn’t just result 
. . . it doesn’t relate to the matter of child sexual abuse as we are 
considering it here. It would relate to relationships between, 
between those between 14 and 16 in which no abuse would be 
taking place. So it’s not the easiest of matters. 
 
Discussions continue in this regard, and they will continue. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, it has been 
stated by a number of people that did presentations or gave 
presentations to the committee that they would like to see this 
happening, and they were hoping that the provincial 
government here could engage in some communication . . . 
conversation with the federal government to change this. 
 
And I guess they were very commonsensical in their request for 
this because they were saying that if it was . . . if that age was 
raised from 14 to 16 and the parents’ consent, as such, was 
involved in it, or the parents had something to say about it, then 
in fact there could be sort of a qualifying clause in the change to 
the Criminal Code that would, would give parents actually 
some authority to speak on behalf of their child and do the best 
by their child in the case where the child may be inclined to go 
on the streets and the parent is trying to stop them. The parent 
would eventually would have some say in all of this. 
 
And so I’m wondering whether or not you intend to or have at 
this point, as Justice minister of the province, made any kind of 
move to speak to the federal government about changes to the 
Criminal Code in this manner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — One thing I might say is that I have 
passed on to the Minister of Justice the recommendations of the 
committee, and so he will be aware that the committee has 
recommended that the age be increased to 16. 
 
I’m sure the member will agree that while it is — and I think 
this is . . . underlies her question — while it is important to, I 
mean, reduce the sexualization of our children as much as 
possible, when you’re dealing with people who are between 14 
and 16 who might be having relationships with other people 
between 14 and 16, that a blanket prohibition is not likely to be 
terribly effective in controlling their behaviour. 
 
We all have obligations to ensure that our children and those for 
whom we’re responsible lead normal childhood lives. But I 
think it would be difficult to prohibit that kind of behaviour. 



May 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

 

And it may also not very well reflect what is actually taking 
place in our communities. 
 
So I think while parents have a responsibility, it would be 
difficult to ensure that children between 14 and 16 did not have 
sexual relations with each other by a mere passage of 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I think the 
focus of the debate needs to be on whether or not sexual 
relations are part of a very dangerous activity that would do 
harm to a child. I don’t think there’s any question that in a 
society that there’s anyone that can be monitoring sexual 
activity between . . . you know, of children that are 14 to 16 
years old. That’s not the focus. 
 
Mr. Minister, the focus is whether or not a parent has the right 
to step in and have some authority over that child in fact if the 
child is endangering their lives, not only by sexual activity in 
itself, but sexual activity that often includes drugs and includes 
all kinds of activities, sometimes with gang members — that 
there are activities going on, Mr. Minister, that, you know, 
where youth in that age group often don’t know how 
detrimental their actions are to themselves. 
 
And so it’s . . . I think it’s vitally important to recognize that we 
have to look at the bigger picture here and look at the danger 
the child is posing to themselves without . . . or unknowingly 
doing so. 
 
So that is sort of the premise on what I think discussions 
surrounding changes to the Criminal Code should be upon. And 
I think it would be really a very wise thing to do to actually talk 
to the federal government about this and maybe we need to 
engage in some conversation that details the kind of dangers 
that our young children are facing if nothing is done about this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises a point of 
significant concern to all of us. And the challenge is to, I think, 
to distinguish between what might be at least a non-exploitive 
behaviour and exploitive behaviour. And we are exploring the 
opportunities to amend the code to deal with situations in which 
there is . . . there are . . . situations in which a person is in risk 
of . . . at risk of abuse in a number of ways. 
 
Certainly the member’s right in suggesting that there might be 
drugs related to this sexual activity. There may be 
age-of-partner issues with regards to this sexual activity, 
certainly exploitation. There may be issues of preparing 
someone for the sex trade in the future; exploitation by others; 
the need for . . . or the lack of parent, parental support. 
 
So I think there’s a . . . there is a need and we’re working on 
this need to try to address . . . to try to distinguish between those 
exploitative, at-risk situations, without a blanket . . . a blanket 
prohibition on what might be seen to be perhaps not desirable 
activities, but certainly not at-risk activities. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, so following along that vein of 
conversation, I’m wondering whether or not under the . . . under 
Bill No. 2 there is an opportunity and a right for parents to put 
in an application for a prevention . . . or a stay-away order, if in 

fact those parents are fully cognizant and aware that their child 
is at risk and . . . and/or has been exploited. Do parents have the 
right to make the application? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The short answer to the member’s 
question is yes. And indeed we would encourage parents to 
bring forward matters to the appropriate authorities should they 
see their children acting in a way which is plainly not desirable 
and not acceptable and not responsible on the part of children. 
 
The legislation we’re dealing with here, of course, is primarily 
focused on the sex trade and not on other non-sex trade oriented 
activities. But we certainly would encourage parents to bring 
forward any concerns they have to ensure that children are 
indeed protected. 
 
We know that no matter how much we might want it, parents 
are not always able to control the behaviour of their children, 
and yet when concerned, wonder how to proceed. So we would 
certainly encourage them to take those matters to the 
appropriate authorities. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, at present there are parents who have tried to get the 
assistance of authorities in order to help their children. And 
actually the one instance that comes to mind is of a child that 
was involved with gangs, and the gangs are putting the girl out 
on the streets, so there’s definitely danger here. Mr. Minister, 
that parent was told that that child is over the age of 14, and that 
they can really . . . the authorities could do not too much about 
it. 
 
So I want to know what other initiatives your government is 
taking in order to protect that child, especially with the backing 
of its parents. Will the parent’s request, based on the 
information the parent has, be enough in order for there to be a 
protective intervention order placed against that specific 
perpetrator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The hope of this Bill, Mr. Chair, and 
to the member, is that we would be able to facilitate some of the 
things she’s talking about. Where in the past parents have said, 
my child seems to be out of control, can you do something to 
stop it, in particular in this case — I think the member raised 
this point, that perhaps the child was under the influence of a 
gang and the gang is using . . . is encouraging her to be involved 
in the sex trade and what can a parent do to stop it — well we 
would anticipate here that that would be the way in which 
things would happen. The parent would raise the issue with an 
appropriate authority and an order could be made to ensure that 
that kind of activity would be stopped — for example, that the 
child no longer associate with those people influencing her, that 
those people influencing her would be prohibited from contact 
with that child in order to protect her. 
 
So while the member raises an issue that has been problematic 
in the past, it’s certainly our hope and our intention that 
legislation will ensure that those matters are cleared up, and that 
parents who have concerns about the activity of their children 
— of the sort she raises, involved in prostitution — that it can 
be addressed. 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2002 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister: Mr. Minister, in the event that there was a protective 
intervention order placed then, in the instance that we have just 
been talking about, against a gang member or a number of gang 
members, what consequences will the members of that gang, if 
there is more than one . . . one or more than one, what 
consequences would they be subject to if in fact they breach 
that order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks what would happen 
if a gang member contravened an order preventing contact with 
or a certain behaviour with a particular person. That would 
constitute the commission of an offence under section 127 of 
the Criminal Code, which would make the person liable to an 
imprisonment for a term of not exceeding two years. 
 
Ms. Julé: — So in fact then, Mr. Minister — and I certainly 
address you through the Chair — in fact then you could, if there 
was a number of gang members that were guilty of this offence, 
you could put the whole shebang of them behind bars. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well if you could prove they violated 
the order, yes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well it seems to me like a fine way to stop some 
of the criminal activity on our streets. But the main thing is that 
we take this serious and make sure that these, these offences are 
dealt with in a very serious fashion and act upon them. 
 
Mr. Minister, in order for this Bill to be enforced, how will a 
police officer know — in reference to the stroll areas or high 
incidence areas — how will a peace officer to know, how will a 
peace officer know that an individual who may be driving a car 
or even on the streets, possibly pimping, how are they to know 
that the individual is not to be in that high incidence area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, I think the member asked 
the question how would, would the police know if someone was 
driving in the stroll area when they saw a car going around. 
 
If there was an order against the owner of the car or the person 
driving the car, once the car was stopped and they checked with 
CPIC (Canadian Police Information Centre), they would know 
that that person shouldn’t be in that, in that area. And 
consequently, that person would be in breach of the order. 
 
And when there is no order, of course then it would be a 
question of identifying whether or not there were . . . there was 
sufficient evidence to seek . . . to seek orders and to follow the 
normal kind of criminal procedures. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish everyone a pleasant weekend and the 
House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:14. 
 
 
 


	Melville Legion Members Victorious
	in National Competition
	Melville Legion Members Victorious in National Competition

