















































Hansard: July 05, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2583 
 July 5, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan upset with the government’s 
decision to transfer the surplus from the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund to the General Revenue Fund. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to refund the $1.6 million intended for the 
Saskatchewan Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and 
discontinue its present policy of using this money for other 
government purposes. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of St. Walburg, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — . . . Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens in the city 
of Humboldt and surrounding that area. They would like to see 
the Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority maintained in the city of Humboldt. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt, from Melfort, and from Bruno. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
too rise again and present petitions on behalf of people 
concerned about the shortcomings of the tobacco legislation. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 
 

Signatures on these petitions this morning, Mr. Speaker, are 
from across Saskatchewan but mostly from our two major cities 
of Saskatoon and Regina. And I’m pleased to present on their 

behalf. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in the province. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Indian Head, 
Kendal, Montmartre, Sintaluta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth another petition with 
concerns from constituents of mine and from out of the 
province that are concerned about the Besnard Lake situation. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
constituents of mine from Canwood and some out-of-province 
people, Mr. Speaker, from Broadus, Montana and Miles City, 
Montana. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

Petition concerning the repeal of The Tobacco Control Act 
and the possession of tobacco by minors; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 11, 23, 157, 168, 169, and sessional paper no. 
174. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege today to 
able to introduce to you and to the members of this Assembly 
two guests who are seated in the west gallery. One of them will 
be known to many here, my ministerial assistant, Tyler Lloyd. 
 
Seated with Tyler is Florence Linantud, who is a summer 
student working with our office. Florence was born in the 
Philippines and came to Canada when she was three years old. 
She’s now completing her . . . into her fourth year of her 
electronics engineering degree with a computer science minor at 



2584 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

the University of Regina. She is a university ambassador 
helping first year students and will be working in my office 
over the summer. 
 
I also need to just warn people that Florence has also been 
learning martial arts, Krav Maga, which I am told is an 
extremely healthy workout. So I ask all members to welcome 
her to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

StatsCanada Figures for June 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well. The 
numbers are in. As the members opposite eat sour little green 
apples before question period and proclaim gloom and doom 
every day, reinforced by the Leader of the Opposition using 
only negative statistics and never acknowledging the positive, 
he certainly won’t like today’s news. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the good news is twofold. First, our good, 
objective friends at StatsCanada have released their June jobs 
report. And which way did the jobs go? They went up, way up. 
They went up by 12,800 new jobs in June over June last year, 
the largest increase in Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. We have 
the second lowest unemployment rate at 4.9 per cent and 
Regina had the lowest unemployment rate of any city in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Now remember last month, Mr. Speaker, after 
11,000 new jobs in May, we cautioned that one month does not 
make a trend. Nor does two. But we will say that the results are 
very promising, Mr. Speaker, and it’s looking very good for the 
future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Girls Fastball Championships in Langbank 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
community of Langbank will be alive this weekend with the 
calls of strike . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, please. Order. It’s one thing for members 
to heckle their own member but during members statements I 
think we should be able to hear them all and I ask members to 
allow the statements to be made. And I recognize, once again, 
the member from Moosomin, and you may start over. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
community of Langbank will be alive this weekend with the 
calls of strike one, ball high, you’re safe, you’re out, as the 
Langbank Lions Club hosts the 2002 Midget Provincial B Girls’ 
Fastball Championships. 
 
Beginning this evening, 10 midget girls’ fastball teams from 
across the province will converge on Langbank and play will 
begin in a double knockout competition to determine the 
Provincial B Midget Girls’ Fastball Champions for 2002. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to wish all of the teams well as they participate 
in this year’s tournament. I must however save my greatest 
show of support for the Stockholm Rural Thunder as our 
daughter, Stephanie, is one of the girls on that team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Langbank Lions Club for 
their hard work and dedication to the community. Without their 
efforts Langbank would not be the site of this year’s 
tournament. And a special good luck to all the teams. Play hard 
and have fun. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan Festival 
 
Mr. Forbes: — My humble gratitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hear ye, hear ye. It’s once again time to be whisked away to the 
wonderful world of Shakespeare to experience some of his most 
famous — or infamous — characters at the Shakespeare on the 
Saskatchewan Festival. Loyal to tradition, the Shakespearean 
tents have been raised along the beautiful banks of the South 
Saskatchewan River in Saskatoon in my constituency. 
 
This year one of our favourite heroes, Hamlet, has returned to 
avenge his father’s untimely death. From Hamlet we learned 
that when one tries to usurp the throne, sadly the perpetrators 
shall be knocked down by the rightful heirs. We also will 
remember one of our favourite quotes: there is something rotten 
in the state of . . . Saskatchewan? And yes, we all know it’s not 
just the cheese. I think, dear people, it just may be on the other 
side of these . . . (inaudible) . . . Well I shall stop there and 
leave you in suspense. 
 
For the second piece this year the organizers have chosen The 
Alchemist. Those not familiar with this play shall be warned 
that disguise and con artistry is not to be mistaken for what is 
real and good. It is an entertaining and complex piece of work 
that will have you laughing and pondering all the while. 
 
Finally, the University of Saskatchewan drama department is 
presenting Summer Stock, which is a collection of two one-act 
plays including Cut! and The Pushcart Peddlers. Mr. Speaker, 
choose one, choose them all. They’re all worth your pennies. 
The festival runs from now until August 18. Fare thee well, and 
thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lewis Hobson Inducted into Saskatchewan’s 
Baseball Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the city 
of Prince Albert and the district of Prince Albert has been 
blessed for many years with having citizens who have 
contributed greatly to Prince Albert society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of Prince Albert’s most notable citizens is 
being inducted into Saskatchewan’s Baseball Hall of Fame on 
August 17, 2002 in North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, of course 
I’m referring to Lewis Hobson. Although Lew passed away last 
December 2001, he’s still being remembered for his many 
outstanding accomplishments. 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2585 

 

Lew Hobson, since moving to Prince Albert in 1961, has been 
involved with high school football, the Prince Albert Golf and 
Curling Club, minor baseball, with the Prince Albert Raiders, 
and chairman of the Saskatchewan Rivers School Division. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as instrumental as Lew was in many facets of 
Prince Albert sporting and educational world, on August 17 
he’s being remembered for his curve ball. Lou was discovered 
at a very early age that he could throw a baseball. 
 
This talent eventually earned him a baseball scholarship in 
Arkansas. Unfortunately on a rainy evening, Lew slipped, fell, 
and permanently injured his throwing arm. Lew was unable to 
throw a fastball again. 
 
Losing an opportunity to play in the majors, Lew turned his 
attention to education and amateur baseball in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert has lost a great sportsman, a fan, 
and Lew’s induction is but a small tribute to a great man. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Lew 
Hobson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Flatland Music Festival 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Flatland Music Festival returns this weekend to Regina’s 
Victoria Park to put on a feast of rock, folk, soul, gospel, and 
country music, all cooked up by excellent Saskatchewan talent. 
 
The Flatland Music Festival is the biggest celebration of 
Saskatchewan musical talent, with more than 35 acts scheduled 
to hit the stage. This year’s festival is a great opportunity to 
discover the incredible talent originating in our province, in our 
province. 
 
Performances this year include headliners Wide Mouth Mason, 
Greek Canadian band Arkadia, the funk/soul ensemble, 
Inshaalha, and folk singer, Passion Brandy Moore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those unable to make it out live and in concert, 
I’m sure that they will be happy to know there is a live Web 
cast on-line at sask.cbc.ca or at flatlandmusicfestival.com. 
 
The Web cast is a partnership between CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 
Recording Industry Association. In the past four years, the Web 
cast has drawn thousands of listeners from around the world, 
from Ecuador to Australia, all looking to check out 
Saskatchewan artists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Flatland Music Festival is entering its seventh 
year and it consistently draws crowds in the tens of thousands 
and those who have attended know why. Flatland provides an 
excellent showcase for the thriving recording industry that calls 
this province home. 
 
I encourage all members of the House to attend or tune in and 
see for themselves the rich talent our province has to offer. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

(10:15) 
Souris Valley Theatre 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Wednesday night the Souris Valley Theatre kicked off their 
13th season of their outdoor theatre, with a delicious supper 
complete with saskatoon and rhubarb pie. This year the show 
Calamity Jane will run for two weeks after which Cocktails for 
200 will run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these presentations, sponsored by the Estevan 
Tourism, showcase Saskatchewan talent, some local talent, and 
attract audiences from all over the world. For the past years, 
these performances have taken place in a big tent, but the new 
building will be ready in time for the opening of Cocktails for 
200 on July 25. 
 
The Estevan Downtown Association donated the roof and the 
lumber, and other materials needed to complete the building 
were donated by Ray and Doris Frehlick of Estevan and we 
express our gratitude to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Estevan Tourism and all those 
responsible for making this annual event a huge success. And I 
would invite everyone to take in these shows. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Centenary Affordable Housing Program Agreement 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last week the provincial 
government and the federal government announced details of 
the new centenary affordable housing program agreement 
which has been signed with the federal government. 
 
This agreement is an important step forward for our province 
and will allow us to make major progress in the provision of 
affordable housing for low- to modest-income residents. The 
centenary affordable housing program will respond to needs 
that the private market is unable to meet in areas such as inner 
city and mature neighbourhoods, northern communities, and 
urban centres with low vacancy rates. 
 
Moreover it will support the strategic direction of the 
Department of Social Services by building independence and 
self-sufficiency among vulnerable segments of the population. 
It will also create significant employment opportunities across 
the province and Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will 
explore ways to encourage proposals containing an employment 
and skills training component. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Comment by Government House Leader 
 

Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Industry and Resources, the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. Mr. Speaker, last evening, while I was engaged in 
debate on the amendment to The Highway Traffic Act, to give 
police greater powers to protect children from exploitation and 
abuse in the sex trade, the minister called out from his seat and 



2586 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

said that I was stupid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was appalling to me and I believe to all 
members of this House that that minister would stoop to such 
unparliamentary language and behaviour during such important 
debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment deal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this amendment deals with stopping 
the abuse, both sexual, physical, and verbal abuse that children 
involved in the sex trade are subject to. Yet that minister of the 
Crown chose to resort to verbal abuse himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Government House Leader is 
this. When he made his comment, was he calling the 
strengthening of The Highway Traffic Act to protect children in 
the sex trade stupid? Was he calling the amendment that has 
been agreed to by all parties in this legislature stupid? Or was 
he calling me as a woman stupid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say to the member opposite that the 
amendment put forth on Bill 40 was part of a negotiation that 
took place between myself as the Government House Leader, 
and the Leader of the Opposition, or the leader of the House for 
the opposition, as it relates to the . . . this session, and what 
we’re attempting to achieve before the session. It was an issue 
that was raised by that member to strengthen as she says, the 
Bill. We felt as a government that it was in fact a good 
initiative, and that it is a good initiative and for that reason we 
agreed to support the amendment to Bill 40 in the legislature, 
and so we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s always fair and it’s always good to see 
the opposition with positive input, and I think that this has been 
an example where that has taken place. I want to say to the 
House that this is a place that’s been referred to as a place of 
emotion and a place of very strong debate. 
 
And I want to say to the members of the opposition that I very 
much support the amendment as do members of this 
government, and we will see that enacted into Bill 40 and it will 
strengthen the legislation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader’s 
comment last evening was acceptable . . . unacceptable rather. It 
was condescending and it was abusive. And I think that the 
Government House Leader today is skirting around the real 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe that the Government House Leader 
would think the protection of children exploited through the sex 
trade is stupid. I believe his comment was levelled at me 
personally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you will recall, earlier in this session the 
Minister of Agriculture and Deputy Premier called a proposal 
put forward by our Agriculture critic, dumb. And now the 

Minister of Industry and Government House Leader calls me 
stupid. Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that it is purely a 
coincidence that both of these comments from male government 
members were levelled at female members of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Does the Premier 
condone this type of behaviour and these comments from his 
senior cabinet ministers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is 
while I was not present in the House at that particular time last 
night, I understand that the minister stood in his place and 
apologized for his comments. I’m wondering therefore if 
members across the way would stand today and apologize for 
comments that I’ve heard as recently as yesterday from their 
benches? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some very significant public policy issues 
to debate in this Chamber. Not the least among them, the sexual 
exploitation of children on our streets. And as the House Leader 
has just pointed out, we believed that the amendment proposed 
by the member was appropriate, strengthened the legislation, 
and was put into place. 
 
That’s what we should be about in this House. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we should be talking about jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Economic Development. Earlier in this legislative session the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) announced its intention to use 
100 million taxpayers’ dollars to buy equity positions in four 
new ethanol plants in Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP also admitted that they were negotiating with 
American real estate company, Broe industries, to build the new 
ethanol plants, even though Broe has no experience in the 
ethanol business. And the NDP even went so far as to announce 
where they were going to put these new ethanol plants: in 
Shaunavon, in Belle Plaine, in Tisdale, and in Melville. 
 
But now the NDP Party has learned . . . or the Saskatchewan 
Party has learned that the NDP has decided to scale back to two 
ethanol plants and possibly even only one. Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister confirm that the NDP is retreating from its plan to 
build four ethanol plants; and if so, which of those four 
communities has the NDP misled? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That . . . well if they will listen, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The minister may start 
over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
members of the opposition if they’re interested in listening, that 
the number of plants will be determined by the private sector. 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2587 

 

There will be private sector proponents of ethanol development. 
There are communities who are working with private sector 
developers right now, and of course they have also indicated 
their intention to work with Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has planned no plants. These will 
be done by the private sector. There may be agreements reached 
with Crown Investments Corporation. There may be no public 
sector funding to plants at all. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that member should be, I think, very 
supportive of the fact that an American company is very much 
interested in working with a potash company in his riding, 
about halfway between here and Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. I 
want that member to stand up and tell this House whether he 
supports that investment, whether he supports that development 
in his backyard, or whether he’s just part of the negative 
Saskatchewan Party ongoing attack in terms of people who 
want to build this economy and grow this economy. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, does he support the new 12,000 . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — True to form, nobody on the NDP side of this 
legislature is willing to answer even the most direct questions. 
 
So let’s try again: will the minister confirm that the government 
hired Meyers Norris Penny and another BC (British Columbia) 
based company to evaluate the expansion of the ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan, and if so, will the minister table a 
copy of the consultant’s report? 
 
And will the minister tell the legislature how much these 
consulting firms were paid for the report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, here you are again. 
This is a opposition who can focus on nothing substantive. Mr. 
Speaker, this is an opposition who opposes every job creation 
initiative whether it by the private sector or whether it by a 
combination of public and private sector, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order please, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is they 
cannot stand success. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, the Leader of the Opposition 
yesterday in this House stands up and he says the numbers are 
in; there is numbers; we have numbers. And he’s referring to 
the population between 15 and 65 which for one year decreased 
after 10 years of a 30,000 population increase. This member 
attacks one little component of it. 
 
And do you want to know something? This morning Statistics 
Canada indicates that this June over last June there are 12,800 
more people working in this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, they don’t say a word 

about jobs and job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
Shame on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — That’s another interesting non-answer from 
this minister. 
 
It just so happens, Mr. Speaker, that in the 1999 election 
campaign this NDP government promised 30,000 new jobs by 
now. And the facts are, and the facts are that in June of 1999 
there were 494,500 people employed in this province and right 
now there are 494,300 people in this province. In other words, 
not only didn’t they create 30,000 new jobs — they managed to 
lose 200. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP refuses to answer 
questions about important government policy issues and when 
the NDP does manage an answer you can’t trust that they are 
telling the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of a 
report . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — This report that evaluates the potential for 
expanding the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, this report was 
prepared by S&T Consultants of Delta, British Columbia and 
by Myers Norris Penny of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister taken the time to read this 
consultant’s report and if so, does the report say that it is 
necessary for the NDP government to invest 
100-million-taxpayers’ dollars to own ethanol plants in order 
for the industry to expand in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Thunder Creek is angry. He’s angry that an American 
company has indicated that they want to partner with another 
American company already working in his riding to build . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I have to 
ask the member for Canora-Pelly and the member for Regina 
South to desist from conducting a debate of their own during a 
time when we’ve got members that have been given the floor 
and are doing their utmost to serve the constituents, their 
constituents, and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And, Mr. Speaker, the member is 
angry and the reason he’s angry is because the job numbers that 
were released by StatsCanada this morning don’t fit into their 
political game plan, because they don’t want to talk about the 
fact that we have got the third . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
well, and they want to shout me down, Mr. Speaker, because 
they don’t want to hear good news. 
 
The fact is, that this June is the third highest number of jobs in 
the history of this province. 
 



2588 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that after 
a difficult year in 2001, there are 12,800 more people working 
in this province than there were last June. And the fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there’s an opportunity in Belle Plaine, 
Saskatchewan for tens of millions of dollars in private sector 
investment to create jobs in the livestock industry in his 
backyard, and he doesn’t like that either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
been through the job numbers. I’m only going to do it once — 
this minister, this minister does it every time he’s asked a 
question about ethanol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, judging from the answers we’re getting from the 
minister this morning, he either hasn’t read the consultant’s 
report, or he doesn’t understand the consultant’s report, or he’s 
ignoring the consultant’s report. Because, Mr. Speaker, 
nowhere in the report does it advise the government to invest 
100 million taxpayers’ dollars to own ethanol plants in order for 
the expansion of the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. In fact, 
the consultant’s advice is exactly the opposite. 
 
On page 30 of the report, the consultants conclude: 
 

That given the right business environment, the private 
sector would be willing to finance the construction of an 
80-million litre ethanol plant. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP conclude that it was necessary 
to gamble 100 million taxpayers’ dollars when the 
government’s own consultants say private sector capital is 
available? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say to 
the member for Thunder Creek that yes, I have read the report. 
And I want to say to that member that I also understand the 
report. And I also know that the private sector is interested in 
investing in this province and I also know that we are going to 
have that private sector investment. And I also know that we’re 
going to have local community investment. And I also know 
that we’re going to have livestock industry tied to that 
investment. 
 
And I also know that there’s a good chance that one of those 
investments might be right in his backyard, but I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, what he should be is very clear to the constituency 
he represents. Does he support jobs in his constituency, or does 
he not? The answer should be yes or it should be no, because 
I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, it can’t be this foolishness 
where he stands up in this legislature every day and attempts to 
pick a hole to make a political argument for himself. 
 
And I also, Mr. Speaker, want to ask the Leader of the 
Opposition, who was so eloquent in here yesterday when he 
said the numbers are in, whether he supports the new 12,800 

jobs this June over last year, yes or no. Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the good news in the 
consultant’s report, if the minister takes the time to read it, is 
that there is considerable experience and expertise in the design, 
construction, and operation of ethanol plants in North America. 
And the consultants recommend that Saskatchewan take 
advantage of that industry expertise. 
 
But the NDP has decided to gamble 100 million taxpayers’ 
dollars on an ethanol partnership with Broe industries, an 
American real estate company with absolutely no experience in 
the ethanol business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP ignoring its own consultant’s 
report by gambling 100 million taxpayers’ dollars to build 
ethanol plants in partnership with a company with absolutely no 
experience in the ethanol industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to draw a 
little analogy. That member says that the Broe group of 
companies is not in a position to be able to develop an ethanol 
plant. And he says they have no experience, so nobody should 
choose them and nobody should trust them. Well I want to say 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly why nobody’s going to 
choose those guys come the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — They’ve got no experience and 
nobody trusts them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Operation of Kitchen at Liquor Store 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. Earlier this 
session, I asked written questions about the operation costs 
associated with the kitchen facility in the south Albert Street 
liquor board store. The government replied the cost to operate 
the kitchen annually is $82,000, which includes expenses for a 
full-time kitchen manager of over $40,000, cleaning services at 
26,000, special event expenses of 7,000, groceries and supplies 
of 5,000, and more — an expense paid for by the taxpayers of 
this province, $82,000 to operate a kitchen in a liquor board 
store. 
 
To the minister, how can the NDP justify this expense? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I keep 
hearing the members opposite asking their questions of the 
NDP. This is an NDP coalition government, Mr. Speaker, that 
has a proud record. This is a proud record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2589 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — This is not the NDP Party over here, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a coalition Government of Saskatchewan that has 
done a great deal of good for this great province of ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Member will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m very pleased to answer that member’s 
question, Mr. Speaker, so I can assure the people of this 
province that once again the inaccuracies and inadequacies of 
the content of the questions that are being asked. I’m glad to 
clarify, Mr. Speaker, that the purpose of the kitchen was an 
enhancement to customer service. People can learn more about 
food and alcohol pairing. 
 
But the important thing is, Mr. Speaker, that that member 
should recognize and the people of this province recognize the 
Liquor and Gaming Authority is in the retail business. It’s not 
taxpayers’ money from the General Revenue Fund that pays for 
that kitchen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Taxpayers paid $82,000 to operate this kitchen 
and, according to media reports, the kitchen itself is a sight to 
behold. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order. Order. Order. I specifically asked the 
member from Moose Jaw North . . . Order. Order, order. 
 
I would invite the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy to start 
over if she wishes. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, taxpayers paid $82,000 to 
operate this kitchen. And according to media reports the kitchen 
itself is a sight to behold. It is awesome. It has a full line . . . it 
has a top-of-the-line range, a heavy-duty microwave oven, a 
refrigerator and freezer that is roomy and functional, and a 
high-end dishwasher. It is nicer and better equipped than most 
kitchens in most homes in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this kitchen was equipped with taxpayers’ dollars 
by an NDP government that once promised to eliminate food 
banks in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, what was the total cost to install 
this equipment and equip this kitchen in the Liquor Board 
store? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m amazed that the 
members opposite obviously, or the member . . . I’m certain that 
they, some of them at least, and perhaps the member that’s 
asking the questions, remembers the old days when we used to 
have to fill out little paper slips to get a bottle or to get some 
alcohol out of liquor stores. 
 
We’re into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. This is an enhanced 

customer service opportunity. And let me tell you something. 
Local restaurateurs use that facility to boast about their wares 
and their culinary prowess and that what attracts a lot of people. 
It allows them an opportunity to boast about why the people 
want to come back to Regina, want to come back to 
Saskatchewan, because we have these types of facilities 
available in the 21st century as a customer service in a 
responsible way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The costs to the taxpayers associated with this 
kitchen are extremely high. The kitchen only operates about 64 
hours a month and at this rate is about $89 an hour to operate 
this kitchen. Taxpayers money is used to coordinate it, it is used 
for cleaning staff, it is used for groceries, it’s used for people to 
go and buy groceries, it’s even used for travel. 
 
The SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) told 
the media and the minister agrees that the kitchen provided 
information and customer service. It’s a good value. Well it’s a 
good value for whom? Free food to those who frequent the 
liquor store and guess who pays? You and I do. The taxpayers 
of this province. 
 
The members opposite can laugh about this — $82,000 is a lot 
of money to a lot of people in this province. It’s . . . $20,000 is 
what some people make in this province. But this government 
laughs about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, how can the NDP justify this and 
what is their priority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious that 
these people are so full of doom and gloom they still live in the 
dark ages. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe that that 
member would go on the attack against the restaurateurs of this 
great city — okay? — that have the opportunity to show their 
culinary prowess and invite people to come and taste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s get the facts straight here. They’re not 
listening. I want the people to know. The cost to operate this 
kitchen comes directly from profits made through the sale of 
liquor. The General Revenue Fund does not support SLGA. 
 
Monthly wine seminars are held and participants pay between 
$17 and $26 per ticket. They are very popular and always sold 
out. Some of the comments from people that frequent, that go 
and visit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Okay, so we are in the Dark Ages. Well it’s 



2590 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

this government’s in the Dark Ages. The people of this province 
. . . and it’s a lack of respect for tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
believe . . . Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, how many hard-earned 
taxpayers’ dollars are wasted by this government not only on 
this, but many other issues. 
 
And the members opposite talk about highways. Well I’ll tell 
you the $82,000 would go a lot further if it was spent on 
helping to repair some highways in this province, fixing some 
potholes, than it would to put it into a kitchen in a liquor board 
store. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other 
priorities, one of which is there’s been a safe house . . . they’ve 
been calling for a safe house in Regina for six years to help 
children — $82,000 would go a long way to providing a safe 
house for the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why have fancy bells and whistles 
in the liquor board stores taken priority over basic needs of 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, once again obviously the 
member opposite does not keep up to date with what this 
coalition government is doing. In the budget there is money to 
build a safe house. It’s there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And they still will not accept the fact that 
the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority is very 
responsible in ensuring that all the programs and the handling 
of liquor is done in a safe and responsible manner, but will not 
accept the fact that it’s a retail business. 
 
They go on the attack of the restaurateurs who have a facility 
that’s not funded by the taxpayers, it’s from the profits that 
come from a retail business. I don’t know how much better to 
explain it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians Amendment Act, 2002 

 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Today I’m joined by two officials at this point. Sitting to 
my right is Donald Koop, the vice-president of commercial 
services for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) and seated to my left is Doug Porter, the director 
of risk management services for SPMC. 
 
I understand that we will be joined shortly behind the bar by 
Andrea Seale, who is the Crown counsel, legislative services, 
for Sask Justice. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the minister and his official and coming officials. 
 
This Bill, Bill No. 5, is substantially similar to Bill No. 29. Bill 
No. 29 was pulled and this one reintroduced. And I guess the 
question is: what was wrong with that one, what is so much 
better with this one? Why the playing around with different 
Bills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much. This is a 
seemingly relatively straightforward Bill and a seemingly 
straightforward change. I want to tell the member and tell 
members of the Assembly that this is a Bill that’s actually been 
worked on for many years now. 
 
Where we are into issues that deal with title and professional 
roles and responsibilities, especially where we are dealing with 
a number of groups, it’s important that we make sure that we 
have the language correct in the Bill. 
 
The Bill, I believe, was initially prepared some months ago as 
we introduced it. And I ended up as the new minister of SPMC 
and we started dealing with the groups again. It was suggested 
by the . . . one of the groups that we were consulting with that it 
was preferable to change the Bill, to withdraw Bill 29, 
introduce this new Bill which does substantively the same thing 
— and to proceed in that direction. 
 
So it is unfortunate that there was some confusion that we had 
introduced originally Bill 29, but Bill 69 does substantively the 
same thing but with language which is preferred by the 
technicians and technologists as well as by the architects. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. A statement was made 
that this has been a number of years in the coming and that to 
the change of ministers in charge, there was a bit of a hiatus that 
went on. 
 
And then I believe the minister said there was some more 
discussion with groups that had some interest in it. And I would 
like for the minister to list the various groups that they did 
consult with because it’s been our experience throughout this 
legislative period that there are pieces of legislation that do 
come to this House that have been very poorly researched and 
had very little input by the groups that have some special 
interest in it. 
 
So I would like for the minister to list the groups that were . . . 
had some discussion with government on this particular Bill and 
whether all those groups are onside with the legislation as it 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2591 

 

exists presently in Bill No. 69. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to report to 
the member that, given the relatively narrow scope of this Bill, 
the consultations did involve three different parties who are 
affected: the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors’ Association, 
Saskatchewan Association of Architects, and of course, the 
association of science technologists and technicians. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I guess the other part of the 
question that I had and I’m going to repeat that one, is were all 
those groups . . . are all those groups now onside with Bill No. 
69 as it’s been presented to the House and that we’re discussing 
today? 
 
And as well, a general statement on what is the intent of this 
amended legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I was of 
course remiss to mention to the member that all three groups are 
now in agreement with the wording of the Bill and do support 
it. 
 
The Bill undertakes to clarify the roles and responsibilities of 
the various professions that are involved. It recognizes that 
people involved in the applied science technology and 
technicians do indeed work from time to time in the area that 
has traditionally been dealt with by the architect solely. This 
provides both title protection for the technologists and 
technicians as well as making sure that the architects’ 
profession is also maintaining support. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I’m pleased to be joined today by deputy minister Neil 
Yeates with the Department of Corrections and Public Safety. 
The assistant deputy minister, Don Head, is seated to my left. 
Behind me is Heather Murray, who is the senior standards and 
inspections officer with the department. And seated directly 
behind me is Darcy McGovern who is Crown counsel of 
legislative services for the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Amendments in 
section 28 take a fairly positive step in recognizing victims’ 
rights. And I’ll quote a line from section 28: 
 

Victims must be involved in the decision to allow an 
inmate to be absent from a correctional facility. 

 
I would like for the minister to elaborate on the extent of the 

involvement that will be allowed to victims of crime. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this section of the 
Act deals specifically with leaves which are authorized for 
non-medical purposes. Obviously medical leaves we would deal 
with somewhat differently. 
 
But I want to advise the member and all members of this House 
that victims will be contacted before the leaves are granted; 
their advice will be sought. It will be weighed out against what 
corrections officials believe is the risk level. 
 
And at that point, once those issues have been taken into 
account, a decision will be made as to whether to grant the 
leave. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. There would probably be 
numbers of situations where the victim is not able to be 
involved in making a comment on this, either possibly due to 
age or other kinds of circumstances. In what situations would 
the victim’s family be given the opportunity to sort of take the 
victim’s place in a statement on being absent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are actually a number of 
different people who may be contacted in the case that the 
member has outlined. This is certainly anybody who has filed a 
victim impact statement and registered with victims services. In 
many cases it will be . . . also the police will be contacted, 
Social Services, and other agencies to make sure that there’s 
been appropriate involvement. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Under what circumstances will the victim’s 
family be allowed to be a part of that? 
 
(11:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Given the nature of the offenders that 
we are dealing with in the system, in most cases the victim is 
still in a position to be contacted. 
 
In the case that the victim is not able to be contacted, or in 
particular in a case if the victim is deceased, the victim’s family 
would be contacted in these matters. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Chair, to the minister, 
does the department have a list of circumstances which would 
meet the criteria for request for absence to be made or is each 
request just sort of judged on its own merit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there are three areas 
that we would consider releasing an offender for. This is dealt 
with under, I understand, the federal Act that we have . . . are 
working under. 
 
One is a humanitarian ground. For instance, if an offender 
wants to attend a funeral of a family member we would 
consider it at that point. Second is reintegration or socialization 
issues where we may want to have programming continued in 
the community as opposed to in the facility. Under those two 
cases there would be victim consideration. We would give 
consideration as to whether . . . what the victim’s views are on 
this. 
 



2592 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

The third area where an offender may ask is medical. In this 
case, given the usual pressing need for this, it would likely . . . 
in fact we would not consider at that point the victim’s release 
but the intent clearly in that is for the . . . for it to be a very short 
time away from the facility. 
 
So those are the three circumstances. We do in fact have a 
policy outlining how we weigh out the risk. Unfortunately I 
don’t have it here today. I can make it available to the member 
at a later point, though. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, you outlined three 
situations under which this absence could take place. One was a 
medical reason, one was that there was a particular event that 
the . . . that may wanted to be attended to. The third one dealt 
with sort of moving back into the community and different sorts 
of situations. 
 
The other two would definitely have some time limits put on 
them based by what the event is or what the sickness happens to 
be, but the third one could take all kinds of time. And I’m 
wondering what kind of criteria the department has to, when we 
move to that other area which is fairly open-ended, to decide 
what length of time. Or are there maximum lengths of time that 
can’t be exceeded regardless what the purpose is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, in these particular 
socialization, reintegration issues, this type of a leave, often 
what these are are really day passes again and maybe the best 
way to phrase it, there may well be an overnight possibility to 
it. Often it is to allow the offender to participate in counselling 
programs or other things which are offered outside of the 
facility. 
 
Now I’m advised by the officials that this is a very small 
number of people that we would authorize on this. Of the 
roughly 1,100 offenders that are in the jail, there may be 30 
who would be considered for this type of a release or program. 
 
Now the maximum amount of time that they would be allowed 
out on this kind of a leave would be 60 days. Now in that case 
that seems like a lot, but it would be in the case that they are 
participating in some kind of resident treatment program. 
 
In the case where these leaves are given and there is an 
overnight, there is a regular reporting process required back to 
the police to ensure that they are participating and that they are 
meeting the terms that are necessary. In the case that they don’t, 
they are then taken back into, into custody and taken back into 
the facility. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Sometime ago, Mr. Minister, we 
spent a number of hours discussing rehabilitative programs and 
we won’t go into the specifics of those today. But part of the 
rehabilitative program is that individuals, if they want some 
remission, need to obey the rules of the facility and they need to 
participate in rehabilitative programs. 
 
Now the question I have is — and a bit of an analogy that 
comes from a former life of mine where a student was asked to 
sit down and the student sat down and said, I’m still standing on 
the inside — what ability do people in a correctional facility 
have to look at an individual who has taken the program but 

doing it simply to manipulate the system and then sort of say, 
well I took the program but on the inside I really haven’t 
changed and I don’t intend to, but I took the program so now I 
want the benefit for it. 
 
What ability do you have within the system to make some 
subjective decisions on those kinds of issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Certainly I think all of us recognize it’s 
very hard to anticipate in many of these cases what human 
nature will cause these individuals to do. 
 
The sole participation in programming is not a sufficient criteria 
to warrant remission. There is obviously a monitoring to ensure 
that people are adapting their lifestyles to deal with this. This is 
not however a flawless process, and from time to time there are 
certainly going to be problems and be issues, and we will have 
to deal with those as it occurs. 
 
But this is a case where there are a number of different factors 
which will be taken into account to deal with the remission of 
sentence. Certainly one of the benefits in this Act, which was 
initially presented by the Attorney General, is the fact that it 
now makes remission an earned benefit rather than an 
automatic. 
 
So there will be undoubtedly situations we will run into where 
people will have decided to ignore their programming or for 
one reason or another not stick to the program that they should. 
We will need to deal with those as those cases arise. 
 
But for the most part, we believe that this is a better system to 
work under and we will endeavour to make sure the resources 
are available within the system to deal with these individuals. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And the minister makes a correct 
statement, that when you deal with human nature nothing is 
ever definite and a for sure. And that leads me into my next 
question. 
 
Society always has a bit of a concern for their security when 
people are let out — and justifiably so. And I think to some 
extent society has to take some risk because obviously, as we 
just finished discussing, human nature dictates that we can’t 
make a perfect decision in every case. 
 
Looking at where the program has been and where you hope 
this program is going to go, what assurance can you give to the 
public that they will be at least as safe as they were before, and 
hopefully more secure with this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this is a very good 
question and certainly one that is of significant interest to us. 
We believe though that by moving to this new system that there 
will be a greater ability for us to keep high-risk offenders in the 
facility, and keep them in the programming that we believe is 
necessary for them. 
 
If they are however deemed to be of a . . . the risk level is 
deemed to be moderate or little to the community, there will 
still be many checks and balances that need to be in place. This 
may include reporting to police, this may include other things. 
But certainly we will include the comments in the sense of what 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2593 

 

the community believes. 
 
I wanted to just say to the member that one of the things that I 
have certainly found in the brief time that I have been the new 
Minister of Corrections and Public Safety is that there are often 
competing interests within the community. And so this is a case 
where we have opted for a much broader perspective of the 
number of people that are involved and consulted, and we will 
continue on that in terms of . . . the terms of release rather than 
just a very narrow focus on community. 
 
So it is a complicated matter. Certainly there is some risk — we 
believe it to be small — and certainly we will put the steps in 
place. But we do believe that forcing this change which will 
require offenders to earn remission is preferable to the system 
we currently operate under. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, in section 35 your 
notes indicate an interesting word, and that is when you’re 
talking about the community correctional programs that most of 
those programs will be provided by the corrections staff — 
most. My question has two parts to it. 
 
Who will be providing the remainder of the program that is not 
provided by corrections staff? And what percentage essentially 
is that going to be of the program? 
 
(11:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it is the intention of the 
department to increase our capacity internally to deal with this 
within the facilities and within the correctional service. 
 
However, there are certainly programs where we may need to 
rely upon or find it better to rely upon the resources which are 
already in the community. This may include services offered by 
non-government organizations, be it alcohol and drug groups to 
work within the community, or be it health districts in terms of 
services like mental health where we may decide that that is a 
preferable group given their experience and the expertise that’s 
needed to deal with things like sex offender behaviour issues. 
 
So it will be a partnership that we’re looking at, but we are 
certainly of a view that we want to increase our own capacity 
within the correctional service to provide that within. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Minister, I want to 
thank you for the time that you had this morning to go through 
some of those questions, and for your officials. I’m hoping that 
we’ll meet again this spring in estimates because there’s a few 
things that we started to discuss last time that I think need some 
further discussion. Particularly as you relate to some of the 
failures in some of the areas of the province, particularly the 
member from Cumberland, I’m sure he’ll be interested to listen 
to that. 
 
And so at this point, Mr. Chairman, that concludes the questions 
we have on this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. I wanted to 
thank again the opposition spokesman, the member for 
Rosthern, for his questions in both estimates and in this Bill. 
Certainly this has been a unique circumstance for us as we’re 

trying to pull together a new department here and I appreciate 
his understanding of that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Department of Economic 
Development Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — Whenever the minister is ready he can introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Today I’m joined by Bryon Burnett who is the assistant deputy 
minister of the Department of Industry and Resources. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And through the 
minister, welcome to your official. And I just have a couple of 
quick questions. It’s not a very complicated set of amendments 
that we’re looking at, but I think for the record I wouldn’t mind 
having a couple of questions answered if you don’t mind. 
 
We’re mainly focusing here on information technology as the 
amendment is going and I wonder if, just as an overview 
response, if you could give me some idea of why these changes, 
in your view, you think are necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there are two main 
areas that this Bill deals with. One is a set of policy 
amendments that add a provision to allow the minister 
responsible for this Act to carry out the mandate for the Office 
of Information Technology, which was not initially included in 
the 1993 Act. 
 
Part of this is it allows a government-wide perspective for it. So 
there’s an ability to deal with the services of government-wide 
information technology usage and information management. 
The second main policy amendment is it allows the minister 
responsible to provide funding for these information technology 
initiatives which currently is not in the 1993 Act. There are then 
a couple of other small housekeeping amendments to deal 
largely with reorganization. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, minister. Referring now to the 
information technology, is this going to apply, will this apply to 
all departments? Is there still going to be some departments that 
won’t be part of the IT (information technology) strategy? Will 
there be some agencies, in fact, that will still be doing their own 
IT work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this Act . . . these 
amendments will allow us to deal in a more coordinated fashion 
with different government departments. Individual government 
departments will still be responsible for their own information 
technology. Now they may do that in shared service 
arrangements, but this is not a case of we would be centralizing 
it. 
 



2594 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

What we will be centralizing, though, is the coordination of it 
so it allows us to set standards and to deal with, in particular, 
government on-line initiatives where we are trying to bring a 
standard out to individuals, a standard profile for the 
government. 
 
So it increases the department’s ability to do coordinating with 
individual departments but it will not mean that all of the 
various branches of information technology across government 
will be consolidated under the Department of Industry and 
Resources. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, wouldn’t that be the 
appropriate way to go, that there be a central purchasing and a 
central control of IT? I guess where I am going with this, if you 
want to get all the governments on to the same page, and I see 
in the amendments there’s an increased spending limit. Is that 
not contemplating acquiring and distributing IT both in 
coordination but in actual implementation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The Act would provide the department 
with the ability to do cross-government procurement and set 
those standards. But individual government departments do 
have different needs and we need to be mindful of that. As well 
we need to understand that systems have developed that we 
need to adapt and to deal with. 
 
If we were starting over from ground zero, moving from the old 
IBM (International Business Machines Corporation) Selectrics 
into an IT, information technology offering within government, 
we would probably do it differently. However government 
departments have evolved. This allows us to coordinate that 
without taking over central control and dictating it. We will still 
need to work cooperatively with the departments. This does 
allow us to set standards though. 
 
On the question of the government on-line project and the 
amount of money available there, this again is an area where we 
are wanting to move more aggressively in terms of providing a 
government on-line service. Ultimately that will involve a large 
number of things. Certainly some departments are more 
advanced than others. 
 
The Department of Finance now has the ability to file 
electronically certain tax forms — that’s in place. Other 
departments have the ability to apply for licences. Some 
departments simply have a Web site. And so what this provides 
us with is an ability to work with these departments and better 
coordinate that. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If in fact you’re 
going to try to do that kind of coordinating on behalf of other 
agencies and government departments, how does this affect the 
budgeting for each particular department? Are you going to 
accept the increased budgeting required that I assume is 
associated with the increase in spending limit that’s being asked 
for? 
 
In fact, how does that relate and which department will that 
budgeting be assigned to? The Act, the name of the Act is The 
Department of Economic Development Act and that’s rather 
confusing because there really is no department now with 
Industry and Resources. 

It becomes very confusing for anybody wanting to understand 
what you’re trying to accomplish. And transparency of your 
actions I think is quite important in today’s age where we’re 
talking about information technology, which is supposed to 
make the transparency and accountability even more apparent to 
people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I should start by saying 
I am joined on my left by the chief information officer for the 
province, John Law, who is largely . . . well I guess, almost 
entirely responsible for this particular section. 
 
One of the . . . To answer the member’s question, there are two 
different questions here. One is the question of how the 
transparency will be reflected. Individual departments will 
continue to have an information technology budget. It will be 
reflected within the budget estimates and we will certainly have 
the ability on the floor of the legislature to question individual 
departments about what their procurement is or what their 
spending is. 
 
There is, however, an enhancement through the government 
on-line project for us to bring together various departments 
through shared services and different initiatives to work across 
these departmental boundaries. This allows us to help bring 
together a set of clear procurement standards and information 
standards. 
 
There are two other comments I want to offer to the member. 
First of all is that we are amending this Act. So it is not the 
Department of Economic Development Act, but rather the 
economic development Act. So we will . . . because names of 
departments change, the intention of the department, whether 
it’s named Industry and Resources or formerly Energy and 
Mines, is to deal with economic development. One of these 
changes will deal with that. 
 
The second issue I wanted to note is that there is still a great 
deal of work that needs to be done within information 
technology and information management. And we will need to 
deal with that probably in future years as we move forward with 
other legislation. This simply provides us with a coordinating 
ability now to begin work on that. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, in fact, under which budget 
item in next year’s budget will we be seeing this particular 
increase in projected spending? 
 
And under the IT aspect, whose budget will we be ask . . . be 
able to ask these questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It’s my understanding that this will 
appear in the Department of Industry and Resources budget. 
That’s our intention at this point is that there would be a . . . I 
anticipate a separate subvote for this under the department of 
. . . or under the Department of Industry and Resources. So we 
will have the ability to question this directly here. However, if 
members have questions about other departments’ spending, 
that would certainly be followed within any of the critics and 
any of the votes that come before us. 
 
(11:30) 
 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2595 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I guess the obvious question 
then is: why is not the Minister of Industry and Resources 
initiating these amendments rather than yourself and through 
your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is actually a . . . jointly presented 
by myself, as the Minister Responsible for Information 
Technology, and the Minister of Industry and Resources. At this 
point the information technology office is housed within the 
Department of Industry and Resources, although it does have a 
separate reporting mechanism through to myself as the Minister 
Responsible for Information Technology. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the 
clarification. I think it’s important for people to understand 
what the relationship is, and kind of the schematics of how it all 
works. 
 
The next question I would have then would be: are you 
anticipating the need for increased staffing, increased 
employees in order to continue this . . . the coordination aspect 
of this plan, whether it’s intergovernment, interdepartmental, or 
including agencies as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, at this point we’re not 
anticipating an expansion of the information technology office 
itself. Certainly now that we have a new permanent head, a 
chief information officer for the province, there is that addition 
into the office. 
 
But this is a case where we are looking at working with 
different departments to marshal the resources that are already 
in place. I think that we note there are some 400 people within 
government who work on information technology, and it is a 
case that we are wanting to better coordinate and better marshal 
the resources that are already in place, to make more effective 
use and a better coordinated program for the government. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, was there ever any thought or 
maybe a business plan investigation of trying to accomplish the 
same thing with outsourcing a lot of the either equipment or 
expertise needed for the IT program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this is indeed an area 
that we are interested in, is how we can make better use of 
private sector resources that are available and the expertise that 
is there. There is already a degree of partnering between 
different departments and private sector companies. 
 
Again, our function in this particular office of information 
technology — and indeed in many of the government 
departments — is one of coordination of the resources. So it is 
not a case that we don’t work with the private sector. Indeed it 
is something I’m interested in seeing if we can build more 
capacity within Saskatchewan’s IT industry outside of 
government. And this is one of the things that, as we move 
forward, that I am hopeful that we will be able to do. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s 
encouraging because the world of IT, as you and your officials 
are well aware, is moving so quickly that it’s hard to focus on 
kind of two jobs at once — trying to direct the department and 
agencies and also keep up with the technology. So I’m pleased 

to hear that and we’ll be watching for how that’s working out. 
 
Just another quick question following that. As you’re trying to 
coordinate the IT through the different agencies and 
departments, will this include the Crowns as well and 
coordinating some of that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the short answer is yes, 
that we are looking for a government-wide response and our 
coordination. And that indeed is very much what Mr. Law’s job 
will be. So it’s not limited solely to the executive side of 
government. It will in fact, also involve coordination with the 
Crown sector. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister. I just have another 
question along the line of security or privacy. You know, we’ve 
had questions come up in this legislature about the distribution 
of information that wasn’t necessarily should have been 
distributed, or that whole aspect of privacy and computers very 
often has people right on the edge of a nervous breakdown. 
They don’t want to give any information because that 
information might be shared. 
 
Can you give some assurance that in this particular IT program 
that we’re going to go even further to secure the information — 
it’s not going to be available right across the board — so that 
people will start to feel more comfortable and confident that the 
information that is on hand is going to be used for the specific, 
exact purpose and not shared inadvertently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is very much our objective and it 
is something that we are going to need to clearly work on across 
government departments. Now different departments may have 
different security needs in terms of the type of information 
which is required. 
 
Certainly I know from my other role as Minister of Corrections 
and Public Safety, there is a large amount of information there 
that we need to make sure is protected and tightly limited in 
terms of who has access to it. Certainly we know the Minister 
of Health has similar privacy concerns. 
 
So we need to start thinking about how we deal with this across 
government This is something that our office will work with 
other departments on. And it is something that we, through the 
. . . was it PricewaterhouseCoopers study that we are going to 
continue to take a look at also. 
 
There are two sets of issues here that need to be weighed out. 
One is the type of information we’re collecting and the second 
is the access and usage within government. I think that often we 
have focused in the past on simply information technology. And 
we have forgotten about information management. 
 
It is our view that this new office and indeed the approach that 
we’re looking at within IT is about capacity building within the 
private sector. It is about better coordination within 
government. It is also about making sure that we have a sound 
and reasonable information management policies and programs 
in place. 
 
So I wish I could tell you today that this is . . . slap down a large 
piece of papers for you to tell you that that is what our policy is. 



2596 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

We need to work our way through it. It is very much a work in 
progress and we are going to work within our government, but 
also, I think, across other provinces to see what kind of 
standards can be set. 
 
So very much the concerns are noted and I would say indeed 
are shared in terms of how we move forward in this area. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate those 
comments because I think the sharing with other jurisdictions is 
also quite important. I think the information becomes global, 
but then again you have to make sure that there is security and 
priorization of who has access to these. 
 
And when you use the word we’re going to begin to begin to 
put this together, I hope that isn’t what you meant. I assume up 
to this stage a lot of work has been done. 
 
It’s a moving target, and I would certainly concur that we have 
to keep moving in that direction, but building on what I hope 
you referred to, as something that is secure and not starting 
from square one. 
 
So I would encourage you to certainly go in that direction. And 
I don’t have any particular problems with the direction of trying 
to coordinate IT. And under the right conditions and 
fundamentals, I think the Act is going in the right direction. 
 
I have no further questions, Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to very 
briefly respond that this is very much a work in progress. 
Certainly the comment from the member opposite is well taken. 
What we are endeavouring to do is provide better coordination 
and a better standard of practice in terms of how we are dealing 
with information privacy. 
 
I think all members of this House are certainly aware of the 
difficulty and the complexities as we try and manage these 
issues, but we are continuing to work with it. I should also note 
that the company that we are dealing with on these issues is 
Deloitte & Touche. I may have said PricewaterhouseCoopers 
but it is Deloitte & Touche. 
 
And just in closing, I’d like to obviously thank the officials for 
the work that they’re doing. I want to say personally I’m very 
excited about the fact that John Law is taking over as the chief 
information officer for the province. I think this is a very, very 
good opportunity for us to move forward. And I want to thank 
the member for his questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 

officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
introduce this morning the president and CEO (chief executive 
officer) of SLGA, Ms. Sandra Morgan, seated to my left; Lisa 
Ann Wood, executive director of human relations; Faye Rafter 
is here with us, who is the manager of inspection services 
branch; and Fiona Cribb, who is the manager of policy and 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. I have several 
questions regarding Bill No. 48. It is a very extensive Bill and I 
think that time will tell if there are issues around it that we can’t 
identify today. But upon studying the Bill and reading through 
it there are a few issues that jump out at us and that we would 
like to address to you this morning. 
 
I guess of concern is that there are 36 some changes to the Bill 
— very lengthy and intensive changes. But one major concern 
is that the number of issues that are now going to be decided 
through regulation. And I wonder if you might comment, Mr. 
Minister, on why you are moving all these provisions from the 
Legislative Assembly and now putting them under regulation? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
for the question. A lot of these changes were as a result — and 
incorporation of these regulations — were as a result of the 
Wakeling report, based on the review that was done and his 
suggestion, that a lot of these issues be outlined in Regulations. 
 
Now, here is what Justice Wakeling had said: 
 

I do not think it is expected I should grant an amendment to 
section 133, but I do think the approach taken in The Public 
Service Act has many advantages. It leaves the nature of 
the guidelines to be established by regulation which 
provides the minister and cabinet with a broader discretion 
and permits changes to be made much more readily as 
circumstances may dictate. 

 
And I believe, with respect to a lot of the permits and a lot of 
the regulations, they’ve always been there regulating permittees 
and permits. So there have not been any significant changes for 
any underhanded purposes other than to comply with what Mr. 
Justice Wakeling had suggested would allow for more 
flexibility in ensuring that if there was a need to tighten up or 
loosen up, if you wish, for the benefit of customers that use 
permits, permit holders, that it would be more flexible doing it 
through changes in regulations than having to revisit the 
legislation each time. 
 
So that’s primarily the purpose largely due to the report as 
Justice Wakeling had outlined, and the others have always been 
in regulations. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
guess the concern that we have on this side of the House and 
certainly the people of Saskatchewan I’m sure would have if 
they realized what was going on here is that now we are moving 
the decision making from the legislative body to being made 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2597 

 

behind closed doors in regulations which is a function of the 
minister and cabinet. 
 
And especially in light of last year’s incident where it was 
brought forth that there were gifts being accepted by ministers 
of the Crown from liquor companies and now instead of 
changing the actions of the minister, we find that the rules are 
being changed and not only are the rules being changed, but 
they are being moved into regulations so they are out of the 
view of the people of the province. And I’d like you to 
comment on how you justify that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and I say with all due 
respect, it’s almost as if the suggestion is being disrespectful to 
what the Hon. Chief Justice Wakeling had indicated that 
suggested be done. 
 
I regret that the member feels that people see us as behind 
closed doors entering into some agreements to do underhanded 
and devious things. I want to point out that this particular Bill 
was primarily, first of all, to enhance the authority’s 
accountability as a regulator and a lot of that as a result of some 
of the questions that were asked and the review that was done. 
 
The other reason for this Bill . . . And, once again, reminding, 
Mr. Chairman, the member this is a retail business so it will 
improve the business and administrative practices related to 
liquor permits. Once again, it’s not to take anything away from 
our customers, from the people of the province. It’s to enhance 
their opportunities, their access to what they feel meets their 
needs and meets their expectations as well. 
 
It also will enhance the authority’s legislative basis for action in 
its role as distributor and regulator of the liquor and gaming 
industries in the province and support the authority’s role in 
promoting the socially responsible use of liquor and gaming 
products. So the entire Act was revisited but not to make it 
detrimental or inaccessible for clients of the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. That would be totally opposite 
to what any retail operation should be doing. 
 
And once again, I want to underline that it’s the responsible use 
of liquor and gaming products in this province that’s underlined 
and reinforced, was reinforced, I believe, as a result of and the 
implementation of the recommendations of Mr. Wakeling. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, what I was referring to was not 
talking about clients or the responsible use of alcohol by people 
in Saskatchewan. I was talking about the provision that was in 
legislation before that restricted acceptance of gifts by SLGA 
employees and by ministers of the Crown from accepting gifts 
from liquor companies. 
 
And when ministers of the Crown were found to be in conflict 
of this and there was a review initiated, instead of tightening up 
the actions of the employees and the minister, we are now 
changing the rules, and we’re not only changing the rules but 
we’re removing them from the floor of the legislature. 
 
So I think it is a serious concern and it is now being taken away 
from the view of the public. I did not refer in any way to the 
responsible use of alcohol by the people of the province when I 
was referring to this. 

And, Mr. Minister, we were talking about under regulation is 
the extension of who is eligible for commercial liquor permits. 
And I wonder if you would comment on why you felt it 
necessary to extend those that are eligible for liquor permits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the purpose for easing that, 
if you wish, expanding the opportunities and making easier for 
commercial permit holders to change permits from a name or 
corporation instead of having to go through the entire process 
once again of reapplying, they would be recognized as one of 
the original permit holders. If they change from an individual to 
a corporation they would not have to go through the entire 
process once again, which was something that was welcomed 
by commercial permit holders. 
 
The other reason for that was to allow more easier access for 
entities such as regional parks to apply for, under certain 
conditions and circumstances, a permit to allow them to 
participate in some activities that they may wish to include a 
permit for liquor. 
 
Well I want to go back to this regulation thing again, because I 
don’t want people to have the impression that this is something 
that’s been changed or put into place to advantage anybody. It’s 
just a matter . . . It’s a following of what Mr. Justice Wakeling 
had insisted — not insisted, but recommended — that once 
again that he saw that section 133, with respect to gifts and so 
on, was too restrictive, that he suggested that it be included 
similar to what’s under The Public Service Act because it has 
many advantages. 
 
So it allows the nature and the guidelines to be established by 
regulation which provides the minister and cabinet a broader 
discretion and permits those kinds of changes. So it’s, in effect, 
allows us now to prepare a strict code of conduct for all 
employees involved with the authority, which will be in place, 
which is being prepared, and again all based on and I believe a 
process that was well worthwhile, and by a very astute 
gentleman who look at all the aspects of participation by 
employees, responsibilities. And those recommendations have 
been taken very, very seriously and there will be a very strict 
code of conduct to address the concerns by having the 
regulations in place as well. If they need to be tightened up then 
it’s much easier to do it when they’re in regulation than if the 
whole Act has to be reopened in legislation again. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I guess we will agree to disagree on this issue because 
I believe that Judge Wakeling recommended that there be 
changes made, amendments made, but he certainly did not 
recommend that they be eliminated from the Act, and that they 
be out of scrutiny of the legislature. I do not believe that was 
what Judge Wakeling recommended. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, while Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
claims that accepting these gifts in the past did not contravene 
guidelines set down by the authority, the guidelines themselves 
did not follow the legislation which stated expressly that 
accepting these gifts was illegal. 
 
And so now what the government has chosen to do is to get rid 
of the regulation . . . or get rid of the legislation, move it into 
regulation, and they will be free to set the guidelines as they so 



2598 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

choose. 
 
I do not believe that this is a correct action to be taken, and to 
move this decision making out of the view of the legislation . . . 
legislative process, and if there’s a code of conduct in place that 
is acceptable and something that the people of Saskatchewan 
would condone, I see no reason why it should not be done in 
this Legislative Assembly, not in regulation. 
 
But we’ll move on from that, Mr. Minister. We were talking 
about permits. And, Mr. Minister, you indicated that this would 
enable entities such as the regional parks and so on to access 
permits more readily. And I’m wondering if you, when making 
this decision, took into consideration the impact it would have 
on existing businesses and groups that currently can receive 
permits, and what that impact might be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there is no direct impact. 
Some of these commercial organizations have to set up separate 
entities in order to apply for a commercial permit. In the case of 
the regional parks, what they would have had to do in the past 
was to set up a company — and I don’t like the use of the word, 
but people use it as a slang — have to set up dummy companies 
in order to be legally entitled to make an application for a 
permit. So this will not have any significant impact on what’s 
already been in place for commercial permit holders. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then you are giving 
assurance that this is not going to change the way things are 
carried out today, it’s just going to make it more convenient for 
those and not . . . and so I will accept that explanation, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I’m wondering if this legislation in any way addresses the issue 
of choice where individuals or businesses or organizations can 
purchase their licence and purchase their liquor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, no, the legislation does not 
address that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me if this legislation 
in any way affects suppliers of casinos? I know it talks a lot 
about suppliers, but the ones that supply directly to casinos, 
does this impact them and does it impact their employees as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — What the Act will require and strengthen 
to some extent is the . . . right now suppliers and employees 
have to be registered. What this has done is extended it to 
include non-gaming entities such as laundry, for example, and 
objects and things that are not directly related to the gaming 
industry but are supplied to the facility. So it now extends the 
need or requirement for registration to that entity as well as the 
suppliers themselves and the employees. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Could you 
explain to me exactly how you would go about doing that and 
what are the . . . or is there a form they fill out or what 
stipulation is there for them to meet the requirements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. Yes, there 

is an application form that would be submitted with all the 
necessary detail and background of an individual and/or if it’s a 
corporation or company. And the due process is followed to do 
the background checks and follow up on any requirements that 
are stipulated in the legislation that people . . . the information 
that people would have to supply. And the authority would have 
to be satisfied that they’ve met all the criteria that’s in 
legislation to allow them to become a registered entity within 
the current . . . under the liquor control Act. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. On several 
occasions throughout the Bill there’s reference to good 
character and that good character is a prerequisite to obtaining 
licensing and being involved in the liquor and gaming industry 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Could you please tell us how SLGA would go about 
determining if someone had good character? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the matter of good 
character is common in our language and in our . . . good 
character that’s in our British common-law practices. That kind 
of language is universal — people of good character and the 
need for assessment to determine that good character with 
respect to any criminal background activity. Any perhaps 
financial stability would be another perhaps . . . not perhaps, but 
would be a requirement with respect to satisfying the quality for 
good character. 
 
But it’s in the common-law language of our country and 
similarly in this province. So it’s part and parcel of ensuring 
that in situations or in responsibility areas that may be sensitive 
and involve financial dealings, and particularly with the gaming 
industry, you would appreciate the need for a requirement to 
ensure. 
 
And I think the people would want us to be doing that to make 
sure that we had the . . . we did all the due diligence, if you 
wish, that may be required to ensure that people . . . we do have 
responsible people and accountable people that are employed 
and engaged in our efforts. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave to introduce a guest, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I’d like to ask members of the legislature to 
recognize a visitor to our Chamber. I note behind the bar, Lorne 
Hepworth, a minister with the administration in the 1980s. I 
was fortunate enough to serve in the 1980s with Mr. Hepworth. 
He was minister I think of Education, Finance — if I’m right, 
Lorne? — and served with distinguishment in this legislature. 
 
So I want to say, Lorne, welcome back and I hope you enjoy 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2599 

 

your stay here as you watch today’s proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to 
take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Hepworth to the 
Legislative Assembly who is from my riding of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and so I’d like to welcome him here as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just have one more set of questions to ask you 
about, pertaining to the legislation and to the broader issue of 
horse racing in the province of Saskatchewan. And I was just 
referring to good character and that is one of the . . . and I 
believe it is the only reference that is made to the horse racing 
industry in Saskatchewan in the Bill, is about the good character 
provision. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, as you I’m sure are aware, there is great 
concern about the whole horse racing industry in the province 
of Saskatchewan. I believe that various components of the horse 
racing industry have made representation to you, as they have to 
myself, and are very concerned about maintaining this heritage 
industry in our province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering what provisions are being made 
by your department in order to enhance horse racing in 
Saskatchewan as opposed to what we see happening today, 
which is the decline of an industry that we have long valued in 
our province and which is a great tourism draw. It provides jobs 
for many people in this province. 
 
What we’ve seen over the last several years is the continual 
decline in horse racing activity in the province. We’ve seen the 
loss of families that gave their life to the horse racing industry, 
that have left our province. And along with that we’ve lost the 
breeders the trainers, people that work at the track, those that 
provide accessory services. And also we’ve lost a lost a lot of 
dollars because of the spin-offs that accompany that, that we 
have lost to the province. 
 
And I’m wondering if you could comment on this industry to 
me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, we’re 
concerned as well but this is not a phenomena only to 
Saskatchewan. I’m told, and I understand, that there is a decline 
generally across North America with respect to the choice of 
citizens for this type of entertainment. 
 
And you’re probably aware, the member probably is aware, Mr. 
Chairman, that there are other forms of gambling now that have 
attracted people as a different form of entertainment. 
Nevertheless, and once again, it’s what people want. 
 
And I know it’s difficult. Nobody wants to see any kind of an 

industry decline, but if it’s an industry that demands the 
attention of the public as part of their choice, as to their choice 
for the entertainment that they would like to participate in, then 
we have no control over that. 
 
Now the race tracks in other places that are continuing and are 
— and I believe the member, Mr. Chairman, would say — are 
being successful are only successful because they are supported 
by another part of a gaming industry and that’s through VLT 
(video lottery terminal) programs. 
 
And here in this province we have been working with the 
breeders associations and with the people that are involved in 
horse racing. The province gives the association $1.4 million. 
And there is seasonal support from VLT revenues as well for 
that association. 
 
Now there are different entities within that association. We’ve 
been working very, very hard. And yes, the officials from 
SLGA and myself have met with these people. We want to do 
whatever we can within a responsibility authority to assist, but 
we need to have the co-operation of everybody that’s involved 
in that particular industry to come together. And we plan on 
once again bringing them together before the next season to see 
if we can’t sort out, iron out, or address what those specific 
concerns, disagreements, direction that we might take, in order 
to ensure that we can continue that form of entertainment, as 
you say, for our tourists, for people of this province. 
 
But once again, there needs to be the coming together of the 
different entities within the horse racing industry and we’re 
prepared to do that. We’re prepared to sit down with them and 
we will, as I said, before the next season. So we’ll likely be 
meeting with these folks come this fall and perhaps throughout 
the winter, winter months to determine just exactly what we 
need to do to address the ills that are affecting the decline of 
that particular form of entertainment. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, there has been a steady decline of the horse racing 
industry and the families and the people that support it in this 
province. And if we wait another year there might not be 
enough people left here to get the industry up and running. We 
now have only 18 days of racing in this province and there has 
been a steady decline of the people that are left in the province 
to support the industry. 
 
What the industry is asking is that they have control of the 
horse racing industry, that it not be given into the hands of 
exhibition parks. And they’re asking for the money to given 
directly to their association so that they can run the industry as a 
business and run it properly. They have given their life to this 
industry and to the passion of horse racing and they know the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is the same in any business. If you have people 
that are running it that are not familiar with it, have not been 
grown up in it, it is not their passion, they do not understand 
what makes the industry work. And the people that have horses 
and that belong to these associations for years are asking that 
the dollars be directed to them instead of being filtered through 
the exhibition association, and then they have to go to them and 
make a deal with them. 



2600 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

I would like your comments on this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I would 
like to just point out that . . . and I do believe that Mr. Doug 
Cressman is in . . . somehow related to the horse racing 
industry, so it’s not that those people do not have an idea of 
how to operate in that kind of an atmosphere. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, to the member as well, when the choice of 
this type of entertainment from the public and only 3 per cent 
indicate that as a choice of entertainment, I would very much 
appreciate if the member . . . and I would welcome any 
suggestions or ideas as well from the member to see how we 
can, once again, re-instill the interest. And if it’s a matter of 
funding, then how do we, how do we access that funding? 
 
And as you mention in the retail business, if you succeed it’s as 
a result of the product that you offer. And if you’re in the 
entertainment industry, which . . . let’s face it, horse racing, 
gambling, whatever form it may take, is a form of 
entertainment. And if there are fewer people want to participate 
in horse racing and participate instead by going to movies or 
going to the casinos, how do you then change or insist that they 
change their choices. 
 
So that’s another issue that needs to be addressed. It’s how do 
we enhance the product that we have to offer in any particular 
area that we need to attract customers in order to participate, in 
order to support and survive. 
 
So what I have here, Mr. Chairman, and perhaps I’d like to pass 
. . . send this over to the member and that’s a breakdown of the 
grants that go to each of the participating entities, the 
Queensbury Downs operators, and the total grants are involved, 
the adjusted grants, and so on. And I think that may . . . it will 
show that there is financial support, that that support has been 
there. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Now the authority does not set the number of days of racing, 
and I’m sure the member’s aware of that. It’s the exhibition 
associations. But that needs to be done as well. That’s why I say 
it’s so important for all of us involved in that business to get 
together and sit down and to come to a reasonable conclusion. 
 
If it’s a matter of, as the member pointed out, in the retail 
business, if it’s a matter of coming to the conclusion that, hey 
folks, how do we do . . . what do we have to do in order to 
enhance our product so people will come back and want to buy 
it again, then we need to address that. 
 
You know, as I pointed out and I don’t want to be repetitive, but 
it is a matter of choice for people as to the type of entertainment 
they want to participate in. And again, as I mentioned earlier, 
generally across North America there has been a decline in 
interest in horse racing. So we’re not an island unto ourselves. 
We’re part and parcel of what’s affecting the entire industry, 
not only here in Saskatchewan or Canada but in North America. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Well I think 
that the horse racing association would take great exception to 
what you are saying today — that somehow it’s because there is 

a lack of . . . there’s been a lack of interest over the years for 
horse racing. They certainly do not feel that. They believe that 
their industry has been killed by the policies and the 
heavy-handedness of this government in interfering in their 
industry. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you made mention that the operators of the 
park and exhibition associations receive the funding. It’s $1.6 
million that they receive from this government, and then they 
make the determination of what is going to happen with those 
dollars. Whether there’s 18 days of racing, which there is this 
year, or whether there’s 50, they still get the same amount of 
money. And the reason there isn’t anyone at the tracks is 
because there’s only three horses running around in one race. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this government has destroyed this industry in 
this province and do not . . . I do not believe it is appropriate to 
throw it on the backs of the people that have tried to keep this 
industry alive and have been met with roadblocks at every turn. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it’s very clear that the reason that there is 
live horse racing at all in the province is because in order to 
have simulcast and telecast theatre you must have a certain 
number of days of live racing. And that is where the profit is 
coming to this government. And the horse race industry is but a 
sideline and something that they have to put up with in order to 
be able to have simulcast and telecast and receive the profits 
from that. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I know you have indicated that you would be 
open to meeting with the horse association — there’s two or 
three of them in the province. And I would hope that you would 
give me a time and date, or a date — approximate date — when 
industry could look forward to that meeting in order to try and 
get this industry back on track. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that the letter that 
I sent over to the member will more specifically explain . . . I 
want to underline again, there’s been some very serious 
allegations made here with respect to the lack of consideration 
by this coalition government for the horse racing industry. That 
is not true. 
 
The money goes to the different associations, and there’s more 
than one. We have the standardbreds, we have the 
thoroughbreds, we have the First Nations, we have the speed 
racing people. So there’s not just one association. And there’s a 
distribution of that money to those associations and to the 
exhibition park. So let’s be clear that we have been . . . the 
authority has been doing everything possible to ensure that the 
distribution is fair. 
 
As far as it comes to . . . as far as it goes with the simulcast 
telecasts, that is federally controlled. It has nothing to do with 
what we do as far as the authority is concerned. So I just want 
to make it clear, and again it’s not a matter of creating 
roadblocks or barriers. 
 
This is good, we see it as good. But once again if you do not 
have customers to participate in the entertainment that you 
provide, how is that industry going to support it? How are you 
going to support that industry? If you don’t have people going 
to the movies and buying tickets how are you going to pay for 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2601 

 

the reels and the equipment that runs the movie theatre? So it’s 
all part and parcel, not different than a retail industry. 
 
If your product has lost favour with customers because they’ve 
made other choices, then you do whatever you can to enhance 
your product or you recognize that by golly, perhaps there is 
another form of entertainment that we need to address or look 
at, or coordinate. I’m not sure what you do in this case. 
 
But as I said, we’re prepared and we will meet again, and it will 
not be the first time we’ve met, and it perhaps won’t . . . well 
I’m sure it won’t be the last. But we’ve had many meetings. 
Officials have had many meetings with the different entities. 
And there’s more than one association, I want to underline that. 
And each of them have their own views. 
 
What we need to do hopefully is bring everybody together, and 
we will accomplish a great deal more, I believe, in that fashion 
— as opposed to having opposing views. We need to go in the 
same direction and accept reality, that it’s a matter of choice for 
people. We can’t force folks to go to the racetrack. We can’t do 
that. So we’ll do whatever we can to make sure that we help the 
industry, but there’s only so much that can be done. The 
industry needs to help itself as well, and we’ll participate in that 
kind of a process. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, there certainly are problems, and there certainly are 
issues surrounding this, and there is a will by the horse 
association, whether it’s thoroughbred or standard bred, to 
improve this industry. And, Mr. Minister, I would like to take 
you for your word that you will meet with these associations. I 
believe that Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, yourself, and 
the association should all be in the room at one time and come 
to a decision that will be of benefit to the horse racing 
association in Saskatchewan, and therefore to all people in the 
province — especially in Regina and Saskatoon, which are 
presently where most of the horse racing still does occur. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I would hope that you would initiate that 
meeting soon so that these problems do not arise next year. And 
I certainly hope that there are enough people that are still in 
Saskatchewan that are interested in making this happen when 
that meeting is convened. And so with that, I have no further 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2)/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi 

de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce any 
new officials he may have had. Same officials. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Bill 77 is a translation of Bill 48, and so I have 

no questions regarding this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before we 
move on then, perhaps at this point I want to take the 
opportunity to sincerely thank the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy for the questions with respect to the contents of this 
legislation. And I believe we’ve had a good discourse and 
exchange, and recognizing concerns that the member has 
brought with respect to some of the changes and some of the 
issues that need to be dealt with. And I believe that’s the type of 
discourse that we need to have in order to address the concerns 
on behalf of all the people of our province. 
 
So I want to thank the member. I want to certainly thank the 
officials of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority who 
do work very, very diligently to ensure that we meet not only 
the demands but the needs of the customers of whether it’s the 
Liquor Authority or Gaming, because it is a responsible form of 
entertainment that this coalition government wants to ensure 
prevails in this province. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 29 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
right I have Nigel Howard, who is the CEO of SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), and Glenda Bruce 
is to my left; she is the chief financial officer of SOCO. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome to your officials. 
 
The Bill No. 74, these amendments are very straightforward. 
There are about . . . if I counted right, about 40 words in the 
whole amendment to increase the borrowing by $20 million. 
 
Just a couple of questions just for the record, Mr. Minister. Is 
this going to increase the government debt or how is this going 
to be accounted for? 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m told by the officials that there is 
a small increase in the debt. But as well, that will be covered off 
by assets. This is basically for the buildings, Innovation Place 
. . . in Innovation Place in Saskatoon and in the Regina 
Research Park. So basically it’s capital that will be allocated to 
the buildings. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, if SOCO is being wound 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

down or moved over into the Crowns sector, why are we going 
through these amendments now? Why is this not being done 
through the Crown that will be taking over the assets or the 
operation of SOCO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to 
the member opposite, what this is really is an interim initiative 
as we are doing the transition between SOCO, between the 
corporation and the assets being moved to the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
And really what it’s to do is, as it relates to Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon and the Research Park in Regina, allow for capital 
for business operations to be financed such as constructing 
tenant improvements, building improvements, and building 
maintenance projects. 
 
So what we are is in a transition period as SOCO is moved and 
the assets are moved into Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Just one more question. Well then will the 
. . . as the assets move over to Crown Investments, will also the 
asset debt, as you described it, move over there as well? Or will 
the government still be responsible entirely under their budget 
for that particular transition debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — All right. Mr. Chairman, we’re just 
in the process of determining exactly where the Innovation 
Place and Research Park assets will land. And it . . . but the debt 
will follow the assets. If it’s in Crown Investments Corporation 
in, say, CIC III (Crown Investments Corporation Industrial 
Interests Inc.) as an example, or if it’s in an Innovation Place 
corporation within Crown Investments Corporation, that would 
all follow. 
 
And I think what they’ll be doing is looking for the simplest 
way to administer these assets, you know, in the most . . . I 
guess in the simplest way possible. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Okay. Thank you, Minister. It’ll be 
interesting to watch how this unfolds, how it gets transferred 
into Crowns, where it ends up, and we’ll be watching very 
closely. I want to thank your officials for being here for such a 
short amendment. We have no further questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I would 
like to thank my officials and the member opposite for his 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
introduce to my right Cheryl Hanson. To my left is John Boyd, 
executive director of policy and planning. Directly behind me is 

Peter Federko, CEO of Workers’ Compensation Board. And 
sitting beside Peter is Pat Parenteau, senior policy analyst from 
the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d also like to 
welcome the minister and her officials here today. Bill 72, an 
Act to amend workers’ compensation. 
 
I would like to start out by asking the minister, considering how 
many reviews and studies that have been done . . . I understand 
there’s been five reviews and studies done in the last few years. 
Mr. Dorsey has been a big part of at least two of them. 
 
And the amendments today are fairly . . . well there’s only a 
few amendments today considering the amount of study and 
amendments that have been recommended by Mr. Dorsey and 
other people in the different reviews. 
 
I’d just like to start by asking the minister to kind of outline the 
process that her officials and department took to come to the 
conclusion only to implement these few amendments to the Act, 
and what is the timeline as far as implementing the other many 
recommendations that have been proposed. And ultimately, will 
the minister be implementing or have intentions of 
implementing the other amendments that have been proposed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. When 
you look at the total report from the committee of review there 
was 48 recommendations: 29 of these recommendations have 
been or are being implemented through the change in board 
policy; 5 have been deferred pending implementation and 
evaluation of the other recommendations; and 14 
recommendations are being implemented through amendments 
to the Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister. More 
specific points about the amendments, section 2(a.1) the 
removal of the definition of the Canada Pension Plan. What is 
the purpose of removing this definition from the Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Justice has made this recommendation 
because its handled in The Interpretation Act and it’s no longer 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Concerning the average weekly 
wage, could the minister define how the average weekly wage 
of the industrial composite is determined? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The average wage is calculated by 
Statistics Canada. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Jones: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, and thank you to the member 
opposite. I wish to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Assembly some guests seated in the west gallery who are 
constituents of mine. We have with us Sam Sambasivam and 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

 

his wife Barbara, and their son Rupin who is down here to 
watch a football game tonight, and Barb and Sam’s nephew 
Marshall. 
 
And they’re all with us and I hope that they’re enjoying the 
proceedings this afternoon and I hope that we’ll all welcome 
them warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Just a clarification, Madam 
Minister. When we talk about the . . . Is the department using 
the statistics from all of Canada or just Saskatchewan to come 
up with the index or the . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Could the minister tell me the 
difference between the average weekly wage of the industrial 
composite as determined by StatsCanada and the average 
weekly wage of the Saskatchewan numbers for workers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Statistics Canada does the calculation 
province by province, and does the calculations for 
Saskatchewan based on Saskatchewan statistics. If you’re 
looking for a wider range of information, we don’t have that 
with us. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. In section 30 the presumption 
where the worker found dead unless contrary is shown . . . 
Could you explain what kind of investigation is done and by 
whom when a worker is found dead on the job? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There are claims representatives that 
would go out to the accident site. They would do interviews 
with the employer, with other employees, seeking any 
information that may be pertinent to the investigation. They 
would also investigate the actual accident site. 
 
The information brought back would be presented to a claims 
manager who would make the decision. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I don’t believe it’s quite that cut 
and dried. But for an example if an employee died from a heart 
attack and . . . how is that determined whether that’s work 
related or not? I mean it could be a pre-existing condition. It 
could be . . . the heart attack could have been caused by stress 
on the job. So how is something like a heart attack determined? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member opposite, you’re correct. I 
mean nothing is that cut and dried. When you’re dealing with a 
situation that may involve a heart attack well then you would be 
interviewing more people and taking more information into 

account — maybe a coroner’s report or physicians’ reports that 
would add to the information where your final decision would 
be made on the death. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Next question is concerning 
section 38.1, the maximum wage rate. Does the minister know 
what additional cost the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) 
will incur by raising the maximum wage rate from 48,000 to 
51,900 effective 2003? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When we look at the increments that the 
maximum wage will go up, it’s just about impossible to give 
you a definite figure to go each step one at a time for a variety 
of reasons, because we don’t know how many workers are 
going to be injured during that time, what their wage rate may 
be. 
 
But as soon as this Bill is proclaimed and the three increases 
take effect, there will be an actuarial . . . there’s an actuarial 
calculation done that measures, for the current claims, what the 
costs will be projected into the future for those three 
increments. 
 
And being they’re all three in the legislation at once, the cost 
for all three will be booked immediately. So that would be the 
$33 million, the actuarial adjustment that will put those . . . 
cover those increases into the future. Being they’re proclaimed, 
it has to be booked all at once. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — So you couldn’t give us an estimate of those 
costs today then for that year and the 2003, 2004, and 2005? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The costs aren’t broken down. Being 
they’re implemented and all three are proclaimed in the same 
piece of legislation, the cost isn’t broken down. 
 
We have the one-time $33 million adjustment that will take 
place immediately upon proclamation and all three increases are 
contained within that amount. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I have asked through a written 
question concerning the maximum wage rate for 1999, 2000, 
2001 and you had said in the . . . your official said in the reply 
that it will not be retroactive. 
 
I have talked to a number of stakeholders and they have said 
you have told them that it will be retroactive. So I just want to 
clarify that. It’s a big difference in potential liability whether it 
is retroactive or not. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — A better term to use would be that it’s 
retrospective — not retroactive. Anyone that’s currently on 
compensation and may be at the maximum wage rate, once the 
increases . . . or the legislation is proclaimed, if their previous 
wage rate would have been at the max and they were entitled to 
more, then they will be moved up, but it’s not retroactive. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Just a point of clarification: so they will not be 
receiving money for a claim in 1999 and 2000-2001. It’d just be 
the increase would be for the future years. Is that right? Thank 
you. 
 
Earlier I asked a written question to the minister asking how 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

many ongoing claims currently exist that are on a long-term 
benefit or have been permanently disabled, and how many of 
these claims . . . benefits would be adjusted according to the 
new maximum wage rate effective January 1, 2003. And your 
answer was the specific number cannot be determined with 
certainty. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister, could you tell me why this number 
of long-term claimants that would be affected by the maximum 
wage rate cannot be determined with certainty, considering 
more recent claims have not yet been determined to be long 
term, and the WCB must know how many permanently disabled 
claims it has on file? How many of these would be exceeding 
the current maximum wage rate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I know we covered some of these 
questions in estimates and it can be very confusing. We talked 
. . . I think I gave you a number of approximately 300 during 
estimates and the exact number currently, at this time, is 340. 
 
But also there is a number of current cases would be at 2,140 
cases. But the difference is the 2,140 number. We don’t know if 
any of those will be long-term cases. It may . . . they may only 
be on an earnings replacement . . . or a wage loss so that it’s a 
short-term claim. Once they’re better they go back to work and 
that’s it. So it’s ongoing and a rotating number all the time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to move on to section 
67.1, independence allowance. Why was the percentage used to 
determine independence allowance lowered from 10 per cent to 
5 per cent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When you look at the recommendations, 
the independence allowance and the PFI (permanent functional 
impairment), the functional permanent impairment, are tied, 
both of those recommendations. So when the PFI was doubling 
— because the committee felt that the permanent functional 
impairment awards were too low and they were out of sync with 
other jurisdictions and the needs of workers — those, the PFI 
awards, were increased — in fact, doubled. 
 
So with the doubling of the PFI, the independence allowance is 
calculated on a percentage of the PFI. Now the independence 
allowance was felt by the committee to be fair, that it 
adequately addressed the needs of claimants. So when the PFI 
was doubled but they felt the independence allowance was 
adequate the way it was to maintain the level of the 
independence allowance, the percentage was cut in half. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister through the Chair, 
these amendments for the most part seem to be housekeeping. 
We have no problem with a number of the areas. The survivor 
benefits, obviously, is just updating the law. The death benefits 
obviously make sense. Some of the other things, as I have 
mentioned, we had some questions and concerns about them. 
 
But our concerns really go to the credibility and the 
accountability of WCB. As you know, the actuary was out by 
$69 million last year and the actuary number is only as good as 
the information that is given to the actuary. And we feel that 
there is . . . well quite frankly in the past the proper information 
hasn’t been given to the board and passed on to the actuary to 
give the proper numbers. And we have a big concern about 

some of these amendments, about the cost of some of these 
amendments that will incur. 
 
And the minister has said that there will be a part-time actuary 
employed. I feel that a part-time actuary isn’t something that’s 
necessary. I believe that proper numbers have to be given to the 
officials so that — as the saying, garbage in, garbage out — if 
the numbers aren’t correct, the end result numbers will not be 
correct. 
 
And I would just like to ask the minister what steps has she 
taken to make sure that WCB is properly administrated and the 
proper numbers are projected so that employees and employers 
feel confidence in the WCB and how it’s being operated. 
 
(13:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Chair, I would like to actually 
thank the member opposite for his comments about the report, 
feeling that many of the recommendations were needed. 
 
I’d also like to make a comment on the committee itself which 
is composed of representatives from both business and labour 
with a chairperson. 
 
Their comments, when they gave the report to me in a meeting 
that we had, that they felt they had only made recommendations 
that were doable, that were needed, that in some cases were 
overdue being done. They had come to a consensus on this 
report because they felt they were needed and that was their 
way of putting forward a very good report. 
 
So now in looking at it . . . And when you talk about the 
actuarial adjustment, it isn’t in fact inadequate information. It’s 
the timing of the information. The $69 million was an actuarial 
adjustment that was done at the end of the year and came about 
as a result of a number of factors — loss of investment revenue, 
increase in some claims cost. So the adjustment is made at the 
end of the year. 
 
There’s been a variety of steps that have gone into tightening up 
the reporting system. There’s more in-depth . . . or in detail 
information, financial information that goes to the board 
monthly, with an actuarial adjustment line attached to it. And 
with the arrangement we’ve made with the University of Regina 
and the actuary being available to the board, they are looking at 
more frequent actuarial adjustments and calculations being 
made throughout the year. 
 
Now can it be done monthly? It may be too big of a job to be 
done monthly. It may be something that’s done quarterly. When 
we look at companies the size of SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), they I believe . . . or I’m told do two 
actuarial reviews a year. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d just like to thank the minister 
and her officials, and look forward to estimates next week to 
continue questioning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I would like to thank the members 
opposite for their questions, their written questions, and the 
interest that they have showed in this. 
 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

 

And also I would like to thank the member from Redberry Lake 
for the petitions that he has filed on behalf of people in 
Saskatchewan looking for improvements and a fair and 
equitable workers’ compensation system. 
 
And I’d also like to thank my officials for being here today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I will invite the minister to introduce the 
new official that has joined her. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My officials 
remain the same, Cheryl Hanson and John Boyd. And joining 
us is Eric Greene, who is the executive director of labour 
services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I welcome the 
minister and her officials. There is a number of concerns that 
we’ve raised in this House already and the concerns are coming 
to us from the hog industry because they have a real fear that 
this particular piece of legislation will be viewed by both the 
investors and the developers as a reason not to invest or expand 
the hog industry in Saskatchewan. It seems like again we will 
be on an un-level playing field with our neighbouring provinces 
when it comes to competing for capital investment dollars. 
 
And the reasons or considerations that we had hoped the 
government would take into consideration was that the hog 
producers of this province have invested hundreds of millions 
of dollars in our province. They’ve created thousands of direct 
and indirect jobs and they offer their employees good jobs with 
good pay and benefits, and they provide employment for our U 
of S (University of Saskatchewan) agriculture graduates in 
management roles. 
 
It’s an opportunity — and I particularly feel that in my own 
constituency with the number of hog barns I have close by — 
it’s an opportunity for the rural residents to earn off-farm 
income without having to move away from the area and from 
their families. It’s an opportunity for construction workers to 
find good jobs building the hog barns across the province, and 
we have a number in construction in my area. It’s an 
opportunity for businesses in rural and urban Saskatchewan to 
gain more security by having customers in the hog industry to 
serve. 
 
So with all of these benefits and opportunities I feel that they’re 
being put at risk because the government isn’t willing to sit 
down and talk with the industry about the appropriate 
employment rules for the industry. And yet the industry seems 
more than willing to have that consultation process take place. 
And that’s what we find particularly unacceptable, was the lack 
of consultation process. 

And so my first question would be: what was the impetus of 
this Bill other than the Premier’s province . . . promise when he 
was campaigning in the NDP leadership? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When you look at this issue over the past 
number of years, during ’94-95 into ’96, there was a review 
done on labour standards that was comprehensive over a year 
and a half, two years, I believe. And this issue was looked at 
then. 
 
At that time the hog industry was fairly small in Saskatchewan. 
Since then, as you are well aware, it’s grown, doubling or more 
over the last number of years. It has . . . the industry has 
changed. 
 
The processes that are gone through has changed and over that 
period of time there has been more and more discussion — I’ve 
said this a number of times before — I can remember ’98, late 
’97-98, articles being in The Western Producer talking about 
labour standards issues across the Prairie provinces in the hog 
industry and in other agricultural areas. 
 
Also there has been discussions informally gone on which 
began in earnest before January of this year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for the answer, but I’d 
like to point out to her that pork production still involves 
breeding, farrowing, and growing of pigs. It’s still not immune 
to the challenges of bad weather, power outages, poor road 
conditions, and the constant need to feed and care for live 
animals. So it still very much is an agricultural type industry 
and it still needs care 365 days of the year. 
 
Is it the opinion of the minister that hog barn workers were 
being mistreated today and that they have been mistreated in the 
past decade, which is when her own government had initiatives 
in place to push for the expansion of this industry but hadn’t 
until now seen the need for such legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — We can go back quite a number of years. 
I think since 1947 traditional farming has maintained an 
exemption from labour standards, for a variety of reasons, 
number one being that it’s an outdoor business. Livelihood 
would probably be a better word for it. It’s seasonal, where you 
would have more hours and more intense hours of work in the 
spring during seeding, in the fall during harvest. You’re 
susceptible to weather, drought — which we’re going through 
right now — disease, a variety of other things. 
 
The hog industry has evolved over the last number of years 
where it is done indoors. It is climate controlled. It is highly 
technical. You don’t have the susceptibility to disease because 
of the controls that are in place and taken in the large operations 
where you have shower in/shower out, controlled conditions. 
It’s really moved it away from the definition of traditional 
farming. That’s one of the reasons that it’s being looked at 
currently. 
 
There’s also a couple of other things. As a woman, when you 
look at the workforce in the commercial hog industry, they 
estimate that over half of it is women. Basic things such as 
maternity leave does not . . . are not covered. Those are things 
that are guaranteed under labour standards. 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

I don’t believe we’re picking on any industry. Sask Pork and 
many producers have told us in meetings and publicly and in 
the press in a variety of ways that they follow labour standards 
and exceed them in many instances. That’s great. That’s good 
to hear. 
 
But to provide consistent workplace conditions across the 
province is, I think, a plus for the industry. When you look at 
the retention of workers in rural Saskatchewan, to guarantee 
consistent workplace standards is a plus. I think it will help in 
their recruitment and retention of workers which is important in 
the hog industry when you look at . . . I just read an article not 
that long ago about training workers for hog barns can run, 
when you’re including hard and soft costs, anywhere from 
6,000 up to 48,000 to train new workers for these industries. 
 
So everything that we can do to retain workers in these 
industries is a plus and will help. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. I think she failed to 
answer the question. The question was: are the hog barn 
workers being mistreated today and have they been mistreated 
in the past decade and is that the reason why this move has been 
made? 
 
Because there’s a number of workplaces where even are . . . a 
majority are women and yet they’re not under The Labour 
Standards Act. I was just told recently — and I wasn’t even 
aware of this — but teachers are not under The Labour 
Standards Act, teachers. And there the majority of those are 
women. 
 
So why, all of a sudden, was this particular industry targeted? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well I will keep repeating it. It wasn’t all 
of a sudden and nor do I believe that workers across the board 
were mistreated. 
 
Are standards consistent? No, they aren’t. Are they in a 
majority? I believe they are. But to have consistent right across 
the industry, which is an industrial, highly technical industry 
. . . These people are well-trained. It’s technical barns that they 
work in, they’re climate-controlled, there’s a variety of other 
issues that go on when you talk about a pork technician. These 
workers deserve to have consistent workplace conditions just 
like any other industrial workplace in the province. 
 
(13:15) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to ask the minister if she’s 
aware — and I do know some of this firsthand — that there are 
employers in the sector right now that provide benefits far in 
excess of The Labour Standards Act — and she did mention 
that in the answer to her last question — in exchange, basically, 
for flexibility regarding issues such as hours and stat holidays. 
 
I know in the barns closest to me, one of them, which my 
girlfriend works in, she very much appreciates the benefit 
package that she has available to her. 
 
And is the minister aware that now that the barns may have to 
follow, or will have to follow the strict letter of this Act, those 
extended benefits could be in jeopardy of disappearing because 

the flexibility is now gone and they may . . . if they have to hire 
one more employee to cover a few of the extended hours they 
may drop the benefit packages. 
 
And I know in talking to people that I know in the industry, if I 
ask them which would you rather have, would you rather have 
your benefit packages or the . . . you know, to be under The 
Labour Standards Act, it was resounding. They wanted to 
secure their benefit packages; it was extremely important to 
them and worth their while. And they didn’t feel that they were 
being mistreated at all in the workplace. 
 
So is the minister aware that this could possibly be as a direct 
result of this piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, one thing that I would like to 
make very clear, labour standards is your basic minimum 
standards in any workplace. Whether it’s a hospital that runs 
24/7 or a long-term care home that runs 24/7, labour standards 
applies. It’s your very basic minimum hours, or workplace 
conditions. If an employer is above that, that’s great. 
 
And I’m sure in a very competitive industry such as commercial 
hog industry, it is a very competitive industry and they are 
looking to maintain and retain workers that they have. Loyalty 
to companies and expertise in this field is sought after. If they 
have very good benefit packages, if their wages are high, that is 
great. 
 
And we have been told over and over again that the industry is 
above, meets or exceeds labour standards. And if that’s the 
case, then this Bill will have no effect on those employers 
whatsoever. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister point out for us today a 
single operation that is not meeting The Labour Standards Act 
that will now be put under The Labour Standards Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I would not stand here in the Legislative 
Assembly and point a finger at an employer and say you’re not 
doing this right or not doing that right. That’s just not the way 
this would be done. 
 
Once the Bill is proclaimed, labour standards officers will go 
out and visit the 18 employers, large hog production employers 
in the province, to have a more thorough discussion on what 
exactly this covers and where adjustments may be made. 
 
There is a great deal of flexibility within labour standards. I 
know the member from Cannington commented the other day in 
second reading about this little piece of paper that he wasn’t 
quite sure what the details were behind it. 
 
One of the reasons is that labour standards covers every 
industry in the province and labour standards officers will go 
out and visit the employers that are affected and will have 
further discussions once it is proclaimed. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister name the number of 
operations that will now come under the jurisdiction of this Act 
that weren’t prior? The number of operations — I’m not asking 
her to name them then — just how many operations will come 
under this Act that have not been . . . that have not met the 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

 

requirements prior to this Act coming into place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Through the consultations that have gone 
on since January, there will be approximately 18 that will be 
covered by this legislation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Let’s try the question again because 
obviously you have no idea what I asked. I said you do not have 
to name the facilities that are now coming under the regulations 
of the Act. But of the 18 that will now come under the 
regulations of the Act, without naming any of them, how many 
of those were not already in compliance of the regulations of 
the Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The three areas that are discussed most 
often in people that we have talked to is stat holidays, maternity 
leave, and overtime are probably the three main areas that have 
not been consistently applied throughout the industry. 
 
We have no access to go in and audit someone who is not 
covered by labour standards. So until the Bill is passed then we 
will have a better look at it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Perhaps the minister’s answer demonstrates 
how the consultation process has been flawed. There’s a 
consultation going on with these barns. Perhaps she would then 
know the answer, or if there’s any thought process going on in 
this whole thing, any research done, any thought into the 
repercussions. I think those are questions she should have been 
able to answer. 
 
How many complaints of unfair labour practices have been filed 
against the 18 facilities by individual employees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — We seem to be dealing with a 
misconception here. I mean the standards aren’t being put in 
place because of complaints. We don’t do things because 
they’re . . . initially because of complaints. 
 
There has been complaints filed, but being hog barn workers are 
not covered by Labour Standards, there hasn’t been a great 
number that have been . . . I mean we run about 15, I think. 
What we’re looking at is an industry that has changed, that is 
growing, and has consistent standards of . . . it is becoming very 
highly technical and industrialized. And it will be treated the 
same as any other industry within the province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — By the minister’s answer, I have to assume 
then because everything . . . we have lobby groups coming to 
the government and to the opposition all the time. And so 
therefore I have to believe that we’re back to my original 
question is the reason why it’s being done is solely for political 
reasons and the fact that the Premier made a promise when he 
was on his leadership campaign. 
 
The Minister of Labour throughout this whole so-called process 
has shown no respect for the hog producers of this province or 
their employees, quite frankly. In November she announced the 
Labour Standards would apply to the hog production in this 
province. And she didn’t announce this change at a meeting 
with the producers, she did it at the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour Convention. And the hog industry found out about it 
when they read it in the newspaper the next day. 

And the other interesting thing is I know from dealing with the 
agriculture portfolio, that the Premier was quite upset when he 
found out that there was a federal government announcement 
when he read it in the newspaper. And he said this is no way to 
run a country. 
 
Well this is no way to run a province, this is absolutely 
ridiculous. It’s an industry that has invested millions and 
millions of dollars in our province and this is how they find out 
changes in their industry which is being driven by a Minister of 
Labour rather than the industry and what it needs. Because she 
just identified that there isn’t a great need for this in the 
industry. 
 
Did she then recognize her mistake? No, actually when the Sask 
Pork and the office tried to get in contact with her, it took her a 
few months to reply. And I have a copy of the letter that she has 
in reply. 
 
(13:30) 
 
So the consultation process is completely flawed. The way that 
it was dealt with seems completely flawed. The minister 
announced the changes was going to happen at the SFL 
(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) convention in . . . of last 
year. 
 
And then she hired a former NDP ministerial assistant to talk to 
the industry — Mr. Halpenny is my understanding. This former 
assistant told the industry he was the best person for the job 
because he knew nothing about the labour standards and 
nothing about hog production. 
 
And this former assistant went out and met with some industry 
people. Even in the short time he spent with them, he didn’t 
consult with them. He told the producers that the legislative 
changes were going to happen and his job was to determine 
who should be included in the legislation. And the total 
interview time that the producers are telling me that they had 
was about 30 hours altogether. 
 
So then after this somewhat feeble attempt, there haven’t been, 
to my understanding, any more meetings or follow-ups. So 
questions on this consultation process: can the minister explain 
the makeup of the committee that supposedly represented 
employers and employees of the hog industry? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There was representatives from Sask 
Pork, a small, a large producer. There was also representatives 
. . . a person from GSU (Grain Services Union) that represented 
employees and had dealt with labour standards. There was also 
a farmer whose daughter worked for one of the barns. And there 
was also an employee out of one of the barns. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can you tell us which one actually worked 
in a hog barn when they went onto the consultation committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The employee representative was from 
Bear Hills Pork. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Which representative would that be? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The employee representative. 



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2002 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Is her name a secret? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I actually don’t see the relevance of 
naming someone’s name, who I have no way of protecting her 
for repercussions in her workplace. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Her workplace should be more than happy 
with the work that she’s doing if this is what they want. How 
many times did the committee meet and on what dates? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There was meetings on . . . the first one 
was held . . . the more specific meeting was held on April 25, 
2002. The next one was held May 1, 2002, with a request for 
any written submissions to be sent in to the department by May 
8 of the same year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I find it extremely odd that the minister is so 
protective of this committee considering that letters have been 
sent to the hog producers, to the hog barn owners, listing the 
employees, listing the committee members. I’m not too sure 
why she figures all of a sudden that these committee members 
are in jeopardy of being publicly known as to who they are. 
 
What kind of process did the minister put in place to perhaps 
get three employee representatives that actually worked in hog 
barns, because only one of the three does? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’m not being protective of the 
committee, but I guess I fail to see the relevance of the actual 
names. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the minister please answer the 
question, which was what process or how much effort was put 
into putting three employees — hog barn employees — on the 
committee when only one of the three is an actual hog barn 
employee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — What we were looking for when we were 
setting up this committee, and I will assure the member 
opposite that a great deal of effort went into this, besides the 
consultations that the consultant had done with employees and 
employers in the first round, the second round we were looking 
for people who had an understanding of labour standards, its 
implications on the industry, plus had an understanding of the 
hog industry within the province. 
 
And when you start talking to individual employees many are 
unwilling to come forward and offer suggestions and put 
theirself in the limelight so to speak. So it was a difficult 
process that took a little while. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — What knowledge of the hog industry does 
Brian Barnes have? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Brian Barnes operates a farm and his 
daughter has worked in the industry. He is also very familiar 
with the area of hog operations. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can this minister give us the dates of the 
consultation meetings that were held with Sask Pork which is 
representative of the . . . (inaudible) . . . industry? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Can I get some clarification, are you 

looking for the number of times that I met with Sask Pork or 
that the committee or the consultant met with Sask Pork? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’m looking for the dates and the number of 
times that the consultation committee met with Sask Pork since 
the consultation process began. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’m still not totally clear what you want. 
The consultant met with a variety of individuals, over 80 
individuals, during the first part of the year. This included 
producers that belonged to Sask Pork and Sask Pork itself. And 
I don’t have definite dates on all those meetings in one page 
here, so I can get the information to you though. 
 
I met with Sask Pork on a number of occasions. Also, the 
meetings on April 25 and May 1 included representatives from 
Sask Pork. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The industry, the investors and the 
producers in the industry, have been quite shocked by the lack 
of consultation process. We’ve looked at every other NDP 
initiative where there is a consultation process taken and it 
seems far more lengthy, far more extensive, far more thorough. 
 
We need to look no farther than the ACRE (Action Committee 
on the Rural Economy) committee that you know did a study; 
the ethanol industry which you know took — what? — almost 
two years from the time of announcement to study it. And yet 
this consultation process has been pushed through in a few very 
short months. It’s been viewed as being inadequately done. 
 
The Agriculture minister had said actually the ACRE 
committee has put together a subcommittee to study the effects 
of The Labour Standards Act and other labour laws in our 
province on different sectors in agriculture and in rural 
Saskatchewan. The Agriculture minister had implied that 
nothing would be done until that report was completed. 
 
This piece of legislation is being pushed forward without the 
report being completed. And quite frankly this is being viewed 
as the thin edge of the wedge in agriculture in our province, in 
an industry that has been identified time and time again, needs 
to have massive investment dollars brought into that industry. 
And there doesn’t seem to be any thought as to the 
repercussions of this. 
 
It seems so very simple when you word it that this isn’t 
changing anything. But it does change the perception. And I’ve 
worked very hard on the Agriculture Committee that just held a 
number of hearings on changing The Farm Land Security Act, 
and we heard time and time again perhaps the Act wasn’t such 
an inhibitor to the province, but the perception was — it was 
huge. 
 
And that’s our fear for this Act as well, that the perception of 
what it’s going to do is huge. And if it deters investment 
dollars, the province as a whole is going to pay the price for 
this. So therefore I have no more questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’d like to thank the member opposite for 
her concerns. And I know the issue of perception is a big one, 



July 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

 

and it’s something that we deal with in many areas. And I 
believe — when I have talked to any of the media and any of 
the producers — I believe that having consistent standards, 
encouraging young people to stay and work in rural 
Saskatchewan, that the hog industry has great potential for the 
province of Saskatchewan as a whole, not just rural 
Saskatchewan. I believe inclusion under labour standards will 
give consistent standards that will be a plus for the industry. 
 
I would like to thank the member opposite for her questions and 
thank the officials for being here today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 69 
now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3 be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Department of Economic 
Development Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill No. 
53 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 48 be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2)/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi 

de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Monsieur le président, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
74 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill No. 72 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill No. 70 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish everyone a pleasant weekend and the 
House will reconvene on Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:53. 
 


