















































Hansard: May 31, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1723 
 May 31, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Deputy Clerk: — I wish to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present today to open this day’s sitting. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan 
concerned with the condition of Highway No. 23, west from 
Junction 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Weekes, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I have a petition today signed by a number of citizens 
from my constituency who are concerned about retaining their 
community-based ambulance services. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from 
the community of Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring a 
petition for some people who are concerned about the cost of 
prescription drugs: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Shell Lake, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise this 
morning on behalf of citizens concerned about the crop 
insurance program. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are from the communities of Bjorkdale, Mistatim, Archerwill, 
Tisdale, and Zenon Park. 
 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 
have a petition today to do with overfishing at Lake of the 
Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from Yorkton, Regina, 
Bredenbury, Yarbo, and Calgary. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with this 
government’s tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals 
from the community of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition here to improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Elbow, Marquis, Riverhurst. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also have a 
petition from citizens who want adequate, reasonably priced 



1724 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

telephone service in the Emerald Lake area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins, and provide regular cellular telephone coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Emerald Lake and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
would like to present a petition today with citizens concerned 
about Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from Davidson, 
Imperial, Watrous, Simpson, and Semans. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a 
petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned 
with the overfishing in Besnard Lake. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are all 
from the city of Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning the enactment of a law that would 
enforce all bicycle riders, in-line skaters, and skateboarders 
to wear approved safety helmets; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 11, 17, 23, 24, 134, and no. 147. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to draw your attention and that of the members 
to two international visitors who are seated in your gallery. 

Now one of our . . . just by way of preface, Mr. Speaker, I 
might say that St. Paul’s Anglican Cathedral in Regina has a 
partnership link with Lichfield Cathedral in England. 
 
And one of our visitors is to be the principal speaker at the 
annual clergy conference of the Diocese of Qu’Appelle and to 
develop the cathedral-to-cathedral link. He is the Chancellor of 
Lichfield Cathedral with special responsibilities for the 
cathedral libraries, education, and outreach and it is his first 
visit and that of his spouse to Canada and Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you to the members Canon Tony Barnard, Chancellor of 
Lichfield Cathedral and Mrs. Anne Barnard from Lichfield, 
Staffordshire, United Kingdom. They are accompanied by our 
Legislative Librarian, Marian Powell. 
 
I would ask them to stand so that they can be recognized and I 
would ask the members to extend them a warm welcome.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the other members of this House a 
number of students from Osler School — 34 students, grade 8 
and 9 — in the east gallery. It’s a good, vibrant community. It’s 
growing quickly and so is the school. It’s usually bursting at the 
seams. 
 
They are accompanied today by their teachers, Glen Osmond 
and Grant Elke, as well as chaperones Maryann Wiebe and 
Joanne Friesen. They’ve just arrived in the building and they’re 
going to be doing a tour of the building a little later on. I’ll be 
meeting with them and I hope they get enough of an exposure 
to question period so they have some good questions about the 
activities here as well. 
 
Would you join me in welcoming the students from Osler. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have several introductions 
to make this morning. 
 
First, to introduce — although this individual certainly needs no 
introduction in this House — an individual who served this 
legislature, served the people of Saskatchewan for many, many 
years in a variety of benches in this House — in a time in 
opposition, for many years in government, in a variety of 
governments, in many portfolios. I want to welcome, seated 
behind the bar today, our very good friend and former 
colleague, Mr. Ned Shillington. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to have 
the House also acknowledge and welcome Sonia Shillington 
who is seated in your gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1725 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been my 
privilege therefore to introduce and welcome an individual who 
served this House as an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for many years with great distinction. 
 
It’s now my privilege to introduce to this House two individuals 
who will serve this House with great distinction as MLAs. That 
would be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the two individuals seated in 
your gallery, both of whom who have received from their 
respective constituency organizations the nomination for the 
New Democratic Party in the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, and in the constituency of Saltcoats. 
 
First in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, a woman 
deeply involved in her community, a lifetime of activity in 
agriculture and education — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members 
to welcome the next MLA for Weyburn-Big Muddy, Sherry 
Leach. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seated beside 
Sherry, accompanied by her daughter, Justine, the next MLA, a 
woman again who is deeply, deeply involved in her community, 
currently serves as mayor of the community of Kamsack, the 
New Democratic Party nominated candidate last night for the 
constituency of Saltcoats, Pamela Nykolaishen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased, 
Mr. Speaker, to have in the House today my son James who is 
sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. James lives in Calgary, and he’s 
home this weekend to golf in a charity golf tournament in 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that most young people who 
have left Saskatchewan would like a reason to come back to 
Saskatchewan because they left their heart here. And my son, 
and many others like him, are looking for that reason. And my 
goal, and the goal of the Saskatchewan Party, is to make that 
possible. 
 
So I’d like all members of the legislature to help me welcome 
James today to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
join with the Premier this morning through you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in welcoming the mayor of Kamsack. I hope she 
enjoys her one day in the legislature. 
 
I should add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is the first time I’ve 
been this shaky and this nervous in this House since I was 
elected in ’95, but I think I’ll pass quickly on that. 
 
So I welcome the mayor of Kamsack here today, and I hope she 
enjoys herself. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

Universities Hold Convocation Ceremonies 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in the House today to ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with me in congratulating the 
2002 graduating classes from the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Spring convocations for both universities have taken place over 
the last three days with the University of Saskatchewan’s 
occurring Wednesday and Thursday while the University of 
Regina started Wednesday and Thursday and finishes up today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan conferred 
nearly 3,000 degrees, diplomas, and certificates on its graduates 
in the two-day period. Convocation addresses were given by 
honorary degree recipients Alan Cairns, Peggy McKercher, and 
Diane Jones Konihowski. 
 
By the time the University of Regina ceremonies are finished, 
more than 1,500 graduates will have received their degrees, 
diplomas, and certificates. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all members of the House recognize the 
hard word and dedication that these graduates have given in 
their chosen field of study. It is these leaders of tomorrow that 
we will be turning to for their insight and knowledge, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the privilege of attending the 
convocation ceremonies in both Saskatoon and Regina and the 
calibre of the 2002 classes is certainly impressive. It is their 
knowledge and expertise that we will be turning to to grow 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Democratic Party Nomination 
for Saltcoats Constituency 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. More good news for Saskatchewan, this time 
for the citizens of the Saltcoats constituency. Last night at the 
Ukrainian Catholic Hall in Kamsack, the New Democratic Party 
nominated its second candidate for the election which the 
ever-vigilant members of the press tell us is on the near horizon. 
 
The Premier, myself, and the members from Elphinstone, 
Yorkton, and Regina Qu’Appelle along with the 150 
enthusiastic supporters welcomed Pamela Nykolaishen to our 
team. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, just as in Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
we’re stacking the deck by selecting a very qualified candidate. 
How qualified, Mr. Speaker? Well for openers she’s the current 
mayor of Kamsack and the financial secretary for the Kamsack 
School Division. 
 
She understands the concerns of municipalities and the 
aspirations of our educational system, Mr. Speaker, and will be 
a strong voice for both in our caucus. 
 
(10:15) 



1726 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

Want further evidence, Mr. Speaker? Pamela Nykolaishen 
believes in getting involved in her community just as Sherry 
Leach is involved and lives in hers, Mr. Speaker. How 
involved? Well rather than read the whole list, let me just say 
that her record of her involvement covers more than 20 
single-spaced lines on her resumé — from church to Scouts, to 
figure skating, and many more, Mr. Speaker. And those are just 
for openers, Mr. Speaker. Two nominations, two very 
exceptional candidates . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada Environment Week 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, next week, June 2 to June 8, is Canada 
Environment Week. Canadian Environment Week is held the 
first week of June each year and brings to attention the many 
aspects of the environment and the benefits of environmental 
protection. This coincides with World Environment Day, which 
was proclaimed in 1972 and is celebrated each year on June 5. 
 
People throughout Saskatchewan will be participating in events 
to celebrate Canadian Environment Week. Individuals, 
community groups, schools, and workplace organizations are 
joining together to do their part for the environment. These 
include such events as planting trees, organizing recycling 
programs, or making resolutions which benefit the environment, 
such as walking to work. 
 
In addition to these many events, the Saskatchewan Association 
for Resource Recovery Corporation is planning an eco-day 
event June 8 to raise awareness about its used oils recycling 
program. June 5 is also Clean Air Day Canada. The day was 
proclaimed to create an increased public awareness of two 
environmental priorities — clean air and climate change. 
 
Clean Air Day involves community activities that target 
environment, health, and transportation issues, the idea being 
that if we take action now and continue this over the long term, 
a difference can be made. We consider air pollution our biggest 
environmental health issue and therefore there is a great deal of 
enthusiasm in celebrating this particular day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with 
Saskatchewan residents and offer their support in celebration of 
Canadian Environment Week as well as World Environment 
Day. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Graduates 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise in our legislature this morning to pay tribute to 
all those who graduated at this week’s convocation ceremonies 
at our province’s two universities. 
 
To receive a university degree is an exceptional 
accomplishment and represents a pinnacle of achievement for 
each recipient, and a time of great pride for every graduate’s 

family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this week’s spring convocation at the University 
of Saskatchewan, 2,955 graduates received degrees and 
diplomas, while at the University of Regina 1,546 graduates 
were recognized. 
 
I know all members of the Assembly will want to join with me 
in expressing our special congratulations and best wishes to 
each of these graduates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize the achievements of 
those who received special honours at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Former U of S (University of Saskatchewan) 
Chancellor, Peggy McKercher; Olympian athlete Diane Jones 
Konihowski; and constitutional expert Alan Cairns each 
received honorary degrees. 
 
Donna Greschner received the prestigious Master Teacher 
Award; Ali Rajput received the Distinguished Researcher 
Award; and Heather Kuttai received the President’s Service 
Award. 
 
To each of these very worthy recipients, we all, I’m sure, want 
to express our sincere congratulations. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World No Tobacco Day 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the World Health Organization has declared today 
World No Tobacco Day. The World Health Organization calls 
for smoke-free areas for sports and recreation, as well as 
heightened awareness of tobacco advertising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that the use of tobacco products 
causes health problems, and it is particularly disturbing when 
young people get addicted to tobacco. However, the legislation 
that this government has passed to deter young people from 
smoking does little to achieve this end. This legislation 
penalizes the wrong people — the shopkeepers and store 
owners — while the youth trying to purchase tobacco products 
through deceitful means get off scot free. 
 
Without any mechanism in place to fine underage youth for 
possession of tobacco products, they will continue to smoke and 
they will continue to purchase cigarettes through deceitful 
means. It is very disturbing to know that this government feels 
that fining the shop owner — the person who has been duped 
— is more important than fining the person committing a 
fraudulent act by presenting false identification. 
 
You know that they are doing that when they present false ID 
(identification) to purchase cigarettes. I ask that this 
government reconsider The Tobacco Control Act to include 
fining underage youth for possession of tobacco products. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1727 

 

Former Saskatchewan Educator Honoured 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. When I was minister of St. Andrews United Church in 
Indian Head, I came to know and appreciate not only the 
community of Indian Head, but Qu’Appelle, Sintaluta, 
Wolseley, and Grenfell. 
 
They always particularly impressed me in the way these 
communities encouraged and promoted culture and education 
for all their citizens to keep their minds active and their 
communities and their spirits alive. They still do this today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Because I have many pleasant memories of that time, I am 
happy to announce to the Assembly that this afternoon in the 
town of Wolseley, one of Saskatchewan’s most beautiful towns, 
a special ceremony is taking place in the library which is 
emblematic of the community spirit I mentioned. 
 
The ceremony will honour Mr. Harold Whyte, a distinguished 
Saskatchewan educator in several communities for more than 
30 years, who retired to Wolseley and who, when he died in 
1996, left a substantial sum to the local library. 
 
To honour his commitment to education, to literacy, and to the 
pleasures of reading, the library is dedicating the Harold Whyte 
Book Nook, a special reading room in the library for children. 
The mayor, the reeve, several students, and Mr. Whyte’s close 
friend, Bill Dowhaniuk — known to many of us — will all take 
part in this dedication. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have today mentioned university 
convocations. Harold Whyte graduated from the University of 
Saskatchewan in 1927 and spent his life preparing 
Saskatchewan students for their futures. 
 
I am very pleased that this true pioneer from the previous 
century is being honoured today and that his dedication will 
enable the pathfinders of this new millennium. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rocanville School Gets Awards 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, recently four young scientists from Rocanville School 
came back with a few awards and a lot of great memories from 
the National Science Fair in Saskatoon, May 11 through the 19. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Cody Wilson and Wade Affleck won a 
silver medal, $300 prize money, and $1,000 scholarship to the 
University of Western Ontario in the junior life sciences 
category for their project on correcting colour blindness. 
 
As well, Dustin Affleck and Dion Campbell received an 
honourable mention and the Peer Choice Award in the 
intermediate engineering category with their project on an auto 
theft prevention device. The Peer Award is a special award 
voted on by the other groups in the region who choose the best 
project. Along with the award, the pair received $750. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Rocanville science teacher, Dennis 
Thiessen, says I can show them how a thing works in a 
textbook, but to actually get them to do a project themselves is a 
great way for them to learn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past number of years, the Rocanville 
School has entered the science fair projects back since 1988 
and, in that time period, 13 projects from Rocanville School 
have gone on to the National Fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Rocanville, the teachers, and 
the students for their ongoing efforts and further achievements 
at the National Science Fair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Competing in the Marketplace 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Yesterday we raised concerns on behalf of Brad 
Brickner, owner of VS Response Systems. Mr. Brickner has 
learned that he is now going to be competing against his own 
tax dollars as SaskTel SecurTek is getting into the personal 
medical alarm business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve raised these concerns and those of many 
private Saskatchewan business people before. Small-business 
owners who have found themselves in competition with 
taxpayer-funded SaskTel or the SaskEnergy Network are 
examples. 
 
Today for the first time we have heard what the government 
really thinks of these private business people. In response to 
Mr. Brickner’s concern, Don Ching, president and CEO (chief 
executive officer) of SaskTel called him and other 
small-business owners, whiners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with Don Ching that 
expressing your business concerns to the government is 
whining? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Well let me first of all clarify one thing. When the 
member from Rosetown, Mr. Speaker, says that we use 
taxpayers’ dollars for these sorts of things, it’s absolutely 
incorrect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The last time, Mr. Speaker, that SaskTel ever had any 
taxpayers’ dollars involved in their corporation was back in the 
. . . before the Second World War in fact, Mr. Speaker — before 
the Second World War. And in fact the last time there was 
taxpayers’ dollars transferred over to CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) was in early 1990 . . . in the early 
1990s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we had to pay for the huge 
debt that that party, Mr. Speaker, racked up in the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let me be perfectly clear though, first of all. A bit of a history 
lesson, Mr. Speaker. When the federal government through 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 
Commission) deregulated the telephone environment, Mr. 
Speaker, SaskTel had a choice. Either it could get into 
competition or it could go out of business, Mr. Speaker. I think 
they have one agenda — out of business for SaskTel. That’s 
what they want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to call 
the minister the artful Dodger but there wasn’t much grace in 
that answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don Ching told the Leader-Post that he didn’t 
care about Mr. Brickner’s concerns. He went on to say and I 
quote: 
 

“Private businesses that are raising issues of this nature in 
my mind are whining about something that has no real 
legitimacy to it . . . and they should get over that.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the arrogance of this statement is unbelievable and 
unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Don Ching is appointed as 
president of SaskTel by who? This government. His salary is 
paid by the very taxpayers of this province that he is calling 
whiners. It’s one thing for the NDP (New Democratic Party) to 
chase private sector business people out of this province. It’s 
another thing to call them names on the way out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how do statements like Don Ching’s make private 
business feel valued in this province, and how does it encourage 
private sector businesses to look into investing here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, when the 
federal government, through CRTC, deregulated, SaskTel had a 
choice — they either get out of business or they compete, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now that they’re in competition, Mr. Speaker, I look, and I 
referred to this yesterday, through my own Access cable bill, I 
see, through Rogers AT&T, they are in the cellphone business, 
Mr. Speaker. High-speed Internet is delivered by competition. 
 
I listened to the member from Redberry Lake stand up here in 
this House today petitioning us to deliver cell service out in 
rural Saskatchewan. How are we supposed to deliver that, Mr. 
Speaker? How are we supposed to deliver that unless we earn 
revenues from other places, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now if that member, if the member from Rosetown is 
suggesting that this company should not partner with SaskTel, 
that makes no sense to me at all. SaskTel partners with many 
businesses, Mr. Speaker — some 170 businesses across the 
province. 
 
I note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that SecurTek, just as an example, 
SecurTek partners with City Lock and Security out of 

Lloydminster, Melhoff Electric out of Swift Current, and many 
others across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations are 
steamrollering over private sector business, and the news gets 
worse. Don Ching goes on to say that if Mr. Brickner was so 
concerned about SaskTel’s involvement in the industry, his 
company should have come to SaskTel and worked out a deal. 
 
So that’s the only answer to business in this province. If you 
think the government’s going to get involved in your sector, 
come to the government and work out a deal. Let them buy you 
out. It’s a big-government attitude — either you’re in or out. 
Either you’re with the government or you’re on your own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Don Ching’s statements are appalling and they are 
arrogant. They reflect terribly on the Government of 
Saskatchewan and on SaskTel. 
 
Will the Premier immediately fire the president and CEO of 
SaskTel, Don Ching? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not clear to me 
what this member is arguing. Is this member arguing that there 
should not be competition? Is that what he’s saying — there 
should not be competition? 
 
I think he’s arguing for this business — a legitimate business, 
Mr. Speaker; they’re a legitimate business here in Regina and I 
wish them well, Mr. Speaker — I think he’s arguing though that 
they should hold a monopoly. 
 
It just can’t be. We are in a deregulated environment. We’re in 
an environment of competition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:30) 
 
He’s arguing, I think, when you look and I listen, and I list . . . I 
listed some of the companies. You’ve got City Lock and 
Security out of Lloydminster as part of SecurTek. They’ve 
partnered with SecurTek. You’ve got Melhoff Electric out of 
Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. You’ve got Phoenix Security Sales 
out of North Battleford. You’ve got Scott’s Electric out of 
Weyburn, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They will all be sharing in distributing this service, Mr. 
Speaker, through SecurTek, for the seniors in our province who 
want some sense of security around their health. Is he saying 
that they should not share in some of those revenues? The 
private sector should not share in some of those revenues? I 
disagree with him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ministerial Business Trip 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. By the 
answer it’s quite clear that this government just does not believe 
that business can work unless the government is involved in it. 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. It was reported on CBC this morning 
that the minister and a staff member travelled to California last 
summer to attend a workshop about the Internet. The three-day 
trip cost taxpayers $6,000. Unfortunately the minister declined 
a request for an interview with the reporter to discuss the 
reasons for the trip. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it brings to mind the song about, do you 
know the way to San Jose. Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the 
minister explain to this House . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’m having very much 
difficulty hearing the question. So would hon. members please 
come to order so the Chair can hear the question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the minister 
explain to this House exactly what workshop she attended, what 
she and her staff member learned there, and why she refused to 
answer questions about the trip yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to be able 
to answer this directly rather than have my responses filtered. 
And I might say that we did provide a very complete answer. 
That someone chose not to use it is not my lack of having 
provided the information. 
 
And I’m going to say further to the member that I do know the 
way to San Jose and I think it would be very important for him 
to understand that in the dramatic changes taking place in 
Web-based operation of companies today worldwide, that Cisco 
is a world leader. San Jose is the home of their international 
management training centre where they bring in the top 
expertise from around the world to assist people who are 
transforming their systems to increase productivity, increase 
savings, and improve customer service. And the day and a half 
spent there was very instrumental in guiding our thinking on 
investments which will be in the hundreds of millions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
had some very simple questions to ask the minister about the 
trip. When she refused the interview request, a staff member 
suggested they apply through the access to information. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is very simple. To the 
minister: why did she refuse to answer the questions with the 
media yesterday? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will emphasize again 
that we provided all of the information and details on this trip. 
 
And I will just say that we have here a company, Cisco, that is 
one of the partners — I notice here they are one of the sponsors 
of AMTEC, the Association for Media and Technology in 
Education in Canada. Now Cisco is a very strong partner in 
helping grow the Saskatchewan economy and helping make 
sure that we’re choosing leading edge solutions. 
 

And if a company that is international is prepared to make this 
commitment, why won’t the members opposite? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister Responsible for Government Relations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just two days ago, the Government 
Relations minister told the Melville Advance about the 
development of the ethanol industry. And I quote: 
 

The government does not want to be seen owning ethanol 
plants. 

 
Close that particular quote. But he went on to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: 
 

The preference would be (the preference would be) to 
allow private sector industry in communities to run with 
this ball. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. Mr. Speaker, will the 
Minister Responsible for Government Relations tell his NDP 
colleagues about his views on ethanol? Will he tell the NDP to 
step aside and allow the private sector to work with 
communities here in Saskatchewan to develop the ethanol 
industry for Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
say on behalf of the government, all members of the 
government, who are well aware of the initiatives as it relates to 
developing the ethanol industry, that certainly we want to see a 
private sector driven ethanol industry. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we will. We will 
see a private sector driven ethanol industry in this province in 
spite of members opposite, Mr. Speaker, who are not helping in 
terms of attracting that private sector investment by the daily 
barrage and dragging private sector individuals through this 
legislative Chamber, people who just want to invest and who 
want to make profits. Mr. Speaker, I want to say as well, if 
attracting that investment requires private sector development, 
every member on this side of the House will be here to support 
public sector investment as it’s required. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, every one of those members 
has a responsibility to stand in their place and tell us if they 
absolutely refuse to see public sector investment in their 
communities, they should stand up and say it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, will the Industry minister stand up today and 
clearly state that neither CIC nor the NDP government has yet 
made a binding commitment with Broe industries of Denver, 
Colorado to invest directly in the ownership of ethanol plants in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 
about time I made one thing clear. From government’s 
perspective and the interaction that we’ve had from every 
potential investor — every one — there isn’t one operation that 
hasn’t either asked for a loan guarantee or an investment 
commitment. 
 
And I say to that member, if you have got a private sector 
investor that’s coming to the plate with 100 per cent private 
sector investment, you bring those folks . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I 
would remind hon. members to put all of their comments to the 
Chair and through the Chair. The minister has 15 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, they can’t 
seem to comprehend this. You know, the member from 
Shaunavon and the group that have been doing that work down 
there have been working to attract private sector investment. 
And do you want to know, Mr. Speaker, when they first met 
with me they never asked for private sector or public sector 
investment, they asked for a public sector loan guarantee. 
 
Now I want to know if those members . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time is expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard this minister 
several times stand up and indicate to the Assembly and to the 
people of the province that there is no deal as of yet with Broe 
industries and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you go to monster.ca, the largest 
Internet-based job search company in the world, you’ll find two 
job postings from Broe industries with regard to ethanol 
development. The first job posting is for an ethanol project 
manager to, quote, “lead the design and construction of a 
world-class ethanol plant in Saskatchewan.” 
 
Broe’s job posting goes on to say: 
 

Our expectation is construct the first plant near Regina, 
followed by up to five additional plants. 

 
In the second job posting, Broe industry is asking for an ethanol 
plant manager to, quote: 
 

Run an 80 million litre per year ethanol plant in Belle 
Plaine, Saskatchewan. Construction is expected to be 
complete by the third quarter of 2003. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the NDP hasn’t made a firm 
commitment to Broe industries on behalf of the taxpayers to 
build a plant at Belle Plaine or anywhere else, why is Broe 
industries already hiring people for these projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know 
what I want to say? I say that is absolutely wonderful news. It’s 
encouraging and we, on this side of the House, are supporting it 

because you know what it says? 
 
It says, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the nonsense from members on 
the side of the House, these people see an economic 
development opportunity partnering with businesses and with 
local people here in Saskatchewan, in Shaunavon and in 
Melville and in Tisdale. And they see an opportunity to create 
wealth and to create jobs in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the fact that they are willing to post job 
opportunities is very encouraging to me, because you know 
what it says? It says that in spite of the bellering and yelling 
from that side of the House as it relates to trying to destroy this 
industry, they’re still committed to coming here and working 
with us to build and grow a strong ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan farm families in our province are extremely upset 
and they have every reason to be. This NDP government has 
cancelled the spot loss hail insurance. They have increased the 
crop insurance premiums. And they’ve cancelled the education 
property tax rebate. 
 
Our office has received over 1,200 postcards from farm families 
in our province with concerns about these issues. And I know 
that the Premier is receiving these same postcards. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of farm families are telling the 
Premier to stop his attack on Saskatchewan farm families. What 
does the Premier have to say in response to these hundreds of 
farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I would just remind all 
hon. members that the use of props and exhibits in the House is 
not permitted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
spent yesterday in the communities of Birch Hills, Archerwill, 
and Kamsack. I spoke to many people involved in farming, and 
people in those communities. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are appreciative of the 
leadership being shown by this government in defence of farm 
families across Saskatchewan. They are appreciative of the 
leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They are not appreciative of the doom 
and gloom that is delivered. If there’s not enough trouble facing 
the farm families in Saskatchewan — with drought, with dust 
clouds, with farm Bills in Washington threatening to destroy 
their livelihoods — they are not assisted by the doom and 
gloom that comes out of that party opposite. 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d 
love to say that all 1,200 postcards were postcards of 
appreciation. Unfortunately, that’s not the case. There are 
postcards of farmer families that are concerned and they’re 
facing the worst drought in decades, and they’re facing the US 
(United States) farm Bill and the impact that that will have on 
them. 
 
And what has the provincial government done? Well it’s cut the 
crop insurance coverage, it’s increased the premiums, and it’s 
cancelled the property tax rebate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hundreds of farm families are telling the Premier 
that these actions are wrong. They are sending the message loud 
and clear, through hundreds and hundreds of postcards — over 
1,200 cards that our party’s received to date. They have radio 
ads urging people to call the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the Premier even listening to this? Why did this 
government pick this year to attack the farm families in our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when the national 
government of Canada cut back their support for crop insurance 
in this most difficult budget year, what did this government do? 
Added 14 million new dollars — 14 million new dollars to the 
crop insurance program. We have more producers enrolled in 
crop insurance this year than last year — more producers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve added a new drought program which they oppose — 
which they opposed. And now they stand in the House trying to 
prevent the development of an ethanol industry in this province, 
which will support diversification for our farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a time, this is not a time when we 
should stand apart. This is a time we should stand together as 
legislatures . . . as legislators on behalf of the farming families 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The biggest disaster for farm families in this 
province is that government who has absolutely no plan on 
what to do to deal with any of the problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Last week the Saskatchewan Party came up 
with a plan to at least deal with the water shortage for livestock 
producers, and the Minister of Agriculture called it a dumb 
idea. That is what he said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP are telling farmers that it’s a dumb idea . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m having 
difficulty hearing what the member is saying and I would ask 
all hon. members to come to order. Would the member . . . 
Order. 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Minister of Agriculture said that helping farmers is a dumb 
idea. And he says that helping ranchers is a dumb idea. And I 
find that unbelievable and unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP knew that this drought was coming and they knew 
that farmers were facing low commodity prices and they picked 
this year to jack up the property taxes, the crop insurance 
premiums, and the crop . . . and hack crop insurance coverage. 
 
What are they thinking, Mr. Speaker? Why did the NDP pick 
this year of all years to launch the attack on Saskatchewan farm 
families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will recall a 
year ago how this government worked with the national 
government to put a program in place to meet the drought needs 
of last year. You remember how that happened? Well we’re 
working again. We’re working again with our federal 
counterparts to talk about a program around the drought issues, 
the cattle issues that are facing people today. 
 
Now I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t the Minister of 
Agriculture who talked about their ideas being dumb. It was one 
of the journalists right up in the gallery — I heard her myself, I 
heard her myself. That’s the assessment outside of this House, 
that’s the assessment outside of this House. 
 
And will the members opposite join with us, join with us in 
approaching the national government to get some assistance on 
the drought file and we’ll be there, we’ll participate for our 
producers. 
 
I talked to producers yesterday who are having to sell off their 
cattle herds. This is not a time for finger pointing. It’s time for 
us to get together, approach Ottawa, let’s put together a 
program. 
 
She says we don’t have a plan. That’s the critic, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who stood right out here in the corridor, right out here 
in the corridor and said to the people of Saskatchewan, we don’t 
have a plan for agriculture; we wouldn’t know what to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the first 
business of Broe Companies is operating nursing homes in 
Colorado. This is interesting — this is according to their Web 
site — this is interesting in view of raising our ceiling here in 
Saskatchewan on the number of beds in private nursing homes. 
Its second business is, of course, running short-line railways in 
the US corn belt. 
 
As we know, it has never produced a litre of ethanol. 
Obviously, the Government of Saskatchewan and Broe 
Companies will have to partner with someone who has some 
expertise in the construction and operation of ethanol plants. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the entire resources of the Liberal research 
team have failed to find any company with ethanol expertise 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

involved with Broe. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Will the member go directly to his 
question, please. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I get up and try and ask a 
serious question and they . . . they start making wisecracks 
about the NDP winning in North Battleford, as if that’s going to 
happen before Allan Rock . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Will the member directly go to 
his question. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — My question for the minister is, who are we 
going to be partnering with? Who is Broe and the Government 
of Saskatchewan going to partnering with who . . . with a past 
ethanol expertise? There has to be someone we’re partnering 
with. Who is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am assuming 
that the Liberal member . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. We’ve almost made it 
through question period. I would ask all hon. members to please 
stay in order. I recognize the Minister of Industry . . . I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . I am pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 
warm response I’m getting from the opposition today. May I 
. . . May I say . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think . . . first of all, I want, all I want to advise the 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Will the member for Rosthern please 
come to order. I recognize . . . I recognize the Premier. Forty 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I should have known it, Mr. Speaker; his 
students have left and the minister of Rosthern or the member 
from Rosthern . . . By the way, I . . . by the way, Mr. Speaker, I 
look . . . I’ll look forward to visiting the member from 
Rosthern’s hometown this coming weekend, by the way and 
I’m sure he’s going to give me a nice little greeting when I get 
there. 
 
I want to say to the member from North Battleford, he talks 
about his caucus research operation. They need to do a little 
better on the joke material that he’s bringing into the question 
period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to speak here on behalf of government 
and I’m going to say this very clearly. I’m going to speak to this 
very clearly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to develop an ethanol industry in this 

province. We have laid out the framework of the most 
progressive ethanol industry in North America. We’ve laid it 
out. The legislation is before this House. We are talking to 
communities; we are talking to partners — Canadian and across 
this continent — because, Mr. Speaker, this province is going to 
lead North America in ethanol production. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 63 — The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that Bill No. 63, The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Leave to introduce guests, sir. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you, 25 young adults from 
E.D. Feehan High School in Saskatoon to our House today. 
They are students of English as a Second Language and I think 
they’re probably finding the proceedings very interesting. 
 
So I ask all members to welcome them to our House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Hon. members, the Chair also has 
some guests that he would like to introduce and requests leave. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, hon. members. In the 
west gallery as well are 19 English as a Second Language 
students from ages 16 to 25. And they’re students that attend St. 
Joseph School — in the west gallery. And they’re accompanied 
by teachers LarraineRatzlaff and Erin Hilbig. And I would ask 
all hon. members to give them a warm welcome as well. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Before orders of the day I request leave to move a motion to 
withdraw The Architects Amendment Act, 2002. 
 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

 

Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Bill Withdrawn 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move, seconded by the Government House Leader, the member 
for Prince Albert Northcote: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 29, The 
Architects Amendment Act, 2002, be discharged and the 
said Bill withdrawn. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 243 through 253 inclusive. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The questions listed have been 
answered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
move second reading of Bill No. 52, The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act establishes the level of provincial assistance to be allocated 
to both urban and rural municipalities. Accordingly, these 
amendments give legal effect to decisions announced in the 
2002-2003 budget. 
 
The Bill provides for the amounts of funds available this year to 
both the urban revenue-sharing pool and the rural 
revenue-sharing pool. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that the Bill 
provides for an increase this year to the total amount available 
for the urban revenue-sharing pool of $4.9 million, and an 
increase for rural revenue sharing of $4.3 million. This 
represents an increase globally to urban and rural municipalities 
of 18 per cent over last year’s amount. 
 
Total unconditional funding available for cities is $20.85 
million; for towns, villages, and resort villages is 10.97 million; 
and for rural municipalities is $28 million. Together, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this amounts to an overall total of $59.8 
million. 
 
My officials have consulted with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, the cities, and the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities on how to distribute these 
funds this year. Their views have been incorporated into this 
legislation. 
 
With respect to the unconditional revenue-sharing grants for 
cities and other urban municipalities, each city and urban 
municipality will receive the same unconditional 
revenue-sharing grants as last year, plus an increase of $6.08 
per capita that represents each municipality’s share of the new 
funding. 
 
SUMA and the cities support this. For rural municipalities the 
new funding has been allocated by increasing the road 
preservation and construction component of the unconditional 
revenue-sharing grant for rural municipalities. An additional 
$200,000 also has been allocated to conditional bridge grants. 
 
Each rural municipality will receive an increase in funding this 
year. This distribution strategy, once again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is supported by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities. Amendments related to some housekeeping 
measures make up the remainder of this Bill. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the total revenue-sharing 
funding of nearly $60 million represents a significant level of 
financial support to Saskatchewan municipalities. I urge all 
members to support this Bill. 
 
Accordingly, I move second reading of Bill No. 52, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
. . . this piece of legislation and the increases to municipal 
government are certainly welcome. And we won’t . . . we 
certainly aren’t going to condemn the government for 
increasing funding to local governments — our local municipal 
governments, urban and rural — because of the fact that over 
the past number of years, this government has actually removed 
funding. 
 
It’s cut grants. It’s cut municipal sharing which has put local 
governments at a great . . . in an area of great difficulty as they 
endeavour to continue to meet the ongoing needs and costs of 
running their administrations, of providing the services to their 
residents and to their taxpayers. 
 
And over the past number of years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
many local governments have found is they’ve actually had to 
put on hold project developments, or they’ve had to cut back in 
some of their expenditures because they found it very difficult, 
as the government kept reducing the revenue-sharing pool over 
the past number of years, to continue to go to their local tax 
base to ask for the increases necessary just to maintain the 
ongoing services that they had. 
 
And so this piece of legislation and the increases that were 
announced this year in the budget of some, I believe, almost 
$10 million, while they fall short are certainly — as we have 
heard the president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), Mr. Hardy, indicate — certainly are 
welcome and will be accepted gratefully. But they look forward 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

to the day when this government will indeed meet its ongoing 
commitments to live up to its long-time commitments of the 
equal sharing in regarding to the revenue-sharing amendments 
. . . or revenue-sharing pool. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is crying . . . or members 
opposite were saying, wow, when the minister talked about the 
18 per cent increase. And while the 18 per cent increase is 
welcome, it falls far short of the burden that this government 
has put on local governments over the past almost 10 years 
while they’ve been in office. 
 
And as I indicated earlier, while it’s welcome and while it’s 
good news, unfortunately, many governments, even with the 
increases that were announced this year, are facing situations 
where they’re increasing the tax rate on their taxpayers because 
of the fact that in the rural communities we see the government 
remove the educational tax component. And their argument is 
we’ve increased the funding, therefore there shouldn’t be 
increases at the local level in regards to the educational tax. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’re finding out is many 
local governments, while they’ve been holding the line and 
even with the minimal increase they are expecting as a result of 
this piece of legislation, as a result of the budget document that 
was released by the government, are still in many cases, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, finding that when the local tax board comes to 
them, there’s an increase on the map because the increases of 
the revenue-sharing pool, the increases in education, have not 
kept up with the demands and the costs of providing the 
services to educate our young people right across this province 
— be it urban or rural, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly we can . . . we will commend 
the government for beginning the process if you will — and we 
trust it’s a beginning — of actually bringing back a fair display 
and equalization of revenue-sharing funds so that local 
governments can indeed meet the demands that are placed on 
them on an ongoing basis as they endeavour to meet the 
ongoing costs and the increases that they are faced with on an 
annual basis. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly imperative that we recognize 
the need for increases and that we recognize that local 
governments are at a point in their administrations where they 
don’t have a lot of resources left to draw on and where they 
have to rely on the provincial government — much as this 
provincial government has to rely on the federal government — 
when it comes to revenue sharing and sharing grants in regards 
to education and health and what have you, that the 
responsibility of the federal government has over . . . through 
the years off-loaded onto provincial governments where they 
have then turned around and off-loaded onto local governments. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while we compliment the government 
for beginning to realize that the burden that they have placed on 
the local taxpayer by their local governments is inappropriate 
and they’re beginning to address that additional burden by 
placing more money in the hands of local governments to 
address their needs, we still believe, and that as SARM and 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) has 
indicated, that while this falls short, they will accept it and they 
will continue to lobby for that increase that indeed brings the 

proportion of sharing and of funding from the provincial 
government back to where it was a number of years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is certainly appropriate. 
The increases are appropriate. And we will continue to 
encourage the government to move forward in addressing the 
shortfalls that they have off-loaded onto local governments over 
the past number of years. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it would be 
appropriate for us as well to take some time to indeed review all 
the implications of this piece of legislation, The Municipal 
Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2002, and therefore I move 
at this time to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 
the second reading of The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
The Local Government Election Act exists, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to set out the rules, processes, and procedures for 
conducting of elections at the local level. That is, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for the election of members of urban municipal 
councils and school boards. 
 
Over the past few years, the government has been making a 
concerted effort to increase municipal autonomy and authority 
unless overriding provincial interests exist. It is in this spirit, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government proposes the Bill we 
have for consideration today. We feel very strongly that it is 
important that the legislative amendments make the Act less 
prescriptive and more flexible for the municipalities and school 
boards that use it while, at the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
ensuring that the democratic process is not jeopardized. 
 
The proposed amendments will offer greater autonomy to local 
authorities in their own election procedures and will authorize 
municipal councils or school boards to establish disclosure 
requirements respecting campaign contributions, expenditures, 
and to establish campaign spending limits at their discretion. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are hopeful that the changes proposed 
today will help to maximize the participation of electors while 
at the same time protect the local democratic process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the proposed amendments will first 
authorize the use of mail-in ballots for residents of special care 
facilities, extend mobile poll privileges to caregivers of 
incapacitated voters, clarify the returning . . . the role, pardon 
me, of the returning officer in the candidate nomination process. 
Next, allow election officials in the cities greater flexibility 
during the second nomination process, allow local officials 
flexibility in extending voting hours on election day beyond the 
minimum requirements, and authorize a municipal council or 
school board to establish disclosure requirements respecting 
campaign contributions and expenditures, and establish election 
campaign spending limits. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments were developed in 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

 

co-operation with stakeholder representatives from both inside 
and outside government. I want to thank these people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for their assistance and advice in making sure 
these proposed amendments are both appropriate and effective. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, passing these legislative amendments will 
make the Act less prescriptive and more flexible, while at the 
same time providing options for municipalities to increase 
elector participation and ensure that the democratic process is 
not jeopardized. I believe these amendments are in the best 
interest of local governments as well as the people of 
Saskatchewan and are worthy of support by all members of this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 45, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 
2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s a pleasure to speak 
on the Act to amend The Local Government Election Act. I 
believe I have to agree with the minister that it’s very 
fundamental to our democratic society and our structures that 
we make every possible attempt to allow as many of our 
citizens to vote in all levels of the government, for elections in 
all levels of government. 
 
And as we know from statistics, the number of people voting in 
federal elections, provincial elections, and municipal elections 
have fallen dramatically. And actually at the municipal level, 
it’s quite, quite alarming how few people do come out to vote. 
And it’s very important that we enable citizens to . . . enable 
and encourage the citizens to come out to vote at all elections at 
all levels of government, but particularly the municipal level 
where the numbers of citizens voting has decreased 
dramatically. 
 
And I think it’s very important that we take special care to 
encourage people that are in special care facilities to allow them 
and give them the opportunity to vote and set in some clearly 
defined rules about the procedure around that whole area. 
 
We must balance the rights and the needs of people in special 
care circumstances or people . . . elderly or disabled people at 
home, to give them the opportunity to vote in elections. 
 
But that balance of allowing more accessibility to people to 
vote to . . . also must be balanced with the rights of people to 
have a secret ballot to vote for the person that they would like to 
represent them in a way that looks after their rights as far as a 
secret ballot is concerned. 
 
As I mentioned before, the number of people voting in all sorts 
of elections in this country has dropped dramatically and we 
must continue to make our rules and conditions flexible to look 
after that concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as the minister was outlining a number of areas where 
they’re opening up the provisions for . . . or defining the 
provisions for persons nominated. And the flexibility to 
encourage greater voter participation is a very important part of 
this Act — also to undertake a mail-in ballot — but the point of 

it is to give the local officials the right to and the flexibility to 
make some changes in these areas to allow voters to participate 
in greater numbers. 
 
But I’d just like to temper again the notion that we cannot . . . 
we must respect the voters’ rights in elections and we must keep 
in mind that important concept of our democratic structures in 
this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will take a look at this Bill in greater detail to 
make sure that there are no problems in it. We will speak to our 
colleagues and friends in local governments and municipalities 
and the leaders in the municipal governments to see if they have 
any concerns about this; if there should be any changes 
concerning this Act. 
 
And so at this time, Mr. Chair, I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(11:15) 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Department of Economic Development 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m pleased today as Minister Responsible for 
Information Technology to move second reading of Bill 53, An 
Act to Amend the Department of Economic Development Act, 
1993. 
 
The amendments today are designed to facilitate the continued 
work of the information technology office in the 
implementation of information technology and information 
management initiatives. The changes will also reflect recent 
changes in the structure of the Saskatchewan government. 
 
The main beneficiary of these changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
the people of Saskatchewan who will continue to have access to 
on-line services, and that these . . . this access will be faster 
thanks to a more efficient process that we are putting in place 
today. 
 
I think we all agree that information technology presents a great 
many opportunities to the people of Saskatchewan. These 
amendments will legislate processes that will enable us to 
continue to take advantage of those opportunities — 
opportunities like electronic commerce technologies that make 
it easier for citizens to do everything from purchase licences to 
other services on-line. As well, improved efficiency will mean 
that those tax dollars that are contributed to these services are 
better spent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the information age means that our 
government is more accessible to citizens regardless of their 
area of residence. 
 
The amendments I am presenting here today will enable the 
information technology office to continue the important work 
that it does, and to take on new information technology 
information management activities. 
 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

Certainly we all know the Government of Saskatchewan 
recently went through a reorganization process. This process 
was designed to create a more streamlined, focused public 
service that would be better able to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As part of that reorganization, the Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development and the Department of Energy and 
Mines were merged to create the new Department of Industry 
and Resources. It was necessary therefore to rename the 
legislation that is currently before us and remove all references 
to the former Department of Economic Development. Other 
minor amendments are of a housekeeping nature, and they are 
also included in the Act at this time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first policy change that we are dealing 
with here is inclusion of a new clause to allow the ITO, the 
information technology office, to create a government-wide 
strategic approach to information technology usage and 
information management. This is part of our commitment to 
encouraging all parts of government to work together to 
implement the most efficient, effective approach to information 
technology that’s possible. 
 
The second policy amendment in this legislation will allow the 
information technology office to better administer the 
province’s information technology and government on-line 
initiatives. 
 
The government on-line initiatives are designed to manage 
overall government funding for electronic service delivery 
projects, and the change in this Act will allow the information 
technology office to fulfill its mandate in that area. 
 
Specifically the new clause provides the ITO the authority to 
purchase goods for other government departments, and enter 
into agreements with third parties in order to acquire services 
for other government departments and agencies. 
 
These changes will allow departments to work with the ITO to 
enhance government service delivery for the people of 
Saskatchewan. It allows for co-operation and efficiency which 
are two important priorities of this government, and certainly 
were key to this government’s reorganization initiative 
announced this spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes will also allow us to move forward 
in implementing a comprehensive government-wide, 
e-government strategy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move at this point second reading 
of the economic development amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, Bill No. 53, an Act to Amend the Department 
of Economic Development Act, 1993 is a very interesting piece 
of legislation. And interesting in the fact that it talks about 
information technology. It talks about the ITO, the Information 
Technology Office and how that all works and opportunities to 
do more of our business online through information technology, 
whether it’s licensing and those sort of issues. 
 
But it also raises some real red flags in the fact that over the last 

couple weeks when we’ve heard of some of the misuses of the 
information that is online that is available to specific agencies. 
And right now, I mean, that’s what’s going on with the 
government as we speak, there are a number of employees off 
work as some of their practices are being investigated. They are 
off work with pay, but some of the uses of the information that 
is available to government workers and how that is used is 
being investigated. 
 
Now this talks about information technology and I know it 
doesn’t go . . . doesn’t outline all the guidelines and regulations, 
but any time we start talking about information technology, 
we’ve certainly been sensitised because of the real disaster that 
has happened. And I mean who is available, who has the 
availability to this information? And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we certainly have to look at that quite a bit further. 
 
He talked about the government reorganization and 
reorganizing the Energy and Mines and Economic Development 
into one department. And so it’s a matter of then changing the 
Act to fit that. 
 
But any time again, as I said, you start to talk about economic 
development, I was really just almost astonished today when we 
were talking about economic development in during question 
period and some of the people . . . some of the questions were 
regarding private business and dealing with economic 
development. And it’s more or less the attitude that if you want 
to do business in our province, if you want to be a private 
business owner in our province in certain sectors, come and talk 
to us, the government, first and we’ll see whether you can 
operate in partnership or not. 
 
And it just, it was really astonishing. So often, so often we talk 
about the attitude in our province and how it may be a negative 
attitude. What promotes negative attitudes in our province is 
when business people have to go and negotiate with the 
provincial government so that they can do business unrestricted, 
in a non-competitive fashion with our provincial government. I 
mean that deals with an attitude that really, really is a negative 
for business development, for growth in our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill — although it deals with 
information technology and the changes and reorganization in 
departments — we feel it needs to be looked at quite a bit 
further. Because as I said, any time you start dealing with 
information technology, red flags pop up on this side. 
 
Because we had . . . it’s interesting how many phone calls 
we’ve had over the last two weeks, people saying, well you 
know, I was dealing with a department and they knew this, this, 
this, and this about me; they knew all my information. And they 
were saying, how could that department — whether it was SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) or Social Services or 
whoever — how did they get all that information on me? How 
did they know what I had done four years ago, five years ago, 
eight years ago? 
 
And it raises some pretty interesting questions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Who has information on myself or any other member? 
The member from Swift Current, I imagine there’s a lot of 
information on him, and now you wouldn’t want some of that to 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

 

get out. But it’s just the whole principle, it’s a whole principle 
of information being stored on computers that you think is safe 
and secretive, but people have access to that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s an issue that we need to raise with a 
number of interested parties before we could let this Bill move 
on. So at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 53. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today the assistant deputy minister, Mr. Hal Cushon; and seated 
behind him is Mary Jane Laville, who is the manager of the 
livestock inspections branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
first and foremost, I would like to clarify a few things with the 
minister. I have a copy of a letter that the minister sent to the 
Stock Growers Association that basically accuses the 
Saskatchewan Party of stonewalling the Bill. 
 
And just to refresh the minister’s memory, I’d like to read from 
that letter if I may. And it says: 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Amendment 
Act has passed second reading and has been referred to 
Committee of the Whole where it will be examined on a 
clause-by-clause basis prior to the third reading. 
 
(And) As you are aware, the Government introduced the 
bill on the advice of the Committee in an effort to further 
encourage cattle producers to dehorn their cattle prior to 
leaving the farm for market and to update the membership 
of the Committee to reflect changes in the province’s cattle 
organizations. Assurance has been given that all cattle 
organizations supported the changes and that the Official 
Opposition had been briefed on the importance of 
approving the legislation. It obviously came as a surprise 
that the Opposition has continually called for a reduction in 
the amount of the increase in the fee to be assessed on 
horned cattle. 
 

And the minister went on to say that: 
 

At this point I have no interest in moving forward with this 
Bill until I receive assurance from the producer associations 
and the Opposition to support your recommendation. 
Without those assurances I will not be taking . . . further 
action to implement Bill No. 6 — The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Amendment Act. 

 
And although there’s Bills in the past that we would have loved 

to have seen that our influence was so strong that us voicing a 
few concerns with a Bill would indeed mean that the minister 
would not move the Bill forward, it hasn’t been the regular 
practice in the House in the past. 
 
So I would like if the minister could tell the Saskatchewan Party 
what they have done out of the ordinary with this Bill to slow 
down the progress of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I want to say to the 
member opposite, I don’t think anywhere in my comments I’ve 
suggested that the members opposite have slowed down the 
progress of the Bill. What I have said in my letter to the Stock 
Growers Association, and into my conversations with members 
from the Stock Growers Association, is that we were advised 
that in the process of developing the content of the Bill, that 
they had provided and done due diligence on all fronts. 
 
Because as I’ve said privately to the member opposite — and to 
the member from Maple Creek who I expect will be asking 
some questions as well — is that we had initially intended to 
bring the changes to this piece of legislation in regulation. But 
the industry had said to us that they wished that this . . . they 
would come to the legislature and we would make the 
legislative changes particularly in the area which they felt 
needed . . . most affected. And that was the change in the level 
of charge of the fee which would then go . . . which is currently 
at $2, which they suggested should go to $10. 
 
Now what was most disturbing about the . . . particularly now 
that you’ve raised this issue with me and want to debate it in 
that perspective, what was most discouraging and which 
tempered my concerns about moving ahead with this piece of 
legislation was the comments that were made by the member 
from Maple Creek. 
 
And I have the Hansard in front of me, which you’ve asked me 
to refer to, in where the Stock Growers Association and the 
board said to us very specifically that they wanted the 
legislation to include a change from $2 to $10. And we said that 
we would be happy to do that. 
 
Now the member from Maple Creek suggests that it should not 
be $10 in his Hansard report which is on May 9 of 2002 which 
I quote from, in which he said: 
 

. . . (maybe) we (can possibly) move . . . (this) from $2 to 
$5 . . . (and not $10) . . . 

 
And so I say to you, Madam Member, and through the Chair, 
that the reason that we moved this piece of legislation the way 
in which we did is because it had full endorsement from the 
industry we were told, which we were also told that it had full 
consultation with all of the stakeholders in the province, 
including you. 
 
(11:30) 
 
But most disturbing in this piece, Madam Member, and in the 
Hansard from which I read, was the implication that was made 
by the member from Maple Creek that somehow the funding 
from this fund was being used to fund other parts and levels of 
government operation. And I quote what he says here: 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

But the other possibility that has occurred to me, Mr. 
Speaker, is that maybe the government ran so short of 
funds in their budget this year that they borrowed (the) 
money back from the Horned Cattle Fund to underwrite 
some . . . (of their endeavours). And now they have . . . 
(relinquished) this particular fund . . . (which) this (is) 
highly . . . 

 
And then it goes blank after that. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, there is absolutely no 
rationale or need for us to be discussing that issue in my view. 
And so when, in fact, we read this kind of information which is 
provided in this Legislative Assembly, challenging this piece of 
legislation, which has absolutely little to do with why, in fact, 
we were changing it on behalf of the industry, that’s why this 
Bill hasn’t proceeded as quickly as it has and the letter has gone 
out that . . . why this letter has gone out to the industry to advise 
them that there are huge numbers of concerns about how they, 
in fact, are managing the industry on behalf of producers in 
Saskatchewan of which we assumed, and were told, that they 
had had that debate and discussion with members opposite on 
your side of the House. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Through 
you to the minister. Mr. Minister, if you had read the entire 
transcript of Hansard, I think you would have found that our 
concern was that the fee jumped from $2 to $10 in one motion. 
 
We suggested maybe moving from 2 to $5 incrementally and 
then to $10. We never suggested that it shouldn’t go eventually 
to $10. And I think also that the suggestion that we somehow 
didn’t approve of the figure ultimately is incorrect. If you read 
the entire record of Hansard, you will see that we suggested 
moving to $5 as a stop-gap measure and after a year or two at 
that level it could ultimately go to $10. 
 
So it isn’t a matter of not agreeing with the ultimate amount or 
the suggested amount by the associations and the industry 
generally, it’s a matter of timing. And I think that in the 
interests of fairness and accuracy, you should have made that 
point clear in your answer to my colleague a minute ago. 
 
I think also that we need to . . . we need to have a very clear 
understanding of what this process is all about and how we 
arrived at this point. 
 
Now I don’t know what sources you have within the industry 
that told you that this issue had been discussed with the official 
opposition. But to my knowledge, nobody on this side of the 
House was aware of this Bill until the day it landed on our 
desks here. We had no knowledge of the contents of the Bill — 
let alone that it was going to arrive. 
 
And I think that the other issue that we need to clarify here 
today is the subject of the Bill. If this Bill was just about 
changing the fee for horned cattle from $2 to $10, we wouldn’t 
be at this point in the discussion. 
 
But there is more in this Bill, issues that I have raised with you 
personally and in a letter. There’s more in this Bill that if we’re 
going to open the Bill up, why don’t we make the changes that 
could be done to clean the language up in this Bill and not just 

rush it through on the basis of well, that’s what the language 
said originally, we’ll just continue doing it. Because there are 
some clear areas of confusion in this Bill that I think need to be 
addressed today. 
 
Having made those comments, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to go to 
the issue of section 3, if I may. And the question I asked had to 
do with what the Act says about the value of horned cattle and 
dehorned cattle. 
 
In my letter to the minister, I indicated that this piece of the 
legislation says that: 
 

Every dealer who purchases horned cattle . . . 
 
And I’m going to leave some of the other language out of here 
that refers to the purebred cattle. That: 
 

Every dealer who purchases horned cattle . . . shall: 
 
(a) purchase the cattle at the current market price for cattle 
which are polled or have been dehorned, and pay that price 
to the vendor less the deductible amount for each head of 
horned cattle being purchased . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, when I raised the concerns of that particular 
language with you in the letter just of a few days ago, your 
response says that: 
 

There are no changes necessary in that particular wording 
because that is what has existed in the Act previously. 

 
And I don’t dispute that, but what I’m trying to make clear, Mr. 
Minister, is that when the Act is opened to make the changes 
that the industry seemed to want, why don’t we take advantage 
of the opportunity to clear up the language that might be 
confusing. 
 
Your response to me says that: 
 

Section 3(a) as written uses the same language as in the 
existing Act, therefore cattle markets will continue to 
operate the same before and after the proposed amendments 
are made. 

 
Mr. Minister, I can lay out a situation, a hypothetical situation 
for you this morning that is going to make this wording of this 
Act potentially pretty difficult for some people. And I know it 
might be a hypothetical situation, but since the horned cattle 
Act has generated a substantial amount of interest, let me just 
give you the hypothetical situation. 
 
Let’s say we have an individual who brings 20 head of cattle to 
an auction market that have horns. Those cattle go through the 
auction ring, the individual that presented those cattle to the 
auction market has been penalized $10 a head for those horned 
cattle. And when they come through the ring, the buyers there 
notice that these horned cattle are good quality cattle, but 
they’ve got horns and they’re worried about the impact those 
horns might have on other cattle they are going to buy or truck 
that day, or other cattle in their feedlot operation. 
 
So the buyer takes advantage of that situation and decides to bid 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

 

and ends up purchasing those cattle at anywhere from 5 to 10 
cents a pound less than the market price that day for dehorned 
cattle. 
 
Now if you’ve got 20 head going through and, let’s say, they 
are 1,300 pound cows, and you lose 10 cents a pound on each of 
those cows, the $10 a head penalty is going to be a $200 cost to 
the producer. But the 10 cent a pound penalty is going to be a 
substantially higher figure. Now in this day and age, nobody 
can afford to take those kind of penalties. 
 
But having gone home and looked at his cheque and seeing 
what it cost him and being aware that the horned cattle Act has 
become an issue of some discussion in this legislature and 
throughout the industry, he might just decide to check the Act 
and see what the Act says. 
 
And he reads in section 3 the wording that exists and the 
wording that you indicated makes no problem for any producer 
because it was there previously and you’re just using it again, 
but he reads the wording here and it says that the purchaser of 
horned cattle shall: 
 

(a) purchase the cattle at the current market price for 
cattle which are polled or which have been dehorned . . . 

 
He takes this to his lawyer and he says, you know what? The 
Act says I should have been paid exactly the same amount of 
money as the guys who are selling polled cattle. That’s what the 
Act says. But the buyer bought those cattle from me at 10 cents 
a pound less. I don’t think that’s fair. I don’t think that’s right. 
I’m going to sue the auction ring and the buyer. 
 
Your Act and the language in it allow for that kind of legal 
action. And that’s why I think if we’ve opened up the Act to 
change the dollar figure of the penalty amount, why wouldn’t 
we take the opportunity to make changes in the wording of the 
Act that would clear up any of those potential problem areas? 
It’s not a big deal, and I suggested a possible wording change 
that would take this kind of complication out of the Act and 
address the very basic needs that the government feels they 
have to address in this particular piece of legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, there are some problematic areas with this 
Bill. And I think we should take advantage of opportunities, 
like opening this particular piece of legislation represented, to 
address those complicating areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I say to the member opposite 
that I don’t have a great deal of issue with the position that the 
member takes, as it relates to how in fact you enforce the 
particular piece of legislation that’s currently there, that’s been 
rewritten again in the current legislation that we’re proposing 
on behalf of the . . . a number of farm organizations, livestock 
producers. 
 
And we can’t for a minute assume that the buyer who’s in the 
auction marts is going to assume that because the $10 fee as it’s 
recommended here — the $2 fee has already been taken off — 
that for some reason or another, they’re not going to pay the 
same level of price that you might for an animal that in fact 
does have horns which is polled. And so there is no method 
today for, as you point out rightfully, of enforcing that. 

Now what we . . . And I expect what the livestock associations 
here would have anticipated when they were reviewing this 
piece of legislation, is that by having it included here, that at 
least there may be some pressure on the buyers in the markets 
to not discriminate against the individuals who in fact have 
already paid the fee for their horned cattle. And by increasing 
the level of the fee on the horned cow or on the horned animal, 
that in fact they wouldn’t discriminate when the animal gets 
into the market ring, which is why I’m thinking and 
understanding that they are increasing or calling for . . . one of 
the reasons why they’re calling for the increase in the level of 
the fee. 
 
And you’re absolutely right that there will be no way of 
knowing, if you have an animal that enters the ring in an 
auction mart along an animal that is polled and the horned 
animal gets a lesser cost . . . or gets a lesser price, what the 
rationale for that is because they would already know that 
there’s been a deduction that’s been made for the horn. And we 
have no way of course of calling the buyer on that, the way in 
which the legislation reads today. 
 
But you should know that when we went — and I expect do 
know — that when we went to deal with this piece of 
legislation, we had long conversations and detailed 
conversations with a number of people. And this is who they 
are: the Farm Animal Council . . . And this first round of 
presentation and discussion began in January 25 of 2001. And 
the people who were involved in that conversation were the 
Farm Animal Council of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 
Livestock Markets and Order Buyers Association, the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, the Saskatchewan 
Cattle Feeders Association, plus large cattle finishing lots in 
Saskatchewan presented by the Royal View Cattle 84 Ltd. Also 
involved in that discussion was the Saskatchewan Society for 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the Saskatchewan 
Veterinary Medical Association. 
 
And then again, after the current recommendations were put 
forward by them, the committee then directed a further analysis 
at the request . . . and that went then in February . . . or in June 
of . . . or June 20 of 2001 to a meeting where the committee 
recommended increasing the deductions only. And also there, 
also talked about changing the representation on the committee. 
Those were the only two recommendations that came forward. 
 
And then on November 1 of 2001, representatives of 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food received consensus on the 
recommendations of this piece of legislation that are before us 
today, which were the two. 
 
And those recommendations were approved from a consultation 
meeting that included the Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders 
Association, the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association, the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, the National Farmers 
Union, and representatives of the dairy industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So those are the folks who at the end of the day said that, now 
that this legislation is ready for drafting and crafting and for the 
floor of the legislature, those are the only changes which we 
wish the legislation be enacted today. 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

And so if the member is suggesting here that there has not been 
due diligence done on this legislation to the degree it should 
have been, that there should be further amendments that should 
be made to this piece of legislation in order to achieve the kinds 
of language that you’re suggesting we should be trying to 
achieve, we could take the Bill back, and take the Bill back and 
bring it forward at another time. And take it back to the 
associations, to the producers groups and say to them, we’re not 
satisfied here that the language of the legislation is 
appropriately crafted. 
 
And we’ve had this private conversation with them since you 
and I have spoken, and that’s not the message they’re giving 
me. They’re giving me the message that we should be moving 
ahead with what has been presented here, which they’ve 
reviewed, which they’ve endorsed, and I’d be happy to do that. 
 
But if there’s some sense here that there’s discomfort here in 
the level in which this legislation still today appears before us, I 
would be happy to take it and take it back and stand it for 
another period of time, which I expect will be the next session 
of the legislature, and deal with it at that particular time. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, you’ve cited the extensive list of farm-related 
organizations that had input into this particular piece of 
legislation. And you’ve assured us that they were all in 
agreement of the impact of the legislation. 
 
I guess, you know, I don’t have that same assurance. That same 
group of producer groups have not come to me personally or, as 
far as I know, to our Ag critic, my colleague, the member from 
Watrous. We have not been approached on this issue. 
 
And I’m also a little troubled by the preponderance of assurance 
that you’re saying you have because when I have talked to 
individual members of some of those organizations, as far as 
they knew, the only thing that this particular Act addressed was 
the change in the fee amount — the deductible. They didn’t 
know, when I initially talked to them, that there were any other 
pieces in this particular piece of legislation, any other sections 
that were troublesome or where wording was changed or any 
alterations had been made. They weren’t aware of that. 
 
And you know, I found that quite troublesome, that some of the 
people who seemed to be the most assertive on this particular 
issue weren’t even aware that there was anything more to it than 
the actual dollar amount changes. 
 
So you may feel confident you have their support; I’m not so 
sure that they know all of the ramifications of the changes here 
or the wording that has been left intact or altered slightly in 
other areas. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m not asking you to pull this Bill. I’m just 
asking you to take complete responsibility for it and that our 
concerns have gone on record today as having been raised. I’m 
trying, frankly, to wash my hands of the problems that I think 
this Bill might raise if the language remains intact. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, the 

members. I’m comfortable with the way in which the Bill reads 
today because I’m comfortable with the dialogue of which my 
department has had with the various groups and organizations 
from which I’ve listed that we’ve had conversations with. 
 
I’m also comfortable with the fact that this Bill didn’t just arrive 
today for us. The consultation on this piece of legislation really 
began on January 25 of 2001. I can’t . . . And then again made 
its way in a very detailed fashion on November 1 of 2001 
before it arrived here this spring. 
 
Now I can’t answer for you why it is that you haven’t heard 
from the livestock associations. I’m not . . . I can’t answer that 
question. 
 
I believe that the first reading on this piece of legislation was 
about a month or a month and a . . . a month or six weeks ago or 
five weeks ago. And if to date you have had not had an 
opportunity to speak with those livestock organizations in the 
province of whom I’ve listed, I can’t answer that either — why 
you’ve not had an opportunity to do that in any kind of detail. 
 
But I’m assured today from the members that are here 
representing the department and from the . . . from the 
department who’s been working on this piece of legislation that 
the changes that we have in front of us today are ones that they 
would be most pleased for us to move ahead with. 
 
And I just want to reiterate one more time that if in fact there is 
a sense here that you want to have greater consultation with 
your livestock . . . with the livestock industry, of which we 
believe we have, and that you have some sense here that the 
people who are listed here do not represent the livestock 
industry in Saskatchewan appropriately and you think that 
there’s another set of organizations or individuals who represent 
this issue more appropriately, we’d be happy to hear who they 
are and delay the moving ahead with this piece of legislation to 
another time. 
 
But as far as we’re concerned, and I’m concerned, on this side 
of . . . as the minister responsible for this piece of legislation, 
we’ve provided the due diligence that we thought that was 
necessary in changing this piece of legislation to the likes of 
those people who raise livestock in the province. 
 
So if the message here is clearly . . . is clear that you want us to 
hold this, remove it, place it to another agenda on another 
schedule on another day, I would be happy to entertain that 
motion on your behalf. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just 
wanted to point out that we have a visitor from the other side of 
the province. I’m talking lengthwise, Mr. Speaker, not width. 
 
Modeste Bigeye is in your gallery. He’s from Black Lake, and 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

 

he’s currently in the city. He’s attending the convocation of 
Mary Jane Sayazie. Mary Jane is receiving a Bachelor of 
Education, and she is a member of the Black Lake Dene Band. 
Mr. Bigeye is the Chair of the Black Lake Education 
Committee, and I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome a well-travelled guest from all the way. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.) 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I want to move on to section 5 and ask a few 
questions for clarification as well here. 
 
In section 5 it starts out by saying: 
 

In this section, ‘approved auction market’ means . . . 
 
And it gives a definition. 
 
If you move to section (2), it talks about: 
 

. . . no person shall deliver horned cattle to any point 
outside Saskatchewan unless . . . 

 
And in subsection (a) of that particular article, it goes into 
wording such as: 
 

prior to transporting the horned cattle outside 
Saskatchewan, the owner of the cattle and the owner’s 
agent . . . 

 
And so on. 
 
What I need to know, Mr. Minister, is: is there an automatic 
assumption that cattle are going to the auction market because 
of the use of the term auction market, the definition of the 
auction market in the earlier part of section 5? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It’s my understanding here that it would be 
up to the producer to determine whether the livestock are going 
to an auction mart or to another . . . to a feedlot in — if you’re 
referring to another province — in another province. That’s 
what our assumption would be here. It would be the producer 
who would have the understanding of what’s happening with 
the livestock. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, well if there is some option 
available to the owner of that group of livestock, that herd that 
he’s transporting out, then the objection I raised in my letter to 
you becomes even more significant, I think. Because this says: 
 

prior to transporting the horned cattle outside 

Saskatchewan, the owner of the cattle or the owner’s agent 
pays to the minister, or an inspector on behalf of the 
minister, the deductible amount for each head of horned 
cattle to be delivered outside Saskatchewan. 

 
It sounds to me like this is fairly wide open. It doesn’t say 
transported to an auction market or transported for sale; it just 
says “prior to transporting” out of the province. And there’s a 
number of reasons, as you’ve indicated, that somebody might 
want to transport their cattle out of the province without 
actually going to an auction ring. 
 
So the question I asked was, can we assume that people must 
pay that fee before they transport out cattle from the province, 
and by transporting in your explanatory notes said both trucking 
and on foot? So must the fee be paid to the ministry before 
animals are transported out for reasons other than going to an 
auction market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. When you are 
transporting or moving livestock — as you’ll know having done 
it, I know on your own as you’ve mentioned — you would 
require a manifest. And of course on the manifest you would 
state where the livestock are going to. So when the truck arrives 
or whether you’re moving them on foot, of course you would 
then advise the inspector about where it is that the livestock are 
going. 
 
In the case of a truck moving the livestock from your farm 
somewhere else, the manifest would read . . . if it’s my 
livestock, that my livestock are going to an auction mart or my 
livestock are going to, let’s say, a feedlot somewhere else. If 
they’re going to a feedlot then there would be an inspection 
there that would be done. The producer would then pay the fee 
to the inspector and then the fees would make their way into the 
fund. 
 
In the case if the livestock in the manifest . . . if the manifest 
reads that the livestock are going to an action mart in another 
province, into Alberta I mean, what would happen here is that 
when the livestock arrives then in the action mart in Alberta, 
they would do the deduction in the same way that we do in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And this legislation tries to make that process seamless. So 
there are in fact, to your question, two processes that are 
engaged at the same time, led off the information that’s on the 
manifest provided by the producer. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, to you through the Chair. What 
about the situation where an individual is transporting his cattle 
or her cattle to Alberta but not for sale purposes? This particular 
piece of legislation as it’s worded does not make any provisions 
for those situations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. If the livestock 
are not for sale then there is . . . these fees do not apply. Either 
the brand fee doesn’t apply nor does the horned cattle . . . the 
horn fee apply. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, since we opened up the Act, 
would it not be a suitable suggestion to have said that just what 
you’ve indicated? That cattle going out of the province but not 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

for sale, fees need not be collected or applied; because you 
know if I read this particular piece of legislation, it suggests to 
me that just being transported out of the province, the fees have 
to be paid no matter what the destination is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well the . . . I’m told, Mr. Chair, to the 
member, that in fact these kinds of issues were raised in the 
conversations that were had over the discussion around the Bill. 
 
However, the changes haven’t been made here because they 
have not been recommended to us by the industry. Had the 
industry made those kinds of recommendations to it in the way 
in which I answered the earlier question, we would have made 
those amendments. Now we did not get that from the industry. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I just 
wanted to make note that this is one of the first Bills that came 
before the Assembly this session and, in fact, it is also one of 
the first Bills to come to Committee of the Whole. So I wanted 
to point out that I don’t feel that this side of the House has 
unduly held up this Bill even though we’ve had concerns about 
it and raised those and basically asked for some answers to 
questions. 
 
And I notice that this Bill comes into force with proclamation, 
and a lot of people in Saskatchewan probably don’t realize that 
this Assembly passing a Bill does not mean necessarily that it 
comes in effect right away. And in this case, the changes that 
we will see go ahead, when cabinet basically is good and ready 
for it to go into effect — and it could be next week, it could be 
next year, it could be never. 
 
And I just want the minister to clarify if that is, indeed, the case 
and tell me if he has let the organizations and associations that’s 
interested in the Bill know that, from today forward, it is a 
cabinet decision and totally in their hands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I should . . . I just want to say to the 
member opposite I have not at all indicated personally or in any 
other correspondence that I have submitted or will in the future 
say that this piece of legislation has been held up by anyone 
other than the fact that we have not resolved, within this 
legislature, what the language of the Bill might be. 
 
And so, you should rest assured that I will be advising the 
industry upon the completion of moving . . . upon completion of 
the moving of this piece of legislation forward, if that’s our 
interest, that we’ll need a date for proclamation and that the 
importance of the date of proclamation, of course, is when you 
start to collect the fees. 
 
(12:00) 
 
And I expect that there’ll be — not expect — there will need to 
be some notice provided to the industry so that they can prepare 
themselves and the people who will collect the fees on our 
behalf, that there’s going to be a change to the level of fees that 
are going to be collected. So the member can rest assured that 
we’ll provide that information in the way in which I’ve 
suggested. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a couple 
of questions on this Bill here. 

It’s kind of appropriate it came at this time. On the weekend 
there, I was talking to quite a few cattle producers and they are 
all getting ready to move the cattle to community pastures. 
Some of them were opening them up on Thursday and Friday, I 
think, Saturday. Some of them were taking at reduced rates and 
that. So there was quite a bit of discussion, you know, about 
that. 
 
And then I asked him about this $10 fee and most of producers 
didn’t know about it. They agreed that $2 was low. A $500 . . . 
or a 500 per cent increase in one year, they kind of — you know 
what cowboys are like — they kind of shook their head a bit but 
they can live with it. They just hope that there isn’t going to be 
increases in the further years which they stated to me. They feel 
$10 is the max that they can bear right now. So I hope that 
you’re not looking at raising it in the next few years. 
 
But they asked me a few questions that basically I couldn’t 
answer, so I said I would ask under Committee of the Whole 
when this Bill come up, because I knew it was coming up this 
week. 
 
So one of the questions they asked on the $2 fee, how much 
was collected last year and how much was collected 10 years 
before that on the $2 fee? Has there been much of a change? 
Has there been a decrease through the market of horned cattle 
coming in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I just want to 
say that the number that I have here from last year, March of 
2001, they collected 139,000 and . . . $139,000. We expect that 
this year that amount would be about the same. 
 
What I don’t know is the question that you ask as to 10 years 
ago. We can try and find that number for you and then make it 
available for you and as quickly as we can so that you can get 
back to the people that you need to. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I’m 
asking is I . . . like I had mentioned in my speech that I’ve 
always believed . . . I’ve always watched the market, and going 
over a number of years, you’ve always seen less and less every 
year of horned cattle, so . . . And that’s a way of determining if 
it was always less was to check the fee check off in the last 10 
years. So I would . . . just curious for that piece of information. 
 
Now with a $10 fee, do you expect to collect basically five 
times as much money, which should be well over the half a 
million dollar mark, for the year 2003? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, 
that the anticipation here is what will happen is that because 
you’ve raised the fee to a level that will be a disincentive, that 
you’ll see the number from $139,000 reducing itself. I mean, 
that’s the intent here. 
 
Now whether or not that will be the case, I don’t know. We’ll 
pay attention; this will be a good question, I expect, for us to 
sort of manage and monitor next year to see whether or not we 
have actually seen any influence by making this kind of change 
to the fee. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Yes, that would be and I’ll be kind 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

 

of monitoring myself. 
 
Following up on that, will you be sending out some 
information, doing a little bit of ads, letting know producers that 
there is a $10 fee? Because like I say, the ones I talked to on the 
weekend, I think out of 10 guys I talked to, only one actually 
knew there was going to be a $10 fee being brought in. 
 
So is there going to be just . . . either through the rural service 
centre or some of the magazines that you do send out to 
producers, you will be mentioning that the fee will be going up 
to $10 so they will know, and have a chance to maybe do some 
more dehorning this spring, is when most guys are doing it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — This is a very important point that you 
make, that we be sure that when this legislation makes its way 
forward and the proclamation occurs, that we advise all the 
livestock inspectors, that we make sure that the livestock 
associations across the province are aware of the fee increases, 
and that livestock producers are aware of what the fee increases 
are. 
 
And the communications piece is going to be critical here 
because this hasn’t been asked for, as you can appreciate, by the 
government. This increase has been requested by the industry. 
And that’s why this communications piece is even more 
important than one might appreciate. Because what . . . the last 
thing we want is to hear from producers in Saskatchewan that 
these increases have been somehow been driven by the need of 
the . . . needs of the provincial government. 
 
So you can rest assured that we’ll be making this information 
available to livestock producers and associations and our 
livestock inspectors across the province. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that’s . . . I can 
imagine you very, very well will be doing that. 
 
Another thing: on the fee being collected, now that you brought 
that up, one of the questions asked me, what . . . where did the 
money go last year — that exact $139,000, a breakdown of 
that? And where does this $10 fee go? Which departments does 
it go; which research does it go; who handles it? — basically 
the accounting of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member: my officials 
provide me with where some of the expenditures are made from 
the fund: $36,000 went — I expect this is last year — to the 
Veterinary College; $35,000 went to VIDO (veterinary 
infectious disease organization); $7.5 thousand went to the 
Foundation of Animal Care; and 15,000 went to the 
Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders. 
 
And then on an annual basis about 161,000 goes to the Western 
Beef Development Centre, to the research and development 
centre. And then an additional $15,000 is provided on an annual 
basis to the Saskatchewan . . . to the Department of Agriculture 
and Food to look after the administration of this entire fund. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And with the extra 
. . . And there probably will be more money coming in the first 
year too, because it will take a year or two for people to start 
doing more dehorning at home. 

I noticed in the Act there, there was a Cattle Purchase Advisory 
Committee. Does that determine how the money’s going to be 
split up for the upcoming years? Basically at the beginning of 
every year, how do you decide who gets the money? Or is there 
a formula or is there just kind of a percentage formula to each 
group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. The member’s 
right, absolutely right. The committee determines where the 
money goes and I expect that, particularly where the largest 
chunk is, on the research and development, it would be targeted 
to those areas where they are expecting that they will be able to 
have the largest influence in terms of research and development 
work. 
 
So it is the committee that makes the decisions about the 
allocation of the funds. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There’ll be no further 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Just before I do that, I’d like to very briefly explain to our 
guests from Black Lake as to the process involved here. 
 
As I explained to them earlier, Mr. Chairman, is that estimates 
is where the opposition has the opportunity to ask the Minister 
of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) any questions about the budgets, you know, kind 
of related to SERM. And that’s what this whole exercise is 
about. And often we’ll come back four or five times during a 
session to have a number of questions asked of opposition. 
 
And I’d also point out, Mr. Speaker, even though the questions 
are many, I’ve often told Mr. Bigeye the quality sometimes is 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

not there but the quantity certainly is. 
 
And I’d also point out that Mr. Bigeye travelled 16 hours to get 
here. And it’s an extremely tough trip and I would certainly 
again welcome him here to the Assembly. 
 
I would point out the officials we have today. To my immediate 
left we have Terry Scott, and Terry Scott is the deputy minister; 
and next to Terry Scott, we have Bob Ruggles, and Bob 
Ruggles is assistant deputy minister for programs; and directly 
behind me we have Donna Johnson, and Donna is the acting 
executive director for corporate services; and next to Donna we 
have Rick Bates, and Rick is the director of communication 
services; and to my right we have Dave Phillips, the assistant 
deputy minister for operations. 
 
And other environment officials, Mr. Chairman. In the back we 
have Ron Zukowsky — Ron is the executive director of policy 
and assessment; we have Ken Lozinsky who’s with parks and 
special places; Doug Mazur, director of sustainable land 
management branch; Sam Ferris, environmental protection. We 
have Kevin Callele, the director . . . acting in the capacity of 
Dennis Sherratt, he’s also with fish and wildlife. And finally we 
have Dave Tulloch, the fire and management enforcement 
protection personnel. Thank you. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good 
afternoon to the minister and welcome to his officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think given the situation that the province has 
been facing this spring with respect to the number of fires that 
there have been — and we’ve certainly had some fires that have 
caused a tremendous amount of damage — I think perhaps 
everyone would appreciate a bit of an update from you, sir, in 
terms of how many fires are there out there now; what is the 
status of the various fires. 
 
And then I think as well, yesterday there was an appropriation 
passed for one-twelfth and part of that two-twelfths . . . are 
those appropriations going to meet the needs in terms of the 
expenses incurred in the firefighting? Or are we going to be . . . 
or have they exceeded . . . has the cost exceeded the 
appropriation to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for your very 
important question. I don’t disagree that it has been a very 
challenging time for the province. And as of 10 a.m. this 
morning we’ve had 35 forest fires burning in the province. The 
total number of fires to date this year is 328 fires and that’s 17 
per cent above last year’s total and roughly 56 per cent above 
the five-year average. So there’s no question that the amount of 
fires out there is tremendous. 
 
We have had not-yet-under-control fires, the ones that we’re 
primarily concerned about certainly, that are creating a 
significant challenge for us all. There’s about seven that are out 
of control. There’s been some good progress made on other 
fires, but clearly these fires are fairly big fires and we’re doing 
what we can to try and address this challenge and move 
forward. 
 

Right now we have 712 firefighters working and patrolling 
these fires. We also have a number of actions or standby for fire 
suppression activities. There’s 42 helicopters that are engaged, 
19 tanker aircraft, 47 bulldozers, and 9 swamp tractors. And 
there’s no question that we’ve had a great amount of work, just 
a tremendous amount of effort by a great number of people that 
are involved and the personnel that are involved. 
 
So clearly it is a very tough start to a fire season. And I can tell 
you that a lot of the SERM staff right from our deputy 
minister’s level right down to the firefighter and commissary 
folks out there, and the tanker crews and the fire bosses, they’re 
all working very hard, long hours and they can certainly 
appreciate that they have to do this because the impact on our 
forest and property and certainly the communities as a result of 
these fires is just tremendously negative to all the people 
involved. And we can appreciate that. 
 
So there is some very good and hard work being done. But 
nonetheless, it is a tremendous challenge. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 
Minister, I would like to join with you in congratulating all of 
the firefighters out there right now and congratulating everyone 
involved in the firefighting efforts. 
 
I think, when you look at the firefighting capabilities in this 
province, you do realize that a large amount of that is dependent 
on volunteer firefighters. And those are people who, in 
situations such as this, don’t get paid and have to take time 
away from seeding. And in the case of a couple of fires that 
occurred in our area and throughout the province, you certainly 
have individuals who weren’t able to get out and seed. They 
were busy fighting fires. 
 
But that’s just an example of a community pulling together and 
doing everything that it needs to do. And one example of that, 
Mr. Minister, that I saw was Nipawin where absolutely 
everyone came together and I was in awe of the ability of the 
community and the individuals involved there to be able to 
come together and work towards the best interests of their 
community. 
 
But the second part to my question, Mr. Minister, was: what has 
the cost been to date and will there be enough funding for the 
firefighting expense with the appropriations that have been 
made to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. What I 
would point out is that it’s very difficult to give an exact figure 
because, as you know, these fires are ongoing and we certainly 
have invoices and the bills coming on a regular basis. And it’s 
difficult for us to assess what the total cost we’ve spent to date. 
 
But what I can tell you is that based on the fact that we have 
approximately $70 million in terms of the budgets needed to 
fight fires this year, the breakdown would be certainly the Fire 
Contingency Fund; that of course is a backup fund that we 
would use if we didn’t extend our $36 million base fund to 
make sure that we have enough money to fight fires. 
 
What I will point out is that it is never an exact science about 
trying predict costs because we don’t know how long the fires 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

 

will go on for. We’re not sure how much extra costs that will be 
incurred. But what we do is that we certainly action fires. We 
are going to protect Saskatchewan’s interests. We will continue 
fighting these fires, and we will work very close with Finance 
to make sure that we have the means, you know, to do exactly 
that. 
 
What I will say is that we’ve had a rough start — there’s no 
question about that. But in this business, as you know, simple 
things like more moisture, less wind, certainly all these 
contributing factors will determine how tough a year we’re 
going to have or how good a year. 
 
I would also point out that the directive we’ve had from Finance 
is to continue watching the bottom line. 
 
And the fire suppression activities undertaken by SERM clearly 
show that as a result of our proactivity — I’m talking about 
preparedness and monitoring and reacting as quickly as we can 
— that this whole preparedness model that we’ve been 
undertaking is certainly a model that many other jurisdictions 
are facing . . . or looking at and hoping to implement. 
 
So we are doing as best we can and we’re certainly leading the 
nation, in my opinion, in making sure that we’re prepared to 
respond to these fire as quick as we can and to try to keep those 
costs down as much as we can. And that of course takes a 
dedicated crew, which we certainly have. And that of course 
takes some systems that we certainly have. And that of course 
as well takes some diligence in making sure that we train folks 
and we hire as many people as we can to make sure that they 
are able to fight these fires. 
 
So I can tell you — I can’t give you an exact figure — but I can 
tell you that we are certainly experiencing a jump in starts. 
We’re hoping that we have more rain, as everybody else is 
hoping for rain. 
 
But what we do know is that we’re prepared to continue 
fighting fires, that we’re prepared to respond to the fire 
situation, and we’ll continue improving the system and 
watching the bottom line to make sure that we protect 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ interests as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, if it became obvious in the near future that the cost of 
fighting the fires was going to exceed the three-twelfths 
appropriated to date, what is the mechanism whereby your 
department could access the required funding? 
 
Now I know that you and I both hope that that certainly is not 
the case. But should it in fact be the case, how would you go 
about accessing the necessary funding? And I guess accessing it 
in a timely way because certainly this isn’t something where 
one would want to allow any kind of tie-ups in terms of the 
amount of time needed in terms of accessing the funding. 
 
So if you could just indicate as to how we would access funds if 
they exceeded the three-twelfths. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for that question. 
What I would point out is that we do have a budget that we 
follow. And if the fire season is such that we need more money 

as we go down this June and July time frame, we would 
approach Finance, and I would ask the member to directly ask 
the Minister of Finance the process that he would undertake. 
 
But clearly I think, from our perspective as we mentioned 
before, we have a budget in place. We’re going to use the 
budget to protect Saskatchewan’s forests and property and 
people and communities. And the budget’s there and the 
money’s there, and we’re certainly going to do our very best to 
utilize it as effectively as we can and certainly watching the 
bottom line. But any question that you have about Finance, I 
would ask that member to contact the Minister of Finance and 
he would fill you in with the financial details. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, could you provide us with some details on the 
situation in Archerwill. What is the status of that fire currently? 
Is it under control? What kind of progress is being made and 
how many people do we have actively engaged in the 
firefighting in the Archerwill area? How many SERM 
personnel do we have out there and what role is the department 
currently playing in the Archerwill area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And I would point out that one of the things I think is very 
important is that we constantly update folks on what’s 
happening with the Archerwill fire and other fires as well. And 
I hope the member will bear with me when I basically explain 
what some of the other troubled areas are as well just so that we 
are able to get a clear picture to folks out there that may be 
listening as to what is happening with our fire situation. 
 
I can report that Archerwill right now, that suppression efforts 
are initially . . . were initially taken by the local fire folks and 
certainly SERM was involved as well. We have a type 1 team 
dispatched to the fire on May 28 with resources buildup 
certainly continuing. And I can report that today it is being held, 
as of today. And of course this is 10 a.m. today so that is also 
always good news. 
 
But what’s the challenge in Archerwill is that we do have strong 
winds. And that’s what’s happening all throughout the province 
is these strong, gusting winds and the dry temperature is really 
putting the resource team that we have in place and all the 
resources we have in place at maximum capacity. There’s a lot 
of people doing a lot of work and there’s a lot of folks of course 
being affected. And we want to look at and recognize both 
those challenges. 
 
(12:30) 
 
And a good example of that, just for the member’s information, 
is that yesterday was a really bad day. It was a really tough day 
for all the folks involved. 
 
As you know, Archerwill and Montreal Lake and now we hear 
this morning that Turtle Lake also . . . the Turtle Lake area 
suffered some significant losses, property losses. While the 
forest itself wasn’t . . . it wasn’t as great as one would think, 
there was significant property loss, and I believe the total 
amount of cabins there may have numbered 50 plus. So there 
was again some very, very tough losses for a lot of people out 
there. 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

And certainly on behalf of all the crews of SERM that are out 
there firefighting and all the local firefighters and the RM (rural 
municipality) folks that are out there helping out, that is there 
on behalf of the government and the Premier, that we want to 
express our profound sadness. And we can only try to 
understand the immense sense of loss that people in the Turtle 
Lake area and throughout Saskatchewan that may be . . . that 
are going through . . . the feeling that they’re going through 
now. 
 
And I would point out to them that it is the highest priority for 
us of trying to make sure that properties and peoples’ lives are 
protected, as well as the forest industry. And so these are some 
of the things that we’re working towards. 
 
So if it’s Archerwill, if it’s Turtle Lake, you know, we certainly 
are aware of some of the challenges. And as I mentioned, we’re 
quite frankly at the wall in terms of all the resources that we 
have. We’ve got some very good help, as you know. We’ve had 
this agreement with other provinces that we would help each 
other out in the event that this happened. 
 
Manitoba’s having some challenges; Alberta’s having some 
challenges — as Saskatchewan is having challenges. But today 
I can tell you that we’re having some good support and 
collaboration by way of some aircraft and other support 
mechanisms from BC (British Columbia), from the Yukon, 
from Ontario. I understand that Quebec is also coming out to 
help out. 
 
So it really, it really points out that we have a good system of 
co-operation amongst all the provinces. And we recognize that 
we’re all in this boat together, so we help each other and we 
certainly share all the resources. And there’s agreements to that 
effect. 
 
So when we talk about Saskatchewan leading the nation, 
certainly trying to provide some best practices and some good 
ideas in helping deal with the Archerwills and certainly the 
Turtle Lake and the Montreal Lakes of this world, there’s been 
some . . . a lot of good work being done. 
 
We are all of course praying for rain, but we’re thankful for the 
efforts of many of the firefighters that are out there and the team 
that’s out there. And as well we’ve also instituted a fire ban, a 
province-wide fire ban to make sure that we don’t add to the 
problem. And there’s no question one of the things that we are 
asking folks out there to be very careful. 
 
As you know, there’s . . . northern forests right now are also at 
risk, as well as the southern farm lands in some of the 
communities. So our resources, as we speak, are just severely 
stretched. And we are just going to have to buckle down hard 
and work alongside of the RMs and continue working diligently 
with the many players out there and partners out there because 
no question about it, Archerwill, Montreal Lake, Turtle Lake, 
the northern area, there are fires out there, and we’re doing our 
very best to respond to them given the resources that we have. 
And it is going to be a tough job this summer. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, could you provide the same kind of update on the fires 
at Tobin Lake and Makwa Lake as well, please? 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the 
questions. I would point out there is — as you mentioned — 
there is quite a bit of fires that are out there, and we’re trying to 
stay on top, as fresh information as possible. And again, this is 
from 10 a.m. this morning and things of course, as you can 
appreciate, change by the hour. 
 
One of the things that we were quite pleased with in terms of 
the amount of attention this is getting, is that I was very happy 
as a minister to see the Premier take an interest in visiting a 
number of the areas. 
 
I know he went to Nipawin. I know that he’s went to 
Archerwill. So having the Premier tour some of these areas, and 
you can appreciate certainly some of the challenge that people 
that lost certain properties have gone through. And he’s out 
there and a lot of SERM folks out there appreciate that, a lot of 
people of Saskatchewan appreciate that. So, certainly want to 
commend the Premier for making the effort of being out there. 
It’s always nice to be able to have some kind of a spiritual and, 
certainly, financial help at this time. And certainly that 
leadership was there. 
 
I would point out on the Tobin fire, it started off five miles 
northwest of Tobin Lake. The winds have shifted to the 
southeast of the lake. And I can tell you that so far we believe 
that there is two cabins that may have been burnt; one was a 
trapper’s cabin, another may have been a hunting cabin. There’s 
also a outfitting operation, I think, that has been saved in that 
area. 
 
And so it is estimated that about roughly 1,200 hectares, I 
believe . . . Sorry, I may have the wrong number here but I’ll 
get the right, correct number. But the Tobin Lake fire is a big 
fire. It’s moving along quite quickly. The winds are gusting 
things up, so there has been property loss. There has been 
certainly other losses as well. We’re . . . again, it’s roughly plus 
1,500 hectares. It’s growing. And we’ve certainly got as many 
people on it as we can. 
 
Now in reference to the Pine Cove or the timber fire — the 
second question that you had — you know, we had Cat lines 
working there until 1 a.m. in the morning. We are . . . as I 
mentioned, it’s close to the lake. There was a small resort area 
called Pine Cove that was being challenged, but they had these 
sprinkler kits and they had Cats working. So we think that 
there’s been some success on that front to stop much more 
property from being burnt. 
 
So it is roughly, right now, it’s crossed Highway 126 and there 
is a number of other places that are . . . of course, it’s moving 
along quite well so we’re trying to stay on top of these things as 
we’re going. 
 
So both the Tobin Lake and the timber fire, as you mentioned, 
there’s been a lot of action undertaken. And as I pointed out 
earlier, you know, the resources are to the wall here — you’ve 
got people working many hours and we have to be very careful 
that we don’t burn out our firefighters or put them at undue risk. 
So that balancing act also has to occur. And so we’ve got tanks, 
equipment in terms of the air tanker service, and Cats and men 
and personnel from all over working on this particular 
challenge. 



May 31, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

 

So there has been progress but clearly it is a tough battle to win. 
But we are going to put our hearts and our minds into it to make 
sure we do our best to protect Saskatchewan people properly — 
forest and communities as well. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, it 
was, in fact, a pleasure to have the Premier accompany me to 
Nipawin in order to view the fire and the damage that was 
caused as a result of it. 
 
And given that you mentioned the visit of the Premier to 
Nipawin, Mr. Minister, at a meeting with the mayor and council 
of Nipawin after the tour, the Premier made a pretty firm 
commitment to the community that he would cost share the 
firefighting costs that were incurred by the community as a 
result of the utilization of water bombers and various other 
department equipment. 
 
The Premier also indicated to the community that as quickly as 
he returned to Regina he would be instructing officials to 
determine what those costs were and to begin negotiating with 
the communities . . . community of Nipawin on an appropriate 
cost share. 
 
Mr. Minister, has the department now determined what the cost 
was to the town of Nipawin for the use of the SERM 
firefighting equipment? And have the negotiations begun with 
respect to the cost share on the cost of that equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well what I would . . . What I would 
point out, when you accompanied the Premier to Nipawin, he 
certainly wanted to see the site and to make sure that the people 
out there seen that the Premier was quite concerned of all of 
Saskatchewan. And the response that I made is, good for the 
Premier, good for the people of Saskatchewan and certainly 
good for the morale of all the people that are fighting fires. So 
again, we thank you for accompanying the Premier to Nipawin. 
 
And I would point out that the Premier basically has indicated 
that he was going to support the communities and was going to 
continue working with them. 
 
And I can tell you right now I don’t have any of those costs that 
you’re speaking about. Negotiations certainly are underway. 
And as I mention right now, there’s a lot of resources that are 
being expended right now and we don’t have all the detailed 
cost analysis in place yet in terms of what the Nipawin fire may 
cost. 
 
But I’ll point out, just for clarification, certainly local 
firefighting is a local responsibility. SERM’s current practice is 
to provide support to local firefighting services on a cost 
recovery basis. But given the exceptional fire season, it is 
appropriate to review the situation and government is currently 
reviewing SARM’s request for assistance. It is expected that 
options will be developed for cabinet’s consideration that 
addresses both the current year’s issues and the long-term. In 
the meantime, Saskatchewan Environment will continue to 
focus on its core programming and will provide assistance to 
municipalities as needed and as requested. 
 

So I was very pleased, as I mentioned before, the Premier to 
tour some of these areas. He’s made commitments. We’re 
working very closely with the town to make sure that those 
commitments are being followed. 
 
The cost analysis, as you can appreciate, is going to take us 
some time to figure out. But clearly, we are going to be 
responding. We’re going to put together a team to talk about 
some of these issues; we’re working with SARM. 
 
So clearly the Premier’s commitment was bang on and we’re 
going to follow through with it and we’re going to work with all 
the parties . . . or the departments involved and the parties 
involved to come up with a good, long-term solution. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr, Chair. Mr. Minister, so 
are you indicating then that there is at this point no real criteria 
in place for cost sharing the cost of firefighting and that you are 
going to be addressing all of these situations on an ad hoc 
basis? 
 
If there is any type of criteria that currently exists, could you 
make the Assembly aware of it? And if not, what kinds of 
suggestions are you making in terms of developing criteria 
around cost sharing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for that question. 
What I want to point out is one of the things that you should 
know is that assistance . . . people asking for our help, all those 
requests are still coming in. The bills are still coming in. And 
certainly there’s a lot of people out there that are asking for a lot 
of help from SERM. 
 
And that’s one the reasons why I want to stand up today and say 
we’re going to plan this thing out to avoid the ad hoc approach 
that you say is in place. 
 
So we are clearly not going down here to try and figure out a 
process that we’re going to put in place with SARM to look at 
these events. And it’s through good planning, good 
co-operation, clearly understanding the roles and 
responsibilities of all the players involved, that’s also very key. 
And we go through this process and we’ll come up with a good 
system to avoid the ad hoc scenario that you are certainly 
suggesting. 
 
So I would point out that, no, we’re not going to take any ad 
hoc approaches. We’re going to work very clearly and very 
carefully and very quickly through this process to make sure 
that we, alongside of SARM, figure out some good solutions. 
 
And as I mention, as we speak, a lot of the RMs are asking for 
help today. There’s bills coming in and all these processes are 
moving along quite quickly. And we’re trying to make sure that 
we put a good plan in place to make sure that we’re able to 
respond very quickly to some of these challenges together with 
the RMs. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
does the declaration of a state of emergency at this point have 
any bearing whatsoever on a community’s eligibility for 
assistance? And what are the plans for the future? Will that be a 
component or a consideration when you do in fact put together 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2002 

 

the criteria for cost sharing? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question 
again. I would point out that our role and our job here clearly is 
to fight fires. And that is what SERM does. And certainly as I 
mentioned before, while we have some very tough challenges 
with the warm weather and no moistures and the wind, that it is 
a very tough job to do at this time. 
 
But clearly our role here is to fight fires. And I would ask that 
member, and I would defer the question about disaster or 
declaration of the disaster. That’ll be handled under the 
Corrections and Public Safety minister, and Minister Thomson 
would be the appropriate person to handle that particular 
question. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. I just would like to 
give the minister an update. Perdue continues to have water 
concerns and just recently the town authorities gave a restricted 
water usage notice out to the households in Perdue. They are 
not allowed to use any water from midnight to 6 a.m. And 
there’s a number of concerns. 
 
First, I would like to know if the minister is aware of the 
situation in Perdue. And what is the minister and the department 
doing to help alleviate Perdue’s water problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question 
on Perdue. What I would point out is that in terms of the actual 
history of what our involvement with Perdue is, I would ask 
that we defer to the Sask Water estimates so we’ll get a full 
detail as to what is happening, you know, to date. I don’t have 
that file and information in front of me. 
 
But from SERM’s perspective, what we’re going to do, as that 
member can appreciate, is we have rules and regulations that 
are going to be put in place. We’re going to have rules, we’re 
going to sit down and explain to the mayors, to the councillors 
what these rules are. We’re going to have some monitoring, and 
there’s going to be transparency and making sure that some of 
these communities that may be under a boil-water advisory, that 
they have . . . paramount to them is public safety. So as long as 
there’s challenges with any community’s water system, we’re 
going to issue a boil-water advisory or a boil-water order. 
 
Now after that order or advisory has been initiated, we will sit 
down and if they decide to work with Sask Water or decide to 
go with the private sector, well that’s certainly the village’s 
options. 
 
And from SERM’s perspective we are there to regulate, we are 
there to help them monitor, and we’re there to explain the rules 
and regulations. So I would point out we are not going to take 
any chances with any communities from SERM’s perspective. 
 
We are going to make sure that if there’s a challenge, if there’s 
any hint of any problems, then we immediately issue a 
boil-water order or a boil-water advisory making sure that the 
residents of Perdue or any community in the province are aware 
that there’s some challenges. And as long as those challenges 
remain, and the questions remain, the boil-water order will 

certainly stay in place or the boil-water advisory. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, are 
you aware of any regulations that require communities to 
maintain a certain amount of water in reserve — and I’m 
speaking primarily urban communities here — where they’re 
required to keep a certain amount of water in reserve for 
firefighting purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question 
again. I’ll point out that there is no regulations per se to have a 
certain amount in a capacity for firefighters. But there are 
guidelines that SERM and Sask Water will certainly work with 
the communities to make them aware of those guidelines. And 
there is much work to be done there again as I mentioned. 
 
But clearly there is no rule or regulation. There are guidelines in 
which you talk about having the fire department having these 
. . . this ability to store water. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
1:30 p.m. on Monday. And have a pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56. 
 
 


