















































Hansard: March 28, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 325 
 March 28, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people concerned about shortcomings in the tobacco legislation 
and present the following petition. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the communities of Tisdale, Sylvania. 
 
And I so present. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
deplorable condition of Highway 339. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Avonlea, Kayville, and Ormiston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatories, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Langenburg, Esterhazy, and Churchbridge. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the deplorable state of our highways — some of our 
highways in particular. Their prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Francis, 
Regina, Weyburn, Estevan, Midale, and Odessa area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
concerned citizens on the issue . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of 
people in the province concerned with the current tobacco 
legislation . . . tobacco control legislation. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
tobacco. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current, from Moose Jaw, Regina, Southey, Webb, and Gull 
Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about certain 
inadequacies in the tobacco legislation. Their prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Carrot River, 
White Fox, and Arborfield. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads as follows: 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received as: 
 

Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 8, 11, 16, 18, and 19. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Aboriginal Affairs: what 
was the total sum of provincial funding provided to the 
Métis Nation of Saskatchewan including Métis 
organizations and agencies for the year 2000-2001; and 
further to this, could the minister please provide a detailed 
breakdown of this funding? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce through you and to all the members of the 
legislature, a good friend of mine seated in the west gallery, 
Gunnar Passmore, who lives with his wife, Dee, and children in 
Sedley but who I’ve known for a good number of years who I 
want to publicly say I thoroughly enjoyed our working 
relationship too over the past months and years. And I ask all 
hon. member to welcome my good friend, Gunnar Passmore. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, through 
you and to you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce Jim Gudmundson from Emerald Park who is seated in 
your gallery. Jim is the husband of Terry Gudmundson, one of 
our caucus researchers, and I ask all members to please join me 
in welcoming Jim. And I hope you enjoy the proceeding today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, very, very much 
for recognizing me. Through you and to you to the rest of the 
gallery . . . or to the rest of the Assembly, I too would like to 
welcome Gunnar Passmore from Sedley, Saskatchewan, a 
constituent of mine. It’s always interesting come election time 

how his house — he’s got a beautiful two-story house in 
Sedley, a nice green coloured house which turns orange come 
election time, Mr. Speaker. So I would like to welcome him 
here . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . and hope he enjoys the proceedings. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Youth Works to Help Regina Children and Teens 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Regina’s mayor, Pat Fiacco, and a 
young gentleman by the name of Ryan Fraser deserve a huge 
pat on the back for their innovative and positive action to help 
Regina’s youth, especially youth at risk, concentrate their 
talents and energy on wholesome and character-enhancing 
activities. 
 
About a year ago, Ryan Fraser had a great desire to assist youth 
in Regina’s inner city and approached Mayor Fiacco with the 
idea of forming a Midnight Basketball League. The idea was 
based on the principle that if youth have opportunities to 
expend their energies in a meaningful and productive way in the 
evenings, they would be less likely to end up in trouble. Ryan 
and Mayor Fiacco worked together on this project and solicited 
the help of the entire community to turn Ryan’s dream into a 
reality and the inner city basketball league was born. 
 
Every Friday and Saturday evening between the hours of 8 p.m. 
and 2 a.m., youth who might otherwise have little in the way of 
resources to get involved in sports, now have the opportunity to 
play basketball at Scott Collegiate. 
 
Churches, schools, business, and corporate community are 
major players in this initiative by providing much-needed 
financial, moral, and practical support. As well, part of the 
proceeds from the mayor’s annual dinner go towards financially 
supporting this very special league. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program received no government funding 
whatsoever — it’s just people helping people. So I’d like to 
congratulate Mayor Pat Fiacco, Ryan Fraser, community 
leaders in Regina, and all the volunteers for taking real and 
positive action on behalf of youth at risk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan 
to Conduct Co-operatives Study 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan 
has been chosen to lead our country’s largest study ever on 
co-operatives — $2.2 million has been invested for a three-year 
study that will encompass nine universities, a number of 
community groups, and a project team stretching from coast to 
coast to coast. 
 
Titled “Co-operative Membership and Globalization: Creating 
Social Cohesion through Market Relations”, the study will 
investigate the extent to which co-operatives reflect and 
contribute to our common sense of identity in the communities 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

 

where they are located. 
 
Dr. Brett Fairbairn, the director of the centre for the study of 
co-operatives, says that globalization and big companies have 
changed the social fabric of cities and towns across our country. 
He says his team will now examine the impact that co-ops and 
their members have had in our society. Quote “Creating a new 
co-operative is one of the best responses communities can make 
to globalization,” says Fairbairn. Understanding co-operative 
membership and social cohesion is especially important today 
when Canadian communities face both threats and opportunities 
through globalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the strength, the resolve, and the faith in the 
common good are rooted in our province’s history. I am sure 
that all members share my enthusiasm and hope that the 
completion of this study will expose the rest of our country to 
one of the building blocks of a compassionate society that we 
have had for so long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Winter Games Volunteers Honoured 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
February we all had the opportunity to cheer for our Canadian 
athletes in the Olympics in Salt Lake City. And we also had the 
opportunity to cheer for our Saskatchewan athletes at the 
Winter Games in Humboldt. 
 
An event of this proportion requires many volunteers. Recently 
The Wadena News received a letter from the games services 
chairperson, Dan Meakin, who stated: 
 

This event was the largest undertaking that Humboldt has 
ever attempted and it went off (partially) without a hitch 
. . . due to the eager help of Glen Lazeski and the Wadena 
School Division. After we told Glen that we needed 20 
buses and were unable to get them locally, the Wadena 
School Division not only graciously offered to let us use 
the fleet of ten buses, providing we covered the 
transportation expenses, but they also encouraged us to 
seek the use of privately-owned school bus contractors. 
This led us to secure seven more buses from the Wadena 
Area as well as ten bus drivers. Each and every one of 
those bus drivers (were) . . . absolutely fantastic and 
exceeded all of my expectations in the completion of their 
duties. They were all very polite, kind, patient, professional 
and . . . (delightful) to work with. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it has also been a great . . . always been a great 
pleasure for me to be able to say I represent 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency. I know that this constituency 
has a solid volunteer base and that people of this constituency 
understand the value of volunteering their time for their 
community and their province. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to join with me in thanking all of 
these bus drivers. Without the help of these volunteers, the 
movement of the more than 1,600 athletes during the seven-day 
event would not have been possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Northern Library System Opens New Building 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, good news from Northern 
Saskatchewan. The provincial government continues to build a 
strong partnership with the people of the North. Last weekend, 
which was attended by the member of Athabasca, the 
Pahkisimon Nuye?áh Library System opened a new building. I 
am sure all members share my congratulations to Chair Brian 
Suetta, the board members, Audrey Mark, and other staff 
members on this tremendous accomplishment. 
 
Of course, this was made possible by the provincial Centenary 
Fund, as we’re going to . . . moving forward to celebrate you 
know our 100 years. 
 
This will provide free access to the Internet through the library, 
public libraries, access to all lending collections in the province 
through the Province-wide Library Electronic Information 
System Web page. The interlibrary system among regions uses 
this interLEND system. Ten years ago nobody heard about 
Internet and now it’s going to be available in the North. 
 
I would also like to say that the . . . to say a special 
congratulations to the people of La Ronge and their honouring 
of former mayor, Mel Hegland. They renamed the 
Communiplex in his name. Tremendous hockey, including the 
Ice Wolves, is played over there, the youth in regards to the 
many activities on ice, curling, etc. Congratulations to Mel 
Hegland on his leadership for the many years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 

 
Bruce and Barb Penton 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I would like to pay tribute to a couple who have given 
a lot to their community. Mr. Speaker, I speak of Bruce and 
Barb Penton, owners of the Moosomin World Spectator. Today, 
in fact, is their last day with the World Spectator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bruce and Barb moved to Moosomin in 1982 
when Bruce became the editor of the Spectator and, at that time, 
the Spectator was owned and operated by Mr. John Meen. In 
1991, Bruce and Barb purchased the paper from Mr. Meen and 
continued running the paper until just recently when they sold 
the Spectator to Mr. Kevin Weedmark. 
 
Over the years, the Pentons have been very active in the 
community of Moosomin, Bruce being an active secretary for 
the Moosomin Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Speaker, as well the 
Pentons were avid golfers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the politicians of this province will know 
and remember the World Spectator and Mr. Penton for the 
many reminders that he brought to our attention, when he 
brought to our attention the need to move to daylight savings 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to wish the Pentons well as they 
move to Brandon and begin a new chapter in their lives in the 
involvement in a new paper. And I’m certain as well that they 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

will continue to enjoy their love of golf as they will now have 
the extra hour in the day to enjoy that round of golf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to wish Mr. Weedmark and his 
staff well as they continue the rich heritage of the Moosomin 
World Spectator. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I would like to extend to the 
members of this Assembly a very happy and pleasant Easter 
weekend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Easter Greetings 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later on today, we 
will leave this Assembly, go to our homes, and begin 
preparation for what is for millions worldwide the most 
significant, most contemplative, and most joyous weekend of 
the year. Whether it be in a religious or secular fashion, each of 
us in our own way will take part in the celebrations which 
symbolize for us the need for reflection, the urgency of peace, 
and the promise of renewal. 
 
On behalf of all government members, I wish all people the 
fulfilment of the promise of this season. 
 
First, of course, tonight is the celebration of the Jewish 
Passover, the observance which marks the beginning of the 
liberation of the children of Israel from bondage and the 
preparation for the most significant mass migration in history. 
For people of any religious persuasion, the desire for a 
homeland expressed in the Passover ceremony and the 
anguished but hopeful cry of next year in Jerusalem should 
uplift our spirits. 
 
And for Christians, the desolation of death leading to the 
promise of rebirth and rejuvenation embodied in the central 
story reminds us that no defeat is final and that hope springs 
eternal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two days ago we had agreement expressed in this 
House on the sad necessity for military action in the perennially 
troubled part of the world which is ironically the birthplace of 
both of these religions. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, on this weekend 
of hope and renewal we might take a moment to remark on the 
necessity for peace in this and all the corners of the world. And 
as the Minister of Finance said yesterday offer thanks that we 
live in a province and a nation blessed with peace and with 
plenty. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Happy Easter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Budgetary Projections 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
nobody is buying the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) fudge-it 
budget. One column has called it a: 
 

. . . sheer sleight-of-hand . . . the likes of which we have not 
seen since the days of former finance minister . . . Gary 
Lane . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that government of the ’80s hid debt in capital 
projects. The Blakeney government used to hide debt in the 
Crowns. And the Glen Clark government in BC (British 
Columbia) hid debt by coming up with bogus revenue 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is doing all three. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP cooking the 
books and hiding the deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just want to make 
mention to the members that when it comes to parliamentary 
language, a lot depends on the context and while the phrase, 
cooking the books, may be acceptable in some contexts, there 
are other contexts where it could intimate illegal action. I would 
ask the member to be careful about the use of language. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Oh well, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite is going to compare me to Gary Lane, all I can say is 
I’m glad to be compared to one of the few Tories that ended up 
on the right side of the bar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people of the province should know that what this member is 
saying. What he’s saying, Mr. Speaker, is he disagrees with our 
plan to put more money into building schools and building 
university buildings. That’s what they’re opposing, Mr. 
Speaker. Unlike the president of the School Trustees 
Association, Mr. Speaker, who says the increase in capital 
funding definitely gives more school boards the opportunity to 
do some of the things that need to be done. Unlike the 
universities, Mr. Speaker, that say the work is badly needed and 
they welcome the work. Unlike the teachers, Mr. Speaker, who 
say this work needs to be done. 
 
And I want to tell you how phony this argument really is, Mr. 
Speaker. The other day — and I have the transcript — this is 
what the member had to say on March 25. He was asked: 
they’re talking about amortizing capital projects over a longer 
period of time — as anybody would do building a home, Mr. 
Speaker — and what did the member who just got up have to 
say to the media that day? He said, but there’s nothing wrong 
with that — there’s nothing wrong with that. When you look at 
amortization, if you look at becoming more transparent and 
proper accounting principles, school boards and municipal 
boards have been doing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance can try 
all the magic accounting tricks he wants. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, he’s no Siegfried and the Premier’s no Roy. 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We’d like the minister to explain some of the 
bogus revenue estimates in his fudge-it budget. First of all, the 
minister is projecting a $40 million increase in potash revenue 
this year — that’s a 25 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. But at 
the same time, there is no increase in the forecast for the price 
of potash. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has spoken with officials at PCS 
(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) and the 
Saskatchewan Potash Producers Association. Both tell us they 
expect no increase in potash production this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t add up. Will the minister please tell us 
how he dreamed up a $40 million revenue increase when the 
potash industry, and his own budget, say there will be no 
increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I see once again 
the opposition has rediscovered their long-lost brother, Roy. In 
an effort to tear down the Premier, Mr. Speaker, what do they 
do? They say, oh the Premier’s no Roy Romanow. They say 
they like Roy Romanow. The problem with that argument, Mr. 
Speaker, is they spent 10 years trying to tear down Roy 
Romanow. That’s what they did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I’ll tell you something, Mr. Speaker. 
While Roy Romanow was trying to build the province as the 
Premier here is trying to build the province, they’re trying to 
tear things down. We’re trying to build the schools — they 
don’t want us to build the schools, Mr. Speaker. We’re trying to 
build the universities — they don’t want us to build the 
universities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they can hide behind all the rhetoric they want, but the 
reality is that member says one thing in this House and he goes 
outside the House and he says something else. He went outside 
the House the other day and when pressed on the point he said 
there was nothing wrong with amortizing the cost of . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, here’s another bogus revenue number in the NDP’s 
fudge-it budget. NDP is projecting a $51 million increase in 
sales tax revenue — that’s a 6.6 per cent increase. But their own 
budget forecast says retail sales will only be up 1.6 per cent this 
year. And the liquor tax increase only amounts to $15 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers don’t add up. They have $40 
million in potash revenue that doesn’t add up, and the $50 
million in sales tax revenue that doesn’t add up either. 
 
Will the minister explain why he is overestimating revenue just 
like Glen Clark did in his fudge-it budget in 1996? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you see, Mr. Speaker, the difference 
between the members opposite and the members on this side of 
the House is we have confidence in the future of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — They will get up, Mr. Speaker, and they 
will oppose anything we propose in the budget. And they’ll 
question the numbers because they are the party of doom and 
gloom. They are the party that says that this province has no 
future. 
 
We are the party, Mr. Speaker, that says that this province has a 
great future. And this budget is going to ensure that great future 
by fixing the roads, which they oppose; by lowering the 
personal income taxes, which they oppose; by putting more 
money into health care, which they oppose; by putting money 
into education, which they want to freeze. 
 
And we’re going to build those schools and we’re going to 
build at the universities notwithstanding the opposition from 
those doom and gloom members over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has some new 
tricks and he also has some old tricks. One of the old tricks in 
his fudge-it budget is making the $225 million magically appear 
out of a rainy day fund that doesn’t exist. 
 
And how does he pull off this trick, Mr. Speaker? By borrowing 
money and running up the debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means the NDP has a deficit. The Provincial 
Auditor knows it. The bond rating agencies know it. Everyone 
in Saskatchewan knows it. Once again, it doesn’t add up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the minister keep resorting to this same 
worn-out trick to try to hide the deficit? Why doesn’t he just 
come clean and tell us, what’s the real size of the deficit in his 
fudge-it budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well if anybody would be an expert on 
deficits, it would be the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But I want to tell the House and I want to 
tell the public, Mr. Speaker, what it is that other people say 
about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
The Leader-Post says: 
 

Thanks to a rainy day fund that acts like a fiscal shock 
absorber, the provincial government is set to ride relatively 
smoothly. 

 
Bruce Johnstone said: 
 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

The concept makes good sense. 
 
Michael Rushton of the University of Regina says: 
 

There’s nothing hidden here. This is exactly what the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund should do. 

 
David Perry of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation says: 
 

Ideally you wouldn’t have money just sitting in the bank. 
 
Now this does contrast with their record, Mr. Speaker, because 
if they had their way, the money would probably be sitting in 
safety deposit boxes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
nobody is falling for the minister’s smoke and mirrors. Nobody 
is falling for his worn-out old accounting tricks. Nobody 
believes this fudge-it budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess Roy must have taken the good calculator 
when he left. And you know, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the 
Finance minister, I am now referring to former Premier Roy 
Romanow instead of Siegfried and Roy which he didn’t quite 
add up the last time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because this budget doesn’t add up, the last resort 
of a desperate government is to fudge the budget and do some 
creative accounting. That’s exactly what the NDP did 
yesterday. 
 
Will the minister come clean? Will the minister be honest with 
the people of Saskatchewan and tell us the real size of his 
deficit in his fudge-it budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well here they go again citing Roy 
Romanow, who they did nothing but oppose when he was here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say, this is how ridiculous the arguments of the 
opposition are. Last year, what was the opposition saying? 
Listen to this headline, Mr. Speaker. “NDP sitting on billion 
dollar surplus,” they said. And then a little while later they said, 
“NDP pours 400 million oil and gas windfall into political slush 
fund.” Then they said that “The legislature should be recalled to 
immediately spend a $400 million surplus,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
We said we were going to keep that money until we needed it. 
That’s what we did. It was the right thing to do. And if we 
hadn’t done that, Mr. Speaker, instead of lowering taxes today, 
we’d be increasing them like their cousins in Alberta and their 
cousins in BC are doing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we are not going to do the Gordon 
Campbell, Canadian Alliance trick. We’re going to keep our 
balanced budget with our Fiscal Stabilization Fund and we’re 
going to reduce taxes which they would never do, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plans for Saskatchewan’s Economic Growth 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, instead of playing fast and loose 
with the books and fudging the budget, the NDP could have 
presented a plan to grow Saskatchewan. At the very least, they 
could have presented a plan to achieve their own election 
promise of creating 30,000 new jobs. Did they do that 
yesterday? No. According to yesterday’s budget, the NDP is 
now projecting a net increase of — not 30,000 jobs — 1,000 
jobs by next year compared to 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, private forecasters are projecting a net loss of jobs 
in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s fudge-it budget 
admitted that the NDP will not reach their job- creation target 
numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP abandoned their promise to 
create 30,000 jobs in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It repeats daily — it repeats daily, the 
doom and the gloom and the negativism from that group over 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the people of Saskatchewan can . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The people of Saskatchewan today have 
a choice. They can believe the Leader of the Opposition or they 
can believe StatsCanada. StatsCanada in its most recent work 
indicates the following: StatsCanada indicates Saskatchewan 
will lead the nation in capital investment growth this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — New capital investment is expected to 
exceed $6.9 billion in 2002, up 9.3 per cent from last year. 
 
StatsCanada indicates manufacturing is projected to grow 200 
per cent. Investment in the mining sector is expected to increase 
11 per cent. Retail trade expected to grow by 16.7 per cent, and 
wholesale trade by 7.4. 
 
This government, these men and women, the people of 
Saskatchewan, StatsCanada, believe in the future of this 
province. Only one group does not, and they are all seated 
across from us in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

 

would say to the Premier, the Saskatchewan Party has a plan to 
grow the province by 100,000 people. What is gloom and doom 
about growing Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The Saskatchewan Party has the plan to 
create jobs . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
a plan to grow jobs in this province. What’s wrong with that? 
Why won’t the Premier of the province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members, order please. I want to be able to 
hear the Leader of the Opposition. The Leader of the 
Opposition has the floor. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
doesn’t want to admit that the Saskatchewan Party has a plan to 
grow Saskatchewan, a plan that people of Saskatchewan are 
getting excited about. Meanwhile what do they deliver in their 
budget? They deliver a plan to only grow the province’s job 
workforce by 1,000 people, a plan to cut school enrolments 
right across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the response to this budget has been 
disappointment and frustration. People recognize that the NDP 
has no plan to grow the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Members, I ask for your co-operation to obey your own 
self-imposed rules. Got to be able to hear the questions; got to 
be able to hear the answers. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP do not 
like it that the Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow 
Saskatchewan. So what do they do, Mr. Speaker? Instead of 
having a plan, they cook the books. They paper over a budget 
that doesn’t add up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of cooking the books and fudging the 
budget, why didn’t the NDP come up with a real plan, a real 
solid plan, to grow this province like the Saskatchewan Party 
does, a plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I do have, I do have a copy 
of the Sask Party plan — on one page. Here it is, the whole 
Sask Party plan, one page. What does it say? It says, you know 
if we just cut the taxes, everything will be roses. That’s a 
one-page plan. 
 
Well is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder they took 
this one page and they went on a bus tour? They took the one 
page and they went on a bus tour. Well here’s the reports of 
their tour across Saskatchewan. 
 
Well one headline put it quite accurately. The Wilkie Press, the 
headline in their tour to advertise the plan: “Grow 
Saskatchewan or gut Saskatchewan.” 

Look at this, Mr. Speaker. They went out on the tour to sell this 
plan. Headline after headline: “Dismal turnout for 
presentation.” “Sask Party preaches to few on tour.” What’s the 
next one, Mr. Speaker? “Grow Saskatchewan meetings stunted 
by indecision.” 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? They came to Moose Jaw; they 
got 12. They went to Meadow Lake; they got 4. They went to 
Assiniboia; they got 2. That’s the support for the one-page Sask 
Party plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Effects of Budget on Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s provincial budget 
was bad news for education — it was bad news for school 
boards, it was bad news for teachers, and it was especially bad 
news for the students in this province. 
 
Last year Saskatchewan people learned that this government 
had planned on the loss of 30,000 students by the end of the 
decade. Well what happened in yesterday’s budget appears the 
NDP is trying to make that happen a lot quicker. 
 
The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association said they need 
an increase of $25 million just to keep the status quo. Well 
yesterday’s budget came through with just $11 million. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a $14 million shortfall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the new Minister of Learning explain what 
programs he thinks should be cut, or how many teachers he 
thinks should be fired, or maybe what schools he thinks should 
be closed, in order to make up for this shortfall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Might 
I point out that there was a significant increase to the education 
budget overall — 7.8 per cent. The largest increase for this 
combined department, it’s the biggest amount of dollars we’ve 
ever provided for education in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about the capital allocation that will be 
building schools, that will be building buildings on the 
university campuses, that will be helping our SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
that will be providing for technical . . . computer equipment, 
these are all positive, Mr. Speaker. And the increase in our 
foundation operating grant of $14 million is a 3 per cent 
increase, Mr. Speaker, in a time when we have seen declining 
revenues for this province. Well, guess what? The priorities of 
this government are education, are health care, are highways, 
and municipal revenue sharing. 
 
And they have no priorities, Mr. Speaker. Their only priority 
was a 20 per cent tax cut and everything frozen, Mr. Speaker — 
frozen solid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about an operating 
budget. School divisions are not even going to be able to 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

operate at last year’s level with the amount of money this 
government put into the budget. And right now, Mr. Speaker, 
school divisions have indicated they’re going to need an extra 
$85 million to deal with the new teachers’ contract that’s 
coming up this year. 
 
The teachers have asked for a 14 per cent increase over two 
years. But even if the new teachers’ contract results in just a 6 
per cent increase, that means that schools are going to need $18 
million more to deal with the teachers’ contract. School boards 
are already $14 million short to be able to break even this year. 
How are they supposed to be able to cope with any sort of wage 
increase at all? 
 
The NDP budget cuts to education have left schools across the 
province with four choices. Can they cut programs? Should 
they cut staff? Should they close schools? Or should they just 
raise taxes? In lots of cases they’re going to have to do all four. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government choose to cut 
education operating grants and raise property taxes? And more 
importantly, why did this NDP government choose to abandon 
education in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I find it 
absolutely incredible that they can ask questions on education 
when they went to the people of Saskatchewan with their 
platform in 1999, with their plan, and they said they were going 
to freeze spending in education, Mr. Speaker. Just one example: 
the foundation operating grant in this province was 397 million 
in 1999; it’s almost 480 million today, Mr. Speaker. We are 
talking about well over a 25 per cent increase in just those short 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And guess what? If we would have followed their plan and 
froze spending on education . . . They talk about what services 
would have been cut, how much they would have downloaded 
on property taxes. They are the party that would have hiked up 
property taxes in this province like this, Mr. Speaker, because 
when you freeze government spending, you off-load on your 
ratepayers. And that’s what they would have done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drinking Water Quality 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, with the water crisis hitting 
communities in this province from Arran on the Manitoba 
border to Perdue near the Alberta border, what does this 
government do? It cuts the budget of Sask Water by over 12 per 
cent. And it takes it all out of a subvote titled water quality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve spent $2 million on a water inquiry 
studying the problem and now they cut the agency of 
government that’s charged with the responsibility of keeping 
our water safe in this province. Is this an example of how little 
this government cares about the lives and health of 
Saskatchewan residents? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province was recently called Mississippi north 
in the National Post. Does this government want us instead to 

get the title of Mexico north? Is that their strategy for building 
tourism in this province? Is that why they cut the Sask Water 
budget in the midst of a water crisis in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious 
matter, Mr. Speaker. And on this side of the House we’re going 
to take a very serious approach to this very crucial challenge 
that all provinces face in this country and across the world, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, what did this government do and what did 
this Premier do when that problem hit, Mr. Speaker? Right now 
he called an inquiry to find out what went wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that inquiry will give us a lot of good information. And 
whether it’s North Battleford, Perdue, or Arran, this 
government will respond, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to be 
in partnership with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out the value of doing this study in North 
Battleford. It will set a template for us to look at other 
opportunities to improve water quality systems across this great 
province. 
 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, in the last two years we’ve had 
some significant effort into making sure we have staff and 
resources out there to deal with this problem. 
 
And what did that member do, Mr. Speaker? He stood up in this 
Assembly and he voted against those improvements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members 
of the House a gentleman that really needs not a great deal of 
introduction in this building or in many areas of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like members to welcome John MacLeod of 
the Saskatchewan Building Trades Council. I welcome him here 
today and I hope he enjoys the proceedings. Nice to see you, 
John. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Elphinstone on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

 

Mr. McCall: — To you and through you to the members of this 
legislature, I’d like to introduce to the House, seated in the 
western gallery, one Matthew Lingenfelter. Matthew, if you 
could stand and wave, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Matthew’s getting close to finishing high 
school but he’s already a champion debater. Given his lineage, 
he knows more about this place than most of the folks seated 
here. And I warn you all — watch out. He’s coming. Anyway, 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Please give him a warm introduction. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kindersley on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for the introduction of 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
member opposite in welcoming Matthew Lingenfelter to the 
legislature here today. I just had a chance last week to visit with 
your father at the leader’s dinner in Calgary. He appears to be 
enjoying Alberta a great deal and said there was little chance he 
would ever return to Saskatchewan, unfortunately — 
unfortunately — like a lot of other people that have left this 
province without any chance of them ever coming back as well. 
 
I would ask all members of the legislature to join with me in 
welcoming our good friend from Alberta. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased also to 
welcome Matthew Lingenfelter to the House this morning. And 
just by the way, Matthew, I had breakfast with your father this 
morning with a large group of Regina business people, in that 
your father is at home in Regina this week. And you know 
what, Matthew, your dad is doing a great thing for the province 
of Saskatchewan going to Alberta, bringing those dollars home 
to Saskatchewan, and a whole lot more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 201 — The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of Bill No. 201, The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2002 
/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur la Cour du Banc 

de la Reine 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 15, 
The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2002, be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Independent Officers’ Remuneration 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 16, 
The Independent Officers’ Remuneration (Amendment) Act, 
2002, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I request 
permission to table responses for questions no. 16 through 22 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 
and 22 have been tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I would like 
to convert questions no. 23 through 32 for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions no. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 
31, and 32 have been converted to orders for returns 
(debatable). 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 
like to continue with my remarks that I began yesterday. 
 
And before I do that, I’d like to recognize two people that assist 
me very much in ensuring that the questions and the comments 
that are raised in my constituency of Canora-Pelly are dealt 
with. And I want to thank my constituency assistant who looks 
after my offices in Canora and Norquay, Mr. Bob Blahay, for 
all his help in . . . throughout the year in making sure that all the 
items that are raised are taken care of. And another individual 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

by the name of Renee Parsons who assists me in . . . at the 
Foam Lake office. I too want to extend my appreciation to her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 24 hours has passed since the delivery of a budget 
— a budget that the people of Saskatchewan are looking at 
very, very closely today. A budget that definitely is a deficit 
budget where everyone in the province — bond rating agencies, 
the Provincial Auditor — has said this for a while. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to enter into the record a couple of 
comments that have been around for a while. I want to read a 
comment from The Leader-Post of February 19, 2002 — a short 
month and a few . . . couple weeks ago. And the article says 
this: 
 

Saskatchewan is already running a deficit budget of at least 
430 million this year according to Canada’s largest bond 
rating agency. 
 
Dominion Bond Rating Service, DBRS, assistant 
vice-president, Geneviève Lavallée said . . . there is no way 
to categorize Saskatchewan’s budgetary situation this year 
other than a deficit. 

 
So that’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that last year’s budget in 
this province — which is somewhere in the area of $400 
million, 430 million maybe — that year-end is coming to a 
close this Sunday. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. I would 
ask members to just tone it down a bit, please, so we can hear 
all of the remarks. Order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in today’s StarPhoenix, Thursday, March 28, the comment in 
that article is this, and I quote: 
 

No matter how hard Cline and the Lorne Calvert 
government try to make the province’s books and their 
management of them look good, however, it’s impossible 
to ignore the disquieting feeling that they are about to take 
Saskatchewan people on a scary ride we’ve been on before 
— one we’ve spent the better part of a decade trying to 
forget. 
 

Mr. Speaker, comments like that in the paper prior to this 
budget, now in newspapers after the budget, that state we have a 
deficit — we have a huge deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers are so unclear, the kinds of fudge-it 
budget, as many people are referring to — this budget is so 
unclear that we can’t even tell whether that deficit will be in the 
area of 400 million or whether it might be as high as $700 
million. 
 
That’s going to place a terrible burden on the future of children 
that are growing up right now in this province. 
 
This government . . . I recall the start of the NDP government of 
the ’90s claiming that we must not mortgage the future of our 
children. Very clearly they said that the kind of budgeting that 
was done in the ’80s was not acceptable. They passed . . . in 
1995 they passed a piece of legislation called the balanced 

budget legislation, one that said you must account for all of 
your expenditures in the given year. 
 
What happened yesterday, Mr. Speaker? Well now we’re 
relying on Crown corporations. We’re now relying on a Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund that is not there. It’s not a fund that’s on 
deposit, Mr. Speaker. The questions have been raised on the 
Minister of Finance as to whether or not this fund is on deposit 
in some bank, and if it’s there, how much interest is it drawing. 
It doesn’t exist. The Provincial Auditor has said it doesn’t exist. 
It is just a bookkeeping entry that allows the government to 
borrow, and create a bigger debt when they want to refer to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we compare fiscal stabilization funds to the 
Heritage Fund of Alberta . . . and the government opposite says, 
well we don’t like to compare ourselves to Alberta. We don’t 
like to make reference to Alberta because, you know, things 
may be better over there, and we want to be positive about 
Saskatchewan. And you know, we do as well; we want this 
province to grow. 
 
But let’s take a look, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a look at the 
Heritage Fund that is created in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And I have the annual report of 2001 — the highlights of that 
Heritage Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of comments about that Alberta Heritage 
Fund is this. It says the Heritage Fund has investments in bonds, 
real estate, domestic stocks, foreign stocks, and other financial 
instruments. 
 
Another question in this report, Mr. Speaker, is how much 
money did the Heritage Fund have, and what did it earn last 
year? Well the total fair value of the fund is $12.1 billon. That’s 
the amount of money that’s sitting in the Alberta Heritage Fund. 
 
Members opposite have stood in this House and said, there is no 
fund; Alberta doesn’t have a fund; they’re like us — we just run 
on a line of credit. That is absolutely false, Mr. Speaker, 
because last year, in 2001, the fund earned $706.2 million in net 
investment income. This money will be used to support 
priorities like tax cuts, program spending in health care, 
education, infrastructure, and debt retirement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What a difference. What a difference between the province of 
Saskatchewan and the province of Alberta. Here we have an 
imaginary fund, one that doesn’t contain any money in it, one 
that the government, the NDP government says, we’ll dip into 
this fund. But really what it means is we will go to the bank and 
we will increase the debt of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They’re doing it again this year. They relied on over $400 
million of that kind of debt financing last year and this year 
they will be dipping into that fund by as much as 225 million, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you recall that in last year’s budget, we had a projection as 
to what the Fiscal Stabilization Fund was going to contribute to 
balancing the books, as the Minister of Finance likes to refer to 
that term so loosely. They didn’t even . . . they didn’t come 
close to that level. They had to rely much more significantly on 
that Fiscal Stabilization Fund which really means rely more 
heavily on growing the debt of this province. 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the debt of this province continues to rise, 
we need to look at the numbers that currently exist. And you 
know, the Minister of Finance says, well we do use summary 
financial statements; we do use all of the economic picture of 
the province. That is not so, because the only time the members 
in this Legislative Assembly, the people of Saskatchewan, see 
the financial statements is about six months after the fact, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we do have to look at the debt of this province because the 
auditor, on page 33 of his Fall Report — and this is the first 
time that we’ve had a chance to look at this report in this 
Legislative Assembly because we did not have a fall session 
like the Premier promised back on July 6 — we look at the debt 
of this province and, in fact, in 1999, the accumulated debt of 
both the Crown corporations and the General Revenue Fund 
was 11.2 billion. In the year 2000, it was 11.1 billion, and in the 
year 2001, it was 11.1 billion. And now, Mr. Speaker, as we 
look at this current budget, we look at the debt of this province 
and we’re now at $11.4 billion. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s also after we have just received, the 
Government of Saskatchewan has just received $230 million 
net from the sale of Cameco shares — $200 million. The 
Minister of Social Services better pay attention because he likes 
numbers. He has to recognize that the debt of this province 
would have grown to 11.6 billion had not the government sold 
Cameco shares. 
 
Now it’s very ironic that the NDP would stand in this House 
and criticize anyone who would look at the efficiencies of 
government, who would look at Crown corporations, who 
would look at shares and say, oh, you can’t sell anything, when 
in fact they have just totally eliminated all of the Cameco shares 
at a net value of $230 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debt of this province is growing, it is growing 
significantly at $11.6 billion less the amount of revenue from 
Cameco. That’s the exact opposite of what this government said 
they were going to do in the early part of the ’90s. They said, 
we were going to restructure, we were going to ensure that the 
debt comes down. I recall the various ministers of Finance 
standing in their place and saying one-third to debt retirement, 
one-third to new programs, and one-third to tax cuts. 
 
Guess what’s happening, Mr. Speaker? Debt is going up, debt is 
going up. We’re seeing the reliance on communities. We’re 
seeing the government force property tax increases. They will 
occur not only at the municipal level, but they will occur at the 
school board level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of their other creative, Mr. Speaker, one of their other 
creative bookkeeping entries this time around is called the 
Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation. Now while we 
recognize, we recognize and people across Saskatchewan 
recognize, that some 10 years ago, the amount of monies 
allocated for capital construction of schools alone in the K to 12 
program was upwards of $75 million. And since then that 
budget has fallen to the point where last year, I believe, it was 
just in the neighbourhood of $25 million. 
 

There is a tremendous need to do renovations, to do 
constructions. But you have to be able to be held accountable, 
Mr. Speaker. The accounting for expenditures on amortized 
basis, on a depreciation basis, those types of controls must be 
maintained here in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, not 
in a Crown corporation — not in a Crown corporation outside 
of this building. 
 
For years we’ve talked about the fact that this province’s 
economy, the entire fiscal position of this province . . . of the 
province of Saskatchewan, only about 60 per cent is actually 
debated in the General Revenue Fund. Where we have the 
ability along with all of the third parties, along with people in 
Saskatchewan to look at the numbers presented — only 60 per 
cent. The other 40 per cent is out there in these Crown 
corporation, it’s hidden. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, they are even enlarging that, by now 
hiding that $90 million worth of capital funding is now going to 
be hid in Crown corporations even further. 
 
No plan to when this will be paid back. No plan for how this 
will work over the next number of years. I’m sure that if the 
school boards spend the $40 million this year that’s allocated to 
them, they will need at least $40 million next year and the year 
after and the year after. There’s no plan as to how this will be 
paid back, how it will be amortized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re moving into the huge massive debts of the 
’80s again. We’re moving into the debts of the ’70s when the 
Blakeney administration used to use Crown corporations as a 
way of hiding its debt so that the people of Saskatchewan 
weren’t there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize further that if this 
government — if this government — is committed to ensuring 
that Crown corporations, which are going to contribute $300 
million to this budget, if they are committed to the fact that now 
they want to use an amortized funding that’s going to be spread 
out over a period of time, they must do that on a complete 
financial picture. And we refer to that as the summary financial 
statements. 
 
And I want to enter into the record, Mr. Speaker, from the 
auditor’s Fall Report 2001, Volume 1 on page 22 the following 
quote from the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan says this: 
 

It is time for Saskatchewan to change. The Government 
should focus its overall financial planning information on 
the entire Government. For several years, we have 
recommended that the Government base its overall 
financial plan on the entire Government. 
 
Across Canada, seven provincial governments and the 
Federal Government have already changed the focus of 
their financial planning information to include (their 
governments) their entire governments. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the position that we have taken as an official 
opposition. That’s the position that the auditor has taken. That’s 
the position of seven other provinces already. Open, 
accountable, transparent. 
 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

The fact that we in this Legislative Assembly, on both sides of 
the House, would have the ability to look at the objectives, to 
look at the plans of Crown corporations, of agencies, of 
departments of Education through the General Revenue Fund 
and to then assess: can we afford to do what the current 
government is planning. If you don’t have those plans, the 
question is the same question that the people of Saskatchewan 
were asking yesterday. What is the real deficit of this current 
budget? 
 
We won’t know. We won’t know until next March when, 
finally, we’ll have had a chance to take a look at what Crowns 
have done. Did Crowns actually turn a profit of $300 million to 
be able to transfer that $300 million to the government? What if 
they don’t? What if they have to borrow that money? 
 
We’re already borrowing $225 million from this imaginary 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund and creating a debt. We’re moving 
$90 million into another Crown corporation and asking that 
Crown corporation to borrow that money on behalf of the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have created a situation where the debt could be anywhere, 
as I’ve said, from 400 million to 700 million. Nobody knows, 
Mr. Speaker. This is not transparent. This is not an accounting 
method that the people of Saskatchewan expected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, in the budget there are a number 
of additional changes that have been forecast. And when you 
take a look at the Crown corporation debt, the entire debt of the 
province, it’s interesting to note not only have they created the 
education fund and have now put $89 million into that fund, but 
there’s also another fund that continues to grow, another Crown 
corporation. We’re still wondering, you know, exactly what that 
Crown corporation is doing. That’s the Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the estimates in 2002 for the debt of 
that corporation was going to be 31.6 million — 31.6. Well it’s 
been revised. The actual forecast for the end of 2002, March 31, 
just a few days away, is going to be 55 million. Missed the 
mark by 24 million. 
 
And the other thing now, Mr. Speaker, is we’re seeing that that 
debt is going to rise to as much as 62 million. Again, estimate, 
Mr. Speaker. Estimate of 62 million. We won’t know what will 
actually happen when we get to March 31 of 2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a Crown corporation that we in this Assembly do 
not have its objectives, we don’t have its business plan, we 
don’t have its financial statements, we don’t have its revenue 
projections, we don’t have its expenditure, are now saying to 
the people of Saskatchewan: trust us, we want $62 million more 
of debt. 
 
This is silly, Mr. Speaker. We need to develop a plan in this 
Legislative Assembly that takes an entire look at all of the 
finances of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I do want to spend a couple of 
moments talking about some of the decisions made in the 
budget and how they’re going to affect all of the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, but specifically some of the people 
in Canora-Pelly. 
 
Let’s take a look at agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Ag estimates this 
year, Ag estimates are indicating that they are going to be 
looking at an enhanced crop insurance program — $14 million 
of additional monies provided in crop insurance at a time, of 
course, that they’ve implemented the forage program and that 
they’re looking at some enhanced values of production. That is 
to be applauded. In fact that they are recognizing that the 
coverage is there for the fact that the price of products, price of 
commodities has increased. 
 
But, you know, Mr. Speaker, the elimination of the spot loss 
hail is something that farmers are just starting to recognize. And 
I want to give an example, Mr. Speaker, of an individual in 
Canora-Pelly. This gentleman has always insured his crops 
through Crop Insurance and he’s taken the 70 per cent coverage 
with spot loss hail. That was the maximum coverage attainable. 
And of course the spot loss hail portion was shared funding. 
The provincial government paid a portion of that spot loss hail, 
the producer paid a portion of that spot loss hail, and so did the 
federal government. That’s how the premium was covered. 
 
This government has decided that spot loss hail isn’t a coverage 
we’re going to provide any longer. What they’ve basically done 
is said to the federal government, keep your share; we don’t 
want your share. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . and a half million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Member for Kindersley points out seventeen 
and a half million dollars of federal money now is outside of the 
province. And we’re not funding spot loss hail as a provincial 
government any more, so no coverage from the province. 
 
Now let’s look at the producer. Producer says, for this coming 
year I still want to have crop insurance, 70 per cent coverage, 
but now I have to go and buy hail insurance through line 
companies. 
 
Well that premium that was shared jointly is now the sole 
responsibility of that farmer. So when we take a look at an 
average farmer, the cost that some farmers have worked out as 
maintaining the identical type of hail coverage, that cost is 
going to be 100 per cent the responsibility of the farmer. It may 
cost anywhere between 5 and $7,000 additional premium to the 
producer. So this budget has downloaded onto the farmer. It has 
said to the farmer, we’re no longer there to support you, we’re 
not going to provide you spot loss hail, look after yourself, and, 
by the way, the entire premium is yours. 
 
We’ve been criticized by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
for the fact that we’re not pushing the federal government for 
more money. We’re not, we’re not asking the federal 
government for more money. Well what did this government 
do? It just has allowed the federal government to keep that 
portion of its funding for spot loss hail. 
 
It’s incredible, Mr. Speaker, to listen to the Minister of 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

 

Agriculture when he says, that, you know, the federal 
government is at fault for not enhancing the program. They 
wiped out spot loss hail, the federal government didn’t. 
 
Now the other part to this story, Mr. Speaker, is to take a look at 
revenues. Take a look at what’s going to happen now to 
revenue. If — and I’m not clear on the exact dollars of how 
much hail coverage was written by Crop Insurance, but we 
understand it was something in that $20 million range, Mr. 
Speaker — if that coverage now is no longer through Crop 
Insurance and it’s moved to line companies, all of the hail 
companies that exist and sell hail insurance in this province, 
$20 million. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, that all hail companies pay the 
premium, a percentage of premium tax to the provincial 
government? That tax is 3 per cent. So now if that $20 million 
worth of hail insurance is written by line companies, they will 
achieve a revenue source. That revenue source will be 3 per 
cent of that 20 million, or approximately a half a million dollars 
— $600,000. That’s additional monies now that the farmers 
have to pay upfront. It’s going to the hail companies and it’s 
now coming back to the government. An interesting way of 
balancing the books, by relying on the backs of the farmers of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers are also going to find out 
now that the property tax rebate which has been $25 million 
across the province — that program is gone. So if there were 
farmers who were looking forward to a rebate on their portion 
of education property tax, that also disappeared. So you now 
have an additional coverage that you need to understand — an 
additional cost, I should say — that’s going to be borne by the 
farmers. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very important area of concern to people in — 
right across Saskatchewan — but especially in Canora-Pelly is 
health care and the provision of health services. And I want to 
talk a bit about the Preeceville Hospital project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a number of letters of communication from 
the mayor of Preeceville, Mr. Grant See, and the Minister of 
Health’s letters back to the mayor. Preeceville has for a number 
of years recognized that the current facilities are not adequate. 
And they need to ensure that both acute care through the 
hospitals and all of their provisions are met along with 
long-term care. So they’re proposing an addition to their facility 
right now, the acute care facility, that’s going to put in place a 
47-bed long-term and multi-purpose facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ve been . . . the community has been raising 
money at the local level. They’ve been working hard. There are 
a lot of committed individuals and the town itself is very 
committed to this project because they were told they would 
have to come up with $1.6 million to be raised locally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a letter from the mayor, he’s stating that all of 
that money is in place. And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 
because of the Mushers Rendezvous, which has been an annual 
thing in Preeceville every spring now for a number of years, 
where they have large amount of competition in dog races, they 

have raised monies, and there have been donations, that now 
that fund that has been raised locally sits at $700,000. And the 
town has committed the additional municipal funding necessary 
to meet the goal of 1.6. 
 
So the mayor met with the Minister of Health at the urban 
municipal convention and said, we need to get moving. We 
need to have the Department of Health make its decision and 
allow us to get moving. 
 
And this is the letter that the mayor received, and it’s dated 
March 21, 2002: 
 

I appreciated meeting with you at the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association convention to discuss planning 
for this facility. As I noted in our conversation, projects that 
were previously recommended for planning will need to be 
re-evaluated. At this time, approval for funding cannot 
proceed because the current status of planning . . . beyond 
the current status of planning for this facility. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Health is saying, it doesn’t 
matter about all your hard work, it doesn’t matter about the fact 
that you’ve met your obligation of 1.6 million, doesn’t matter 
about the fact that he’s impressed with the level of support in 
this project and the commitment of all the people — you can’t 
go ahead. You can’t go ahead planning a facility that’s going to 
meet the needs of hundreds, literally thousands, of people in 
that Preeceville area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need hope. We need vision. We need a plan 
that’s going to ensure that that Preeceville health facility is 
constructed so that it’s operating, so that people who are 
looking at that area and saying you know, maybe we should buy 
a business in Preeceville . . . Maybe they’re from Alberta or 
Manitoba or some other province. They need to see that indeed 
that this government is committed as much as the people of 
Preeceville — and they’re not, Mr. Speaker, because of this 
kind of delay and procrastination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns of many people in the 
area is the waiting list as to when surgery that’s needed can be 
performed. And I’ve had a number of letters from Dr. 
McKitterick. Dr. McKitterick is the medical doctor in Norquay 
and Norquay, by the way, Mr. Speaker, isn’t even a hospital. It 
is a health centre and Dr. McKitterick provides very good 
medical service to all of the people in Norquay and area. 
 
His concern though is with the fact that the regional hospital 
which is at Yorkton, which is supposed to provide all of the 
needs of the people . . . one of the surgeons there is Dr. Van 
Sittert, and this is a letter of March 7, 2002 from Dr. 
McKitterick to myself and it says this: 
 

Between Dr. Van Sittert and Dr. Henning, there were 10 
major joint replacements performed per week around three 
to four years ago in Yorkton. (By the way, Dr. Henning is 
no longer in Yorkton.) Dr. Van Sittert is now looking at a 
waiting list of four years to be able to perform a hip or knee 
replacement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how can people sit on a waiting list, a waiting list, 
waiting for three years, four years? This is a situation that has to 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

be remedied and all we’ve heard from the Minister of Health 
and the government opposite for the last two years is we’re 
going to study it; we’re going to put in place an action plan; 
we’re going to deal with the waiting lists. And you know what 
happened? The waiting lists grew, Mr. Speaker. The waiting 
lists have grown right across this province. 
 
We need to address these concerns of individuals in this 
province. This budget did not do that, Mr. Speaker. This budget 
did not address the fact that health facilities in this province are 
going to experience grave conditions, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to experience grave conditions because they will lack the 
number of professionals needed to upkeep and to maintain the 
services at those facilities. 
 
And I want to bring to your attention, Mr. Speaker, one concern 
from the medical laboratory technologists, the MLTs in this 
province. The medical laboratory technologists program right 
now graduates about 16 people per year. That’s all, 16 people. 
And in the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, the average of 
people staying after they graduate in the province of 
Saskatchewan is about 10. So six don’t even look at 
Saskatchewan; they move elsewhere. Ten stay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because we’re in that baby boomer point in our 
society where baby boomers are nearing retirement, a number 
of retirements are occurring in the MLT field. That number is 
somewhere between 18 and 22 per year for the next numbers of 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you’re only getting 10 graduates to stay in the 
province of Saskatchewan and you need 20 just to replace the 
ones that are retiring, think of the predicament we’re going to 
be in after that happens for four or five years. You know what 
will close facilities, Mr. Speaker? It won’t be the fact that the 
government doesn’t provide funding or that people are not 
using the services. It will be because we don’t have the 
professionals to maintain those facilities. 
 
And this budget did not take that into consideration. It did not 
look at planning. We haven’t seen planning from this 
government for a number of years in terms of enhancing the 
training positions for registered nurses, for LPNs (licensed 
practical nurse), for MLTs. We need to enhance those training 
positions so that we can have a far greater number of graduates, 
so that now there will be people to meet all those needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns in my constituency is in 
the area of infrastructure. And over the last number of days my 
colleagues in the opposition have been raising with the minister 
responsible for Municipal Affairs and Environment the 
concerns expressed about adequate water supplies, adequate 
safe water supplies. 
 
Two communities, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency who are 
very concerned about this are the communities of Foam Lake 
and the small, little community of Arran. The community of 
Foam Lake recognized a number of years ago that it was 
dependent upon surface waters, surface water for providing the 
entire town of Foam Lake with an adequate water supply. And 
they recognized that in a year of drought there may be a 
problem. 
 

So they applied to the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program last year in a hope that they would be able to drill new 
wells, create a new water system. Mr. Speaker, they were turned 
down. They were turned down and they said that their 
application was . . . didn’t rate high enough. It didn’t rate high 
enough and, please, apply next year — a familiar story for 
communities like Perdue and others. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, another community in my constituency is 
the small, little town of Arran. Arran has about 55 residents, 
Mr. Speaker, and they too rely on shallow wells. About a month 
ago the mayor of Arran, Mr. Rick Nahnybida called me, and 
Rick said that, you know, one of our wells looks like it has gone 
dry or it’s froze or the sand has plugged it. We are now in a 
position where our water supply for the village is only about 
half of what we need. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, without even getting any further 
financial support from this government, the mayor took his own 
water tank, his own vehicle, and he’s now hauling water from a 
farmer to put it into the cistern in Arran, treat it appropriately, 
and to put that into the water system. But that only lasted about 
a week and a half, and the second well ended up going dry. 
There is no water supply at all in Arran now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the village council, through the mayor, contacted the 
Department of Municipal Affairs, they contacted Sask Water, 
and they said: we have a emergency; we know we have to deal 
with this problem in the spring as far as drilling wells, but we 
have an emergency right now. 
 
One of his quotes, Mr. Speaker, that appeared in the paper from 
the mayor is this: 
 

We’re not asking for $10,000, not even $8,000. All we 
want is a couple of thousand . . . (dollars),” Nahnybida said. 
“If not, we’re going to have to put on a dance or sell some 
raffle tickets or something to raise the money.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a community that turned to the Department 
of Municipal Affairs, to Sask Water, to say, we have an 
emergency. We need to be able to hire somebody to haul water 
until we can determine through investigation from Sask Water 
as to what we’re going to do with this problem. They’ve been 
turned down. 
 
Now the mayor and others in this community are busy hauling 
water themselves to ensure that they meet the obligations that 
this government has reneged on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns in my constituency is 
about taxation. And we’ve had a lot of people look at their 2001 
income tax forms and are saying, I thought I was promised a 
change by this Minister of Finance; I thought that I was going 
to be paying less tax. 
 
Well there’s some interesting developments, Mr. Speaker. And 
I want to read a letter of February 18 that was addressed to the 
Premier which the . . . it is from an accounting firm and it says 
this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . we did not read and have not heard about the 
cancellation of the Saskatchewan Tax Credit available to 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

 

tax payers of Saskatchewan for the year 2001, which was 
previously available by completing the T1C Saskatchewan 
form, until our office realized the “No” Saskatchewan Tax 
reduction when receiving notices of assessments . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is an accountant and now recognizes that, 
while the government has lowered the tax rate, they have 
removed some of the tax credits. And in the end, the people that 
they said they were going to help are now looking at the 
situation where the $200 tax credit that was used — and again it 
would be used entirely by those people in a lower income — 
has disappeared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record the tax rates of the 
provinces and the territories for the year 2001, because not all 
of the provinces have had their budgets presented for 2002, and 
we don’t know what all the tax rates are. 
 
Each of the provinces has moved now into the new system of 
taxing and they’re looking at putting on . . . a tax level on the 
first 29,000 or 30,000, or as in the case of Saskatchewan it is 
exactly 30,000; all of the provinces have more or less the same, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m not going to read in each of those values. 
 
But here are the first tax rates for that first level of income: 
Newfoundland, 10.57 per cent; Prince Edward Island, 9.8 per 
cent; Nova Scotia, 9.77 per cent; New Brunswick, 9.68 per 
cent; Ontario, 6.16 per cent; Manitoba, 10.9 per cent; Alberta, 
10 per cent on all of their levels, by the way; British Columbia, 
7.3 per cent; Yukon Territory, 7.36 per cent; Northwest 
Territories and Nunavut, 7.2 per cent. And now we get to 
Saskatchewan, 11.5 per cent — the highest level of taxation on 
the first level of income. 
 
The level of income for people that are on minimum-paying 
jobs, on lower jobs, on beginning jobs, our young people that 
are beginning in the province of Saskatchewan, are paying the 
highest tax rate in 2001. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a look at what would happen, 
as the Minister of Finance has said, in 2002. On January 1 we 
received one-quarter of one per cent reduction, Mr. Speaker. 
From 11.5, we could now read in 11.25. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
still would be the highest number of all of those percentages 
that I have entered into the record. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when people in Saskatchewan take a look at 
what this government has done in saying dramatic tax increases, 
they have to look at what it is relative to the rest of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. Because we are in a global economy; we are in a 
competitive position; and to attract and keep our people in 
Saskatchewan, tax cuts are necessary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, you know, there’s so many 
things in this budget that the opposition members are going to 
bring to the attention of people in Saskatchewan in all of the 
various departments. And I know my colleagues are looking 
forward to presenting what this government is trying to 
disguise, what this government is trying to hide in the way of a 

deficit, in the way of a lack of commitment in all of the various 
departments. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will give them that opportunity by ending 
my comments this morning by stating that this deficit is huge, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a debt that is growing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We are mortgaging our children’s future in this 
document. The simple way to describe this budget, Mr. 
Speaker: it is a fudge-it budget. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move an amendment to the 
motion and I would move that, seconded by the member of 
Kindersley: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 
Condemns the provincial government for its decision to 
return to a massive budget deficit and its attempt to hide 
this deficit through accounting changes and questionable 
revenue forecasts; and that this Assembly regrets the 
provincial government’s failure to put forward any kind of 
plan to grow Saskatchewan in this budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly my pleasure to enter the budget debate here this 
morning and second the motion by my hon. colleague. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that people all over Saskatchewan 
are paying a great deal of attention to, I think. They are 
certainly reading the newspapers, reading the clippings from 
around the province. And they see clippings out of The 
StarPhoenix in Saskatoon “End budget games” speaking to all 
of the concerns that the editorialist of The StarPhoenix have, 
putting the Minister of Finance into some rather illustrious 
company when it comes to Finance ministers of the past, 
suggesting that the games that are being played in this budget 
by the Minister of Finance and the NDP opposite are something 
that they should not be that proud of, something that the people 
of Saskatchewan should be very wary of, something that the 
people of Saskatchewan should not be prepared to accept the 
arguments that the members opposite are presenting to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is, this is . . . a fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that 
people all over the province now are, as they are saying here, 
holding their noses at this budget. Very concerned about the 
fact that now we’ve slipped into a massive, massive deficit here 
in Saskatchewan, and no amount of jiggery-pokery opposite 
suggesting that they’ve got this Fiscal Stabilization Fund is 
going to gloss over those facts. 
 
People are beginning to . . . people are looking at this, the 
papers, the media people around this province are wondering 
how they can possibility meet their income targets that they are 
suggesting that they have before them. Fifty-one million dollars 
of sales revenue, clearly when the province’s sales, retail sales 
are not going up at any kind of a rate that would even come 
close to matching that. 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

They’ll come about halfway, it would appear, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of that goal. That is if we reach the goals in terms of retail 
sales, and there’s lots of reasons to suggest that they may be off 
the mark as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, they are taking money in from the Crown 
corporations at any alarming rate, more so than the Crown 
corporations can meet using a little Allan Blakeney strategy 
from the past; a well-used NDP strategy of hiding deficits in the 
Crown corporations, driving the debt up in the Crown 
corporations and then saying that it has nothing to do with the 
finances of the province of Saskatchewan. The Crown 
corporations have self-liquidating methods of addressing the 
debt. 
 
Clearly the people of Saskatchewan see through that. Everyone 
knows anybody that has any degree of sophistication when it 
comes to financial management would clearly understand that 
by driving the debt up of the Crown corporations, they’re 
driving the debt up of the whole province of Saskatchewan onto 
the backs of our children, our children’s children, and so on 
after that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The troubling part as well is that they’ve entered into this style 
of accounting that would make an Enron executive blush, Enron 
employee blush, Mr. Speaker. They clearly are entering back in 
the days of the Gary Lane-style of budgeting that was roundly 
criticized by the NDP at the time. 
 
I don’t know whether . . . there aren’t all that many members 
opposite that are still around from the Gary Lane budget days, 
but I’m sure they will recall their comments at the time when 
Mr. Lane was presenting a budget that had that style of 
accounting in it. And they were sharply critical of it at the time, 
Mr. Speaker, as everyone in the province remembers — sharply 
critical of exactly what they are doing today. 
 
And somehow or another what was done in the past was terrible 
and reprehensible but when the NDP does it, somehow or 
another it’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. It’s that style that the 
NDP . . . that the people of Saskatchewan have learned about 
the NDP opposite over many, many years of experience. 
 
The members opposite come to the legislature with a higher 
calling than anyone else. A sanctimonious way of governing a 
province. It is always, it is always, when the NDP are in 
government, it’s always someone else’s fault for the 
misfortunes of Saskatchewan. If it isn’t the federal government, 
if it isn’t the federal government, it’s the farmers; if it isn’t the 
farmers, it’s the oil people in this province; if it isn’t them, it’s 
somebody else. 
 
And in fact on the front page of today’s newspaper the Premier 
of this province went so far as to blame Osama Bin Laden for 
the troubles that we are having here in Saskatchewan. Well 
clearly Osama Bin Laden is responsible for a lot of things, Mr. 
Speaker, and a lot of problems that North America has faced in 
the last little while, but to suggest that the reason why they have 
to make these budgetary decisions is because of Osama Bin 
Laden, I think is quite a stretch for the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: — They’re breaking, Mr. Speaker, in addition to 
that they are breaking their own laws now. In 1992 Don Gass 
— the commission to change the way the province of 
Saskatchewan reported fiscal matters that the NDP brought in 
back then — now this government opposite is breaking those 
regulations and laws that were introduced at that time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
According to The StarPhoenix editorial, “concocting odious 
bookkeeping methods.” That must be something that the 
members opposite can be real proud of. That was something 
that they roundly criticized previous administrations of all 
stripes for, and now they have that kind of history to add to 
their illustrious history in government over the last 10 years 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Without transparent accounting . . . The editorial goes on to say, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Without . . . transparent accounting, taxpayers have no 
clear idea . . . (of how to trust the) true level of 
indebtedness (of this province), hampering greatly their 
ability to evaluate government actions and spending 
decisions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that has been what the NDP have always claimed 
was the hallmark of their government — fiscal integrity, fiscal 
responsibility. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the budget of yesterday I 
think the people of Saskatchewan will agree with me when I say 
that they have abandoned that history. They have moved into a 
history, into an area, that I don’t think they really wanted to go 
but they felt that they had to because they’ve got a budget that 
doesn’t make sense, they’ve got a budget that doesn’t add up. 
 
They don’t have a plan for the people of Saskatchewan and it’s 
becoming more and more obvious to the people of this province 
every day that the one thing that this government hasn’t done, 
which they should do to try and gain any kind of respectability 
back, is to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And if it wasn’t for a couple of misplaced 
Liberals over there, we would have that election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the editorialists go on and they agree with us when we say 
they should call an election. This government should call one, 
they say, and the sooner the better, to clear the air. After all, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to keep in mind that we have a Premier sitting 
in the Premier’s office today that wasn’t elected by the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We understand how the process works and the people of 
Saskatchewan understand how the process works. He was 
elected by their party and he has a rightful place to take that 
seat. But he also has an obligation to the people of 
Saskatchewan if he plans on sharply changing the direction of 
this province. If he was just going to carry on with what they 
did before, I suppose you could cut him a little room. 
 
But if his plan is to sharply deviate from the past, he has a 
moral obligation — a moral obligation — to take it to the 
people of Saskatchewan and put it before them and say, here’s 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

 

the direction I want to take this province. That hasn’t happened, 
Mr. Speaker. We don’t expect it’s going to happen. As long as 
he’s got those two Liberals heeled in as well as they are, it 
won’t happen either likely, Mr. Speaker. But clearly the people 
of Saskatchewan would want that to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You start looking at the clippings from around the province 
about this budget and many, many people, group after group 
after group, aren’t all that encouraged by what they’re seeing. 
Education groups — unhappy. Agriculture groups — unhappy. 
Rural municipalities — unhappy. People that have concerns 
about highway construction — unhappy. People who have 
concerns about water quality in this province — unhappy. 
 
The minister opposite — it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker — the 
ministers opposite stand in their place and say they’re going to 
do what they can to protect the quality of water here in this 
province and then they slash the budget for water quality 
studies and water quality testing programs by $1 billion. That’s 
the kind of commitment that they have to providing quality 
water for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, I want to talk a 
little bit this morning about the department that I’m the critic 
for and that’s the Department of Agriculture. We’ve seen, Mr. 
Speaker, in agriculture, probably you would have to go back to 
when the NDP opposite tore up the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) contracts to see a comparable assault on 
rural Saskatchewan. You would have to go back to that time 
frame. 
 
But what we saw in the last about 10 days here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is first of all the government 
opposite bringing in some changes to the crop insurance 
department. Very, very serious changes to the crop insurance 
department that I think they felt probably that the farmers of 
this province wouldn’t even notice. But, of course, the farmers 
are getting their hail . . . or I mean their crop insurance 
information right now and they are noticing big time. Our 
offices all over this province are getting calls just constantly 
and I suspect the Minister of Agriculture’s office is getting 
them as well. 
 
What they are saying is, at a time in Saskatchewan when we 
have just come off of a historical drought, a drought of 
historical proportions, one that compares easily with any of the 
dry years in the 1930s, easily with those . . . In fact, many 
reporting stations, weather reporting stations in Saskatchewan 
have less rainfall in the year 2001 than any of the years in the 
1930s. 
 
When we’ve come off of the worst drought in history, and 
unfortunately — and I say very unfortunately — we may be 
faced with another one here in Saskatchewan on about . . . 
About two-thirds of the province, perhaps even more than that, 
Mr. Speaker, has historically low soil moisture levels here in 
Saskatchewan, and there’s virtually no snow across this 
province to speak of. 
 
We have a government opposite wanting to continue to strip 
away one of the most important safety net features that farmers 
have in this province; that’s the Crop Insurance Corporation and 
the programs available within that program. 

The spot loss hail provisions were an important feature. It was 
something that the government opposite, when they put it back 
a few years ago did the right thing, but now they’ve removed it. 
And the removal of that, Mr. Speaker, comes with it two 
entities that benefit very, very nicely — very, very nicely. There 
are two entities that benefit very nicely from the changes in the 
spot loss hail program. 
 
(11:45) 
 
First of all, farmers are hurt dramatically. But in a written 
question that we submitted to the government opposite and got 
back on March 26, we asked the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: How much in 
terms of dollars did each of the following parties contribute 
to the spot-loss hail coverage portion of the 2001 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program: the federal 
government; the provincial government; (and) farmers? 

 
And the answer we got back: 
 

As (of) . . . February 28, 2002, premiums for the 2001 
spot-loss hail program under (the) . . . Crop Insurance 
(Corporation were) . . . as follows: 

 
There are two entities that benefited from the changes, Mr. 
Speaker, and one huge, huge loser in this. The Government of 
Saskatchewan last year, on behalf of farmers in this province, 
contributed $17,484,799 — 17 and a half million dollars, they 
contributed. The province of Saskatchewan contributed exactly 
the same amount — 17 and a half million dollars. And the 
farmers contributed $23.3 million to that program. 
 
So by making the changes to that provision alone, the 
Government of Saskatchewan no longer has an obligation to 
Crop Insurance to pay 17 and a half million dollars and neither 
does the federal government. 
 
So while the Minister of Agriculture goes around this province 
and tells the farmers of this province he’s doing everything he 
can to help them, he just took off the table for his government 
17 and a half million dollars. But probably the most 
reprehensible part of this is, is he also took off the table 17 and 
a half million dollars of federal government money off the 
table. 
 
And then he has the . . . The Finance Minister has the gall, Mr. 
Speaker, in the budget yesterday to tell the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that they’ve put $14 million into the program. 
They took off 17 and a half million dollars on spot loss twice — 
twice, the federal government’s contribution and the provincial 
government’s contribution. They took those away; $35 million 
disappeared right there. 
 
We’re trying to get the information on the variable price option 
as well. I suspect it’ll be a very, very significant number that 
both the provincial government and the federal government 
took off the table there as well, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister 
of Finance says we put $14 million back in. 
 
The only reason, Mr. Speaker, the only reason . . . And farmers 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

understand how this program works. The only reason that the 
province of Saskatchewan is even able to say that they put 
money back in is because the change that there has been from 
last year to this year has been in two areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of them is in coverage in terms of yield and the other one is 
in coverage in terms of price per commodity. Each commodity 
that farmers grow, wheat, durum, oats, barley, on you go, they 
are each assigned a value. That’s how you calculate the 
coverage times the value to give you your per acre coverage 
levels. 
 
Well those levels have all changed, Mr. Speaker. The 
commodity price levels have all changed, and fortunately for 
farmers, they’ve gone up a little bit in the last little while. Grain 
markets in the world are responding a little bit in the last little 
while to the possibility of a poor winter wheat crop in the US 
(United States) and poor crops on a worldwide basis, and we’ve 
started to see some . . . a little bit of a rise in prices for 
commodities, fortunately. That’s one good thing that’s 
happening for farmers. 
 
But what that means to the province and what it means to 
farmers, obviously, is, is because there’s a rise in the coverage 
levels for the prices that farmers can guarantee, there’s also a 
corresponding rise in the premiums. And that accounts for 
every dime of the $14 million that this government is putting in. 
It has nothing to do with the government putting money it, but 
has everything to do with them having a statutory obligation to 
put it in. That’s what it means. 
 
And the farmers of Saskatchewan clearly understand that. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting call after call after call 
from farmers across this province saying at the worst possible 
time what can we count on the NDP to do when it comes to 
agriculture. 
 
We can strip crop insurance of $35 million of contributions 
from the provincial and federal government. We can strip them 
of the variable right policies which will amount — I think it’s in 
the range of about 25 per cent of the producers take that option, 
Mr. Speaker. So I’m guessing that’ll be into the tens of millions 
of dollars, again, that has been taken off the . . . we’re trying to 
get that information from the Crop Insurance department right 
now, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully they will comply. Hopefully, 
they will comply. I say that guardedly, because I suspect the 
government opposite doesn’t want that information out there. 
But hopefully, they’ll comply. 
 
Their commitment to an open government we’ll be testing here 
in the next few days when we submit that question to the Crop 
Insurance department. But we’ll be testing that to find out what 
that cost is to farmers as well. And what benefit there was to the 
province and what benefit there was to the federal government 
on top of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They stripped away those two features that were very important 
within the program. And, then what did they do yesterday on 
top of all of that? If that wasn’t bad enough, Mr. Speaker, if that 
wasn’t bad enough, then yesterday they come in and strip one 
other thing away from farmers that had a $25 million price tag 
associated with it — the property tax rebates that farmers have 
just got. Farmers just received their benefits from last year here 

in the last few days. And farmers all over the province were 
grateful for that change that they made in the last two years 
previous, but it averaged about $1,000 for a farm family here in 
Saskatchewan. So that was an additional thing that the 
government stripped away. 
 
So on top of the $35 million out of crop insurance and growing 
— because we don’t know the variable price, what that cost 
farmers as well — on top of that, $25 million of property tax 
rebates disappeared from this government yesterday. And I 
suspect in some of these fees that we have to do our work to 
ferret out of this government — I suspect that there’s probably 
some changes in there as well to farm families here in this 
province. 
 
Farmers are taking — as I said earlier — a massive, massive hit 
from this government at a time when they’ve just come off a 
drought and unfortunately may be headed into another drought, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as a way of hopefully . . . and as a way of . . . the NDP way 
of trying to mollify the farmers a little bit, they bring in a little 
of what they thought might be a plum for the farmers. They 
bring in this new forage protection, and they bring in this . . . 
the annual crop protection feature. And this is bizarre beyond 
belief, Mr. Speaker. This one is bizarre beyond belief — the 
Serby derby, as we’re calling it, Mr. Speaker. And . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just remind the member once again not to 
refer to members by their name, but rather by their titles or by 
their constituencies. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there’s another name for it that 
farmers are calling it as well: rainfall roulette. And the reason 
they call it that is really quite simple, Mr. Speaker. If you’re 
familiar with gambling — and unfortunately there are all too 
many people in Saskatchewan familiar with that — but if 
you’re familiar with gambling, this is an opportunity for 
farmers to gamble at any time of the year. 
 
You know at certain times of the season, Mr. Speaker, farmers 
don’t have the occasion to visit the VLT (video lottery terminal) 
places all that often. So now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to put 
something in place for farmers so that they can gamble. I guess 
that’s the logic behind it. I can’t think of any other logic behind 
it, because it defies logic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what they are saying to farmers is, is pick a weather station 
across Saskatchewan — apparently there’s one in Manitoba, 
and there’s one in Alberta you can pick as well — pick a 
rainfall station, any rainfall station, pick any one of them, and 
bet on it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they’ve got a premium table or essentially for about 60 
cents an acre premium, you get about $7 worth of action. I think 
that’s how they phrase it when you’re in places like Las Vegas. 
So for 60 cents, you can have $7 worth of action. 
 
And if that particular rainfall station that you picked, Mr. 
Speaker, has the unfortunate circumstance of suffering 
continued drought, you’re a winner. You’re a winner. That’s 
how it works, Mr. Speaker. So the NDP now have gone from 
having a program that had some pretty good components in it in 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

 

crop insurance, the spot loss and the variable rate protection, to 
putting in a rainfall-type lottery. 
 
So instead of this government saying they want to have a way 
of creating opportunity and hope in Saskatchewan, here’s what 
you have today: you will have people all over Saskatchewan 
picking rainfall stations from anywhere in the province and then 
hoping among hope, sitting there at home every night thinking 
to themselves, I hope those poor people over at Rosthern or 
those poor people over at Leader, or wherever you happened to 
bet on, suffer a drought. If that isn’t the most shameful way of 
having an insurance program, I don’t know what it is. 
 
I was speaking yesterday, Mr. Speaker, to a number of . . . and 
we have been to, I think we’ve touched virtually every rural 
newspaper in Saskatchewan in the last few weeks. They’ve 
been calling. They’re in disbelief, Mr. Speaker. They call and 
ask you to explain it to them. We explain it to them; we fax out 
the information to them. 
 
First of all they’re astounded. It usually takes them a few days 
to even absorb the information. And then they call back and ask 
you, is this really how this works? Is this really how this works? 
 
In fact one reporter from a rural newspaper yesterday said to 
me, Mr. Speaker, he made the comment: I’m not sure I 
understand how this works, but if you apply it to car insurance, 
it would be like me buying a car . . . pardon me, me living in 
Kindersley, buying a car in Yorkton, and then hoping, hoping 
that that car in Yorkton had a wreck and then I could get my car 
back in Kindersley repainted. 
 
That’s what it means . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, hope 
your neighbour’s house burns down so you’ll benefit back in 
Kindersley. Hope your neighbour over here . . . hope your 
neighbour on this side of the province has a drought so you can 
benefit. That is bizarre beyond belief. 
 
If you could pick a way of determining that, Mr. Speaker, I 
think there’s many farmers will be sitting down . . . They’ve 
only got a couple more days to do this, incidentally. They 
limited the time frame when you can do this. It’s like the NDP 
croupier saying that, place your bets, but they have to be down 
soon, Mr. Speaker. March 31 is the cut-off for this rainfall 
roulette program, so you’ve got to put your money on the table 
soon. You’ve got to pick a number soon; you’ve got to pick a 
weather station soon. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure Environment Canada’s Web 
site is getting a lot of hits from farmers across the province right 
now, looking at the rainfall averages for all of these 83 stations, 
and they may even pick the Coronation one, I think is the one in 
Alberta that you can pick. I’m not sure which the one in 
Manitoba is. But they’re looking through those historical 
numbers right now and saying well, the average rainfall in 
Leader, Saskatchewan is about seven and a half inches a year, 
somewhere in that . . . seven and a half inches within the 
growing season, Mr. Speaker. But they’re kind of in dry 
condition, I’m wondering whether this thing is going to 
continue or not. 
 
Or should I take a bit of a flyer . . . should I take a bit of a flyer 
based on the odds and the premiums that you can calculate out 

. . . we’re calling them the odds, and that’s essentially how you 
look at it, Mr. Speaker. If you flip the form over it tells you how 
to calculate your odds — that’s what it says on the back of it — 
calculate your potential winnings here. 
 
So you look down the premium tables; you look at where you 
hope they’ll have some degree of bad fortune, Mr. Speaker, and 
then you make your decision based on that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Psychics dot-com . . . 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yes, exactly, Mr. Speaker. I expect many farmers 
are consulting with psychics these days to try and figure out 
where in Saskatchewan are they going to suffer misfortune. 
Where in Saskatchewan are you going to suffer misfortune? 
 
Even in Las Vegas, I don’t know of a program where you can 
bet on the rainfall. They bet on anything down in Las Vegas, if 
you’ve ever been there, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had occasion to be 
there a couple of times. You can bet on anything. You can bet 
on dogs; you can bet on basketball games; you can bet on 
horses; you can bet on baseball games, right down to the minor 
levels. But there’s no rainfall roulette there. 
 
The NDP have come up with a program that even the gambling 
mecca of the world, Las Vegas, hasn’t been able to figure out, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And we have to wonder . . . we have to wonder 
which one of the members opposite came up with that one, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m betting . . . I’m betting that it may be the minister 
responsible for the corporation that lost $28 million in potatoes, 
because if he applies that same kind of logic that he applied to 
losing $28 million, that’s the type of logic that you’d come up 
with this program on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mean, if you recall, the business genius opposite came up with 
that, up with the line — he said we lost $28 million, but it’s 
been a good investment for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Well Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think he has a financial 
background. I think he has a financial background and I’d 
suggest that . . . I would suggest he may want to reconsider his 
opportunities after this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the shameful part of this is — and we’re taking a 
rather wild look at this, Mr. Speaker — but the shameful part of 
it is, is the NDP have come up with a program that is bizarre 
beyond belief and is reprehensible and it’s an insult to the 
people and the farm families of this province. 
 
How can you possibly, how can you possibly claim that this is 
good public policy when you’re asking farmers to pick a 
rainfall station — any rainfall station — and bet on it. Because 
that’s what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And beyond that there’s the bizarre little twists within this one. 
So if you, Mr. Speaker, if in rainfall roulette . . . you have to 
keep in mind there’s a number of regulations within this that 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

you have to comply with. 
 
So we’ve got farmer A over here down in Leader and he 
decides, well I want to pick my home station because it’s dry 
here and unfortunately it may continue dry. But he doesn’t get 
out his money quick enough and put it on the table. And all . . . 
a whole bunch of other farmers beat him to it — beat him to 
betting on that particular one. They’ve limited the amount of 
action that you can get in any one community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you may have this bizarre circumstance of a farmer wanting 
to do probably what is the right thing and bet on his own 
community, which seems crazy beyond belief, but . . . betting 
on . . . wanting to bet on his own community, going into the 
crop insurance office, and the NDP croupier standing there — I 
suspect they got them all in tuxedos standing there, tuxedos 
standing there — and saying . . . I’m not sure how they do it 
when you’re in Vegas but it’s something . . . you know, they 
give the hand signal, you can no longer bet on that one. You’re 
going to have to bet on another one, Mr. Speaker. All bets are 
down, I’m sorry. 
 
You can hear . . . you can just . . . if you’ve been to Vegas 
you’ve heard those words before. All you have to do is go to the 
roulette table and you’ll see it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you’ll have a farmer, perhaps in Leader, saying to himself, 
well I . . . if I can’t bet on my home community I’m going to bet 
on the poor community of Melfort maybe. Maybe if I get lucky, 
maybe if I get lucky and they get really unlucky I’ll get a piece 
of this action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s the type of program that we have in agriculture 
today. And that was, Mr. Speaker, going to be the plum for the 
farmers of this province to mollify them into hoping that . . . the 
NDP were hoping this, Mr. Speaker, that somehow or another if 
we brought in this bizarre little gambling twist into the Crop 
Insurance department that farmers would forget about the fact 
that they’ve lost the hail insurance — spot loss hail insurance 
— component, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve lost the variable rate 
protection that they’ve enjoyed for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly what farmers were looking for in this 
budget and from this government in terms of changes to the 
Crop Insurance department, was an enhanced program. And 
that’s what the Minister of Agriculture’s been saying for 
months that he was going to negotiate with the federal 
government an enhanced program. Every time that minister 
goes down to Ottawa or picks up the phone and calls Lyle 
Vanclief in Ottawa, the farmers of Saskatchewan should be 
scared to death because there’s something more that’s going to 
disappear for them. This guy, Mr. Speaker . . . Unfortunately 
this Minister of Agriculture has a habit of negotiating farmers 
out of good programs rather than negotiating them into a good 
one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And, Mr. Speaker, it’s little wonder, it’s little 
wonder that the farm people of this province have abandoned 
this government in terms of support over the last number of 
years. And this is just going to be one more example of the 
reasons why farmer after farmer in this province will be voting 

in the next election for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what we should have had in this 
budget, as we’ve said, was an enhanced program for crop 
insurance. We should have, as some of the agriculture reporters 
are saying . . . agriculture columnist, Kevin Hursh, is suggesting 
that we should have looked at increasing the spot loss hail 
provisions by adding it to the upper level. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker . . . in the years past at least — not any 
longer, it’s gone — but in the years past you could only take the 
spot loss hail provisions on the 70 per cent feature of crop 
insurance. There is also one higher level than that — 80 per 
cent coverage that you could opt for. And the ag reporter, Kevin 
Hursh, is suggesting that that’s what this government should 
have looked at was increasing the opportunity for farmers on 
that end. 
 
We also think that back in 1988, Mr. Speaker, when the 
province suffered the last significant drought here in 
Saskatchewan, the year after that what they did to try and help 
in terms of agriculture policy, what they tried to help with then 
was, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t take into account the 1988 yield 
averages for the 1989 coverage. 
 
And that’s what we think they should have did this year as well. 
Instead of averaging them in over the 10-year average formula 
that’s there, they should have taken that one out — an 
act-of-God-type clause — that it should have been removed so 
farmers wouldn’t lose coverage in terms of bushels per acre, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that would have been a positive feature that farmers would 
have understand and appreciated, particularly — as we’ve been 
saying all along, Mr. Speaker — when you’re faced with a 
province-wide drought as many farmers are. 
 
In recent days, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been getting calls from a lot 
of people; we’re getting letters from a lot of people. And one of 
the ones that was probably the most interesting, Mr. Speaker, is 
even, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board objects to your 
changes within the Crop Insurance Corporation, the loss of spot 
loss and the variable hail rates. And the reason that they have 
concerns, Mr. Speaker, is a valid reason. 
 
One of the things that has been put in place in terms of helping 
with the agriculture crisis that we have in Saskatchewan right 
now, Mr. Speaker, is the spring cash advance program. And that 
really, what it really is, is that — excuse me, Mr. Speaker — 
what it really is, is an opportunity for farmers to take a cash 
advance on anticipated crop that they will grow in this 
upcoming season. And that program is in place again for 
farmers and I understand the applications are out and available 
right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that program, that program, Mr. Speaker, is an important 
feature for farmers having trouble raising operating capital for 
this planting season that we’re almost into here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It comes with it the opportunity to borrow from the federal 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

 

government, administered by the Canadian Wheat Board, a 
spring cash advance of about $50,000 based on your acreage 
and a whole number of things. But essentially it offered a huge 
amount of opportunity for farmers and it was widely accepted 
by farmers. I don’t recall the number right offhand, Mr. 
Speaker, but it was literally thousands and thousands of farmers 
used this program every spring. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the problem with it is now, and what was . . . 
it was . . . there’s an attachment to that program, a condition 
that you have to comply with. In order to take out the spring 
cash advance program, you have to buy crop insurance. So what 
has happened with this program now is in order for farmers to 
qualify for this year’s, 2002’s spring cash advance program, 
they have to buy crop insurance whether they like it or not. 
 
And now they have to buy a crop insurance coverage and a 
policy that has less coverage for it; less coverage because we 
have lost spot loss and variable rate. You have to pay more for 
it, Mr. Speaker, and you also have the opportunity, if you want, 
to enter into this gambling program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it just again speaks to the need for this 
government to start looking at some real serious agriculture 
policy here in Saskatchewan rather than coming up with these 
kind of hare-brained schemes. It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have these types of programs being introduced, when you 
have a government opposite that has . . . thinks that the 
priorities for this government should be buying things like a 
dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia; who are investing in terms of 
infrastructure in places like Australia or Chile or Mexico or 
wherever it is their minions are out trying to buy up things 
around the world right now. 
 
The captains of industry opposite right now, Mr. Speaker, are 
running all over the world looking at opportunities to buy 
things. It just is bizarre when you think about it. We’ve got 
needs within Saskatchewan; we’ve got concerns about 
education in Saskatchewan; we’ve got concerns about health 
care in Saskatchewan; we’ve got concerns about highways and 
agriculture and department after department after department; 
but this government’s priorities seem to be for buying things 
like a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia rather than taking a serious 
look at what the needs are of Saskatchewan families, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, is saying from his chair 
something along the lines that they’re going to make money on 
this. Well if there’s . . . the minister of . . . the new minister of 
. . . well he was the minister of Energy for a little while, but you 
kind of switched things around to hide a few things too. I don’t 
know what his responsibilities are, but the minister that brought 
in the ethanol program, he said, within that department what 
they wanted to do was have private capital start this project. We 
support that. 
 
But then he went on to say, but if CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) has someone come to them with 
an acceptable program, acceptable investment opportunity, 
they’ll look at it. And he said, but they really don’t want to get 
into picking winners and losers, Mr. Speaker. And that’s quite 
an admission from a government opposite that has a track 
record of picking losers almost on every occasion — picking 

losers on almost every occasion — 28 million bucks in potatoes 
but it’s a successful venture. 
 
Buying a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia that doesn’t have a 
single, solitary job attached to it for Saskatchewan people — 
but that’s a great investment, Mr. Speaker. And when our critic 
for Crown corporations asked the minister opposite, why don’t 
you bring that dot-com company back to Saskatchewan, 
repatriate it back to Saskatchewan, or bring it back here at least, 
put it in Saskatchewan — it never was a Saskatchewan 
company, I guess — but bring it to Saskatchewan, bring it to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Because as everyone knows, 
dot-com companies, Internet-based companies, can operate 
from anywhere in the world. 
 
Instead of bringing it . . . when we asked the question about 
bringing it back to Saskatchewan, the minister says, it’s a 
ridiculous notion. You have to operate apparently — according 
to NDP logic — you have to operate a dot-com company in 
Atlanta, Georgia. And somehow or another, that’s supposed to 
benefit Saskatchewan people. And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, 
we have the minister or the Crown corporation head that’s 
invested into that Crown, or into that dot-com, saying that it’s 
going to take some time before we, hopefully, see any kind of a 
return on this investment. We’re going to have to pour millions 
and millions and millions of dollars into this venture, Mr. 
Speaker, before there’s any hope that this one will. 
 
I predict, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be talking about this one in the 
legislature for years and years. This will be one of the examples 
. . . This will be one of the examples when the Saskatchewan 
Party is on that side of the legislature that we use as a basis for 
saying to the people of Saskatchewan, there’s one thing you can 
count on from the people of Saskatchewan, if we’re going to 
invest dollars anywhere, it’s going to be here in Saskatchewan 
and it’s not going to be . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And it’s not going to be investing into dot-coms 
in Atlanta, Georgia. We’re not going to invest in hare-brained 
schemes in potatoes. We’re not going to blow money on a land 
titles system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good one as well — land titles here in 
Saskatchewan. This government has been thinking about this 
for a while now, Mr. Speaker. They want to . . . If you buy a 
piece of property here in Saskatchewan, the process always 
was, you bought a piece of property, you contacted your lawyer, 
they transferred the title, you got a piece of paper — whether as 
a piece of real estate here in Regina or anywhere in 
Saskatchewan or farmland on Saskatchewan, you got a title 
back that said you own this piece of property. You flip it over, 
you see where it was mortgaged at and all of that kind of stuff. 
It was a system that was old, there’s no question about it — bit 
antiquated, but it worked. It did do one thing — it worked, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So now we got, here in Saskatchewan, a government opposite 
that decided they wanted to computerize this. It’s a little bit like 
GigaText for land titles. They all remember GigaText over 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

GigaText lost . . . And it was a hare-brained scheme then. It was 
a hare-brained scheme then; there is no question about that. I 
think it lost about 5 or $6 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well how much money has the NDP got in their GigaText 
program, the land titles ISC (Information Services Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) program right now? Eighty million and 
counting, Mr. Speaker. We are told that that program, a 
computer program of that type, Mr. Speaker, should cost about 
1 to $5 million, in that range, to implement a program of that 
type. You can buy it off the shelf almost anywhere, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re told as well. 
 
And so now we’ve got a government that sunk, time after time, 
millions and millions of dollars. It’s at $80 million and 
counting. And the only problem with this thing is if it worked, 
you might have some degree of an argument, even though the 
costs are about fifteen-fold over what it should have cost. 
 
(12:15) 
 
But we’ve got a program, Mr. Speaker, that still doesn’t even 
work. I’m told they can’t distinguish between people of the 
same name, so if you’ve got a Bill Smith that bought a piece of 
property out in Cabri, Saskatchewan, and you’ve got a Bill 
Smith that bought a property up in Tisdale, we haven’t been 
able to figure out how we can distinguish between one or the 
other. 
 
It just seems bizarre. Again, beyond belief, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the little hitch, that’s the little hitch that there’s in the program 
still at this point. 
 
And typical of the NDP, they’re going to figure out what to fix 
this problem and if it takes tens of millions of dollars to do it, 
we’re going to plough ahead and get her done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And on top of that they’ve got some of their people running 
around the world telling people in other countries around the 
world, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got a program back in 
Saskatchewan if you want to think about computerizing your 
land titles program. And I suspect that one of the first questions 
they say: well that’s kind of interesting; how is it working? 
How is it going so far over there? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess you would have to say, if you were 
honest, you’d have to say well we’ve got a few hitches in it 
right now. We thought it was going to cost a million and a half 
but it’s cost 80 so far and counting. We were . . . just calculated 
a little bit off there. 
 
And we’ve also got this little hitch that we can’t distinguish two 
people’s names . . . of the same name in this program. So we’ve 
got a province where we’ve got a shrinking number of people, 
Mr. Speaker, and yet we still can’t distinguish between two 
people of the same name. 
 
You would have thought, Mr. Speaker . . . I have a friend that’s 
in the computer programming business and he tells me that 
there are certain things that you do right off the start when 
you’re designing a program. You make sure that there are ways 
of separating people by either their name, their address, their 
social security number, health care number, driver’s licence — 

take anything you want — but they’ve got to figure out some 
way of distinguishing between two people of the same name. 
 
Apparently that was something the members opposite forgot, 
Mr. Speaker, and in order to fix that, we got $80 million 
invested in this and counting, and somehow or another, Mr. 
Speaker, this has been a good investment for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Another NDP investment on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then the Premier stands up before the people of 
Saskatchewan and says it’s Osama bin Laden’s fault. It’s 
Osama bin Laden’s fault that we don’t have money for 
highways; it’s Osama bin Laden’s fault we don’t have money 
for health care or education or agriculture or highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have money for a dot-com in Atlanta, we have 
money to invest in a potato corporation that’s losing money, we 
have money for companies in Australia, we have money for 
almost anything but when it comes to what the real priorities of 
this government is, they say sorry, it’s Osama Bin Laden’s 
fault, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it all be . . . it would all be funny except it’s pretty 
serious when you have a government opposite that 
unfortunately wants to get into these types of games playing 
with the finances of our province. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, this government was going around in 
the legislature and all across Saskatchewan after their budget 
saying it was a good news budget; we’re going to hire more 
people; we have priorities in terms of investing in 
Saskatchewan; and a whole bunch of things of that nature, Mr. 
Speaker. They were going to hire more people, 570 people. 
 
So what did they do in this budget, Mr. Speaker? Those 570 
people that they said were so essential to the operations of 
Saskatchewan, so necessary, so incredibly important to the 
operations of government, they said to about half of those 
people yesterday, we don’t need you any longer. 
 
So once again these people that come to the legislature with this 
higher calling are playing with people’s lives once again. 
They’re saying to them, you’ve served our NDP purpose for 
long enough — now you have to go, now you no longer have a 
job. And the people of Saskatchewan are asked once again to 
just suck it up and take it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I can tell you, I think that the people of Saskatchewan are 
getting a little bit tired of all of this. I learned a long time ago in 
politics, what happens to governments over time is, is they just 
throw another weight, another brick, into that bag of problems 
they’ve got carrying around on their shoulder. And this one’s 
getting pretty heavy to carry, I think, for the members opposite. 
 
When you have things like losses in potatoes; dot-coms in 
Atlanta, Georgia; when you have things like the Minister of 
Finance playing jiggery-pokery with the finances of this 
province; when you have the Minister of Agriculture saying that 
it’s all Ottawa’s fault when we don’t have agriculture programs, 
knowing full well that he sits at the table and negotiates, or 
attempts to negotiate, those programs; when you have all of 
those things happening in Saskatchewan, I think it’s little 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

 

wonder that the editorialists are saying that you have only one 
option left to you, only one option available left to the Premier, 
and that’s to call an election. 
 
The last paragraph of the editorial in today’s StarPhoenix reads: 
 

Rather than make the tough choices, the government has 
opted to procrastinate. If it’s an election Premier Calvert is 
buying time for, he should go ahead and call one without 
delay. Saskatchewan can’t afford to carry on this charade 
. . . (any longer, Mr. Speaker). 

 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly agree with what the editorialists — 
and I predict in the next number of days we’ll see similar ones 
from papers all across this province — coming forward and 
saying, you’ve got one option left, Mr. Premier, and that’s to 
call an election so the people of Saskatchewan can pass 
judgment on you and the dramatic changes in direction that this 
government has made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan . . . And our Finance 
critic, I think, outlined it really well in his comments yesterday 
and again this morning with respect to this budget, talked about 
the $225 million NDP sham, rainy day fund that they call a 
rainy day fund. He talked about the changes to the capital, 
education capital spending, and how that was done by a 
previous administration that they criticized roundly at the time. 
 
The unprecedented $300 million transfer from Crown 
corporations — money they don’t have, Mr. Speaker, that they 
will being going out and borrowing so that they can transfer it 
to the provincial government — and the $50 million increase in 
sales tax. 
 
So some of the things that have been happening in 
Saskatchewan in the past that they criticized, some of the things 
that we watched happening in BC that has been criticized by 
virtually every financial columnist in Canada, these guys are 
being . . . these people opposite are doing right now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it is astounding that the Minister of Finance would want to 
attach his reputation — and I think he has a pretty good one 
actually — it’s astounding that he would want to attach his 
reputation to these kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. And it’s little 
wonder — it’s little wonder — a couple of days ago in the 
newspapers we were seeing an NDP insider saying that if the 
Government of Saskatchewan decided to go for this capital 
spending type of plans that they have, that it was the height of 
sleaze. 
 
It’d be interesting to know, Mr. Speaker, who was . . . which 
minister was the one who leaked that little bit of information 
out; because I suspect there’s quite a few ministers opposite that 
are having a hard time with this, Mr. Speaker. They’re having a 
very, very hard time with this, Mr. Speaker. And I suspect that 
they didn’t want their name associated with this, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s no wonder that the NDP insider — and I can only 
speculate on who that might have been, Mr. Speaker; it might 
have been a cabinet minister, might have been a past cabinet 
minister, might have been a past premier for all I know, Mr. 
Speaker — that said that this would be the height of sleaze if 
this government got into that type of financing. 

But unfortunately for the people of Saskatchewan that’s exactly 
where this government chose to wallow in yesterday’s budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting back to agriculture for a moment, we’ve 
seen in the last number of days the Minister of Agriculture 
desperately trying to convince the farmers of Saskatchewan that 
the changes in the Crop Insurance Corporation were all the 
responsibility of the federal government. 
 
I was on my way into Regina when I heard that news, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re saying that the changes were all a result of 
the federal government. So I thought to myself, given the 
minister’s track record in terms of being straight with the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, I thought, maybe we should phone 
the Minister of Agriculture’s office in Ottawa and get their 
version of events. 
 
So I called the Minister of Agriculture’s office in Regina and 
spoke with his chief of staff. And the chief of staff in Ottawa, in 
Minister Vanclief’s office, said to me, I thought we could 
expect your call here. Because I doubt it very much that you or 
the farmers of Saskatchewan would believe this story, this line, 
hook, line, and sinker, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they said, well the Minister of Agriculture isn’t quite 
telling the whole story here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They said, 
here’s how the thing works. Here’s how it works, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We have a safety net package that’s available for 
Saskatchewan and other provinces. And there’s a certain 
amount of money that the federal government contributes to 
that over that period of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a 
certain amount of money that they contribute over that period of 
time. 
 
And so the Minister of Agriculture, last spring, went down to 
Ottawa and he said to Ottawa, look, we don’t have a lot of 
money. We don’t have a lot of money, Mr. Vanclief. The 
Minister of Agriculture said to him, we don’t have a lot of 
money. But we want the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) program. We want that program; we think it’s a good 
program. 
 
We don’t agree with that. We don’t agree with that. They have 
some real concerns about that program. But the Minister of 
Agriculture went down to Ottawa and said to the Minister of 
Agriculture in Ottawa, we’d like to see this program be put in 
place, but we’re broke. We don’t have any money. We blew her 
all on potatoes. 
 
But, he said, if you would take $20 million out of next year’s 
program — year 2002’s program — and put it into year 2001’s 
program, if you’re willing to do that, we will pay that money 
. . . start paying that money back to you next year, $7 million at 
a time. 
 
So the Minister of Agriculture essentially mortgaged the 
farmers’ future last year and the repayment terms came due this 
year. And so when the rubber hit the road and the Government 
of Saskatchewan had to start making those repayments to the 
federal government for that money, the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan at that point had no choice — they had to start 
repaying the loan that they took out last year. And so 
unfortunately, the way they chose to do that was start slashing 
the program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s not . . . it shouldn’t be a debate about who said what 
was said or anything of that nature. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that 
that agreement is likely on paper somewhere, probably in the 
Minister of Agriculture’s office. And I dare say that there’s a 
copy likely in Ottawa somewhere. And we’re trying to get our 
hands on that too. 
 
And the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Finance likely has 
a copy of that agreement as well. And if I’m wrong, Mr. 
Speaker, if I’m wrong about that, I challenge the government 
opposite to be straight with the farmers and the people of 
Saskatchewan and come clean and say that that isn’t how the 
agreement worked. Because if they do, Mr. Speaker, I suspect 
the Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa will be saying that the 
Minister of Agriculture’s pants are fully aflame here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I suspect as well that the people of Saskatchewan 
will know exactly what that means when I make reference to 
that. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is this government last year decided to 
mortgage the future of Saskatchewan right at a time when we 
were starting on this cycle of drought, unfortunately, and 
continues into the cycle of drought this year. 
 
So we’ve got farmers all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
farmers all across the province right now getting their crop 
insurance information. They’re planning their seeding 
operations. We’re a few short weeks away from it. It’ll be 
starting up in the Southwest, seeding operations will be starting 
up in the Southwest of this province. Traditionally, they get 
going around the 10th to the 15th of April. It might be a little 
later this year because it’s a little cold, but around that time 
frame. So we’re basically two to three, four weeks away from 
seeding operations beginning here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Farmers are making their decisions, they were waiting their 
crop insurance information — waiting and waiting and waiting 
for their crop insurance information. Because it’s not just like 
you can ramp up seeding operations in a few hours. You have to 
think about what you’re going to seed. You have to think about 
getting some seed in place, first of all. You have to start 
thinking about treatment, seed treatments, and all of those kinds 
of things; you have to start thinking about fertilizer and 
pesticides and herbicides and a whole range of things that you 
have to have in mind. One of the other things you have to have 
in mind is how you’re going to finance all of these things. 
 
(12:30) 
 
The biggest megaproject in Saskatchewan’s history is on an 
annual basis is going to take place here in the next few days, 
billions of dollars of resources put into mother earth every year 
with the hope that they’re going to get a return for that. That all 

takes some time to ramp up. I don’t know whether, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite understand that. 
 
But in farms all across this province, Mr. Speaker, farmers are 
making those kinds of decisions. So they’re a few weeks away 
from making those decisions. I would dare say many of them 
haven’t even got their crop insurance information but they are 
anxiously awaiting that information. 
 
And then they have to rush out and start making plans for their 
seeding operation. Decide whether they’re going to buy seed or 
— which is always a good idea, Mr. Speaker, to consider as an 
option, but that was facetiously said, Mr. Speaker — but they’re 
making plans in terms of that right now. So they’ll be looking at 
whether they want to buy seed, Mr. Speaker, or they’ll be 
looking at whether they want to clean their own seed, as many, 
many farmers do in Saskatchewan. That’s always a good idea as 
well. Mr. Speaker, they’ll be making those decisions right now. 
 
They’ll be looking at financing options and how they’re going 
to manage that. And the banks are anxiously awaiting the 
decisions about crop insurance as well because quite often, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, quite often in Saskatchewan operating 
lines of credit are tied to crop insurance contracts that farmers 
have. It goes hand in hand, Mr. Speaker. You go into the bank 
and you say to them, I want to borrow a certain amount of 
money to put my crop in. And one of the security requirements 
that the bank asks for — there’s not all that many options that 
you have — they’ll look at grain inventory as a security feature, 
they’ll look at land as a security feature, and they’ll look at a 
crop insurance contract as security for that operating line of 
credit. 
 
So in the next few weeks farmers have to not only prepare for 
seeding operations, they’re going to go in and negotiate with 
their banks for financing. They’re going to look at how they’re 
going to manage their operations in terms of . . . logistically 
manage their operations and this all has to be done within a few 
days, Mr. Speaker, because that’s all the government opposite 
has allowed them. 
 
And now on top of that, Mr. Speaker, on top of that, as we have 
found out in the last little while, they’ve got a big fat surprise in 
the mail in the last few days. And that’s about a 5 to a $7,000 
bill courtesy of the NDP opposite, Mr. Speaker, to finance as 
well this year. 
 
So they’re sitting there thinking to themselves: I’ve got a 
drought, I haven’t got any seed ready yet, I haven’t got credit 
arrangements ready yet, I haven’t got fertilizer and pesticides 
and herbicides in place yet because I haven’t the money to 
afford that yet. I haven’t got any of those things in place yet and 
then they get the big bill from the NDP opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And farmers all across this province are looking at it right now 
if they’ve got their crop insurance information. It’s really easy 
to determine what your costs are, Mr. Speaker. I have the crop 
insurance information for a farm in the west part of our 
province. It gives you the coverage options that are available to 
you; it gives you the premiums. So it’s really quite simple. 
 
If you’re thinking about seeding 500 acres of wheat here in 
Saskatchewan, you go down the table. There’s what it’s going 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

 

to cost you for wheat in Saskatchewan now. You make the 
simple calculation of 500 acres times the premium costs. Here’s 
what it costs me this year. Here’s what it cost me last year. And 
the . . . and unfortunate circumstance that the NDP have handed 
them in the last few days, it’s going to cost them 5 to $7,000 on 
an average farm here in Saskatchewan, than it cost last year. 
 
We’ve got net farm income figures plummeting in 
Saskatchewan right now — numbers just sliding off the table — 
and these people just took from the farmers of Saskatchewan 
another 5 to $7,000 out of their bottom line. Thank you, thank 
you very much for your enhanced crop insurance program. 
That’s what the farmers of Saskatchewan are saying. With help 
like that we need, we need some severe changes in the 
operations of this government opposite. 
 
That’s . . . I can . . . can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, a 
comparable thing happening anywhere else in Saskatchewan? 
Could you think for a moment what the people of this province 
would be saying if all of a sudden the Government of 
Saskatchewan decided, we’re going to jump the insurance rates 
on your car by 5 to thousand . . . by 5 to $7,000? 
 
If we decided that we’re going to increase insurance premiums 
on houses by 5 to $7,000; if we were going to increase . . . if 
we’re going to increase property taxes on an urban, an urban 
householder here in Regina or in Saskatoon, in the member 
opposite’s constituency by 5 to $7,000 — what do you think 
they would be saying, Mr. Speaker? They would be saying the 
same thing that the farmers of this province are saying right 
now. What possibly, what possibly prompts the government 
opposite to hoist those kinds of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of things that 
unfortunately this government has hoisted onto the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the farmers of this province, 
the farmers of this province. It would be interesting to know 
what the cabinet . . . it would be interesting to know what the 
cabinet discussion was when they decided to make these 
changes. It would be interesting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. I ask the members to 
come to order. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, and we have to wonder on top of 
that . . . last year this government brought in their Rural 
Revitalization program. And that was going to be the program 
that, I think the advertising said something like: we’re going to 
take a look at government policies through a rural lens, Mr. 
Speaker; we’re going to have a department that every piece of 
legislation, every change and anything that the Government of 
Saskatchewan does, we’re going to look at it through a rural 
lens; we’re going to take a really good look at it and see what 
kind of an impact, what kind of an impact it has on the people 
of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well I wonder if that department is working at that right now, 
Mr. Speaker, or whether they had any kind of impact into the 
decisions prior to the decisions being made. 
 
A couple of days ago in the newspaper we had the deputy 

minister of the Rural Revitalization program saying that the 
program was working really well. I suppose if you’re employed 
there it’s working really well. I can’t see any other part of it 
that’s working really well for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s almost like they put a magnifying glass on it and said, 
here’s where we can burn a few people, Mr. Speaker, with that 
rural lens, rather than help them with that rural lens, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the people of this province are beginning, I think, to 
understand that this NDP government opposite, Mr. Speaker, is 
playing just a little bit disingenuous with people when they say 
they are trying to help them, Mr. Speaker — when they’re 
saying that they want to help the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker — because that, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, is the 
type of thing that unfortunately we are faced with in 
Saskatchewan right now. 
 
A province, Mr. Speaker, that has some challenges. There’s no 
doubts about it — no doubt about it. We have challenges in this 
province. We have a loss of population in Saskatchewan. We 
have a province that’s losing population, hasn’t gained in 
population in 50 or 60 or 70 years, and the government opposite 
said, it’s not our fault. 
 
We have a province in Saskatchewan that just simply is not 
growing in terms of our economy. We’ve lost . . . in terms of 
business taxes here in Saskatchewan, we’ve seen it absolutely 
knifed in half in terms of revenue for the Government of 
Saskatchewan — an economy that isn’t growing. 
 
We have a government opposite, Mr. Speaker, that seems to 
think that there is nothing we can do about those things. 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there are some things that 
can be done about it. The official opposition and the Leader of 
the Official Opposition has a plan to make changes here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a plan that will grow the province of Saskatchewan by 
100,000 people. We have a plan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — . . . we have a plan to keep our young people 
here. We have a plan to grow our economy in Saskatchewan; 
we have a plan for investment and opportunity here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a plan that will create hope and dreams for the people 
of our province, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan that will rebuild 
our highways in Saskatchewan, that will put in place an 
agriculture safety net for the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have a plan that will deal with the health care crisis that we 
have ongoing in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan, we 
have a plan that’ll deal with education in Saskatchewan, that 
will provide hopes and dreams for our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2002 

 

Mr. Boyd: — We have a plan that’ll stop, we have a plan that’ll 
stop the looney-tunes investment of the government opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. We have a plan that we’ll put before the people of 
Saskatchewan that’ll say to them, we want opportunity; we 
want to have dreams realized here in our province; we want to 
have our young people stay in this province. 
 
We want to say to the young people that are watching today all 
across this province, that we want you to stay in Saskatchewan; 
we don’t want to have to go and visit you in Alberta; we don’t 
want to have to go and visit you in British Columbia or 
anywhere else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We have a plan that when we go to Alberta and 
say to the people in Alberta, we want to repatriate you back to 
Saskatchewan, we want to provide an opportunity for you to 
take the . . . we want to take your wealth and your experience 
and your education and bring you back to our province to invest 
here in Saskatchewan. That’s what we are saying to the people 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We have a government opposite, we have a 
government opposite that simply says, we have to wallow in 
doom and gloom. We have to simply . . . we cannot have 
investment opportunity here in Saskatchewan without Crown 
corporations doing it for us. 
 
We have a government opposite that demonstrated yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, that they have no plan, never have had a plan, and 
any plans that they have for Saskatchewan are destructive to the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their way of mollifying Saskatchewan last 
summer was they were going to drive around the province in a 
bus, they were going to drive around the province in the bus, 
make this whistle stop tour of Saskatchewan and somehow or 
another that was going to convince the people of Saskatchewan 
that you were going to do the right things. 
 
You were going to . . . the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
went around this province and said to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, you can expect to have an enhanced crop 
insurance program — and we got a, we’ve got a slash program; 
you can expect to have highways that are good — and we’ve 
got highways all over this province that are in deplorable 
conditions; you can expect to have more money available for 
education — instead of that they cut education programs; we’re 
going to have shorter waiting lists for people in health care — 
and yet we have longer and expanding waiting lists here in 
Saskatchewan; they were going to say that we’re going to have 
better water conditions, better water for the people of 
Saskatchewan — and they slashed the budget for the testing 
program for water here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s little wonder that here in Saskatchewan the 
people of this province have lost confidence in this government 
opposite, have lost confidence in the Premier — the Premier 
that has no mandate to do the changes that he’s doing here in 
Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there’s anything that the people of this 
province understand it’s when they see a tired government 
opposite and the need for a change, Mr. Speaker. And if there’s 
anything that we are hearing more and more all over 
Saskatchewan, they are saying to us, we need a change here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there are many members that over 
the course of the next few days will be making comments about 
the budget. We’ll be making comments about our budget here 
in Saskatchewan, we’ll be making on a critic-specific basis. We 
have many concerns about this government’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker — many, many thoughts and criticisms about it. 
 
We have some criticisms but we also have some things that we 
will want to talk about further with respect to our plan for the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the 
Official Opposition will be making comments, and all of the 
members opposite, the members on this side of the House, will 
be making comments about their critic responsibilities. 
 
But in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this 
province have universally turned a thumbs-down on this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. I think they’ve looked at this; they don’t like what 
they see — whether they are a farmer in Leader, Saskatchewan, 
or a business person in Melfort, or a homeowner in Regina, or a 
union worker here in the city of Regina or anywhere else in this 
province. I think the people of this province have universally 
given this budget two thumbs down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s incumbent upon this government, if they have 
any degree of moral authority left, if they have any moral 
ground left, Mr. Speaker, they should do the right thing. They 
should do the right thing for the people of Saskatchewan and 
offer the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity once and for 
all to decide whether they want the Premier and the members 
opposite still in charge of this province. They should do the 
honourable thing, Mr. Speaker;, they should call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are many members 
that want to enter the debate over the next number of days, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move at this time we adjourn debate on this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, along with wishing all hon. 
members of the House a very peaceful weekend and hopefully 
in celebration as they see appropriate with families and friends, 
it is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to move adjournment of the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — Before we ask for adjournment, I would 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



March 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Leave to speak. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I thank my colleagues for leave. I too, on 
behalf of the official opposition and all members in the House, 
would like to wish everyone a very happy Easter, a good 
holiday weekend as we have time with family, those close to us, 
and our constituencies. I just wish you all the best of this 
blessed holiday season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:47. 


	Fiscal Stabilization Fund
	Fiscal Stabilization Fund

