















































Hansard: December 12, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2933 
 December 12, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the negative impact that the ratification of the 
Kyoto Protocol will have on the people of Saskatchewan and 
the economy of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitions are signed by citizens of Carrot River, Aylsham, 
Arborfield, Weekes, Carragana, Porcupine Plain, and many 
other communities in the Northeast. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise again today 
with a petition from people who are concerned about the Kyoto 
accord. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary action to 
protect our province’s economy and to work to halt the 
federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Naicam and 
Spalding. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have five more pages of petitions concerning the Kyoto accord. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Although it may seem too late, Mr. Speaker, to turn this in, I do 
want to offer full representation to the citizens from Eastend, 
Morse, Golden Prairie, Maple Creek, Love, Oxbow, several 
other jurisdictions throughout the province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

have a petition here signed by citizens that are very concerned 
with the effects of the Kyoto accord will have on them. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by people from my constituency, namely 
Estevan and Macoun. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure again to 
rise on behalf of citizens from southwest Saskatchewan 
concerned about the ratification of Kyoto. And the prayer of 
their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with petitions from concerned citizens in my 
constituency with the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll turn in the two of these, and they are 
signed by citizens of Mankota, Kincaid, and McCord. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with crop insurance. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reassess 
the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers in 2002; 
and further, that the government review the definition of 



2934 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

viable farming practices as outlined in present Sask Crop 
Insurance policy. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Hawarden and Hanley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the Kyoto 
accord. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the Kyoto accord. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 

And the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good citizens 
from Davidson and Aylesbury. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition that deals with changes to regional health authority 
boundaries. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
Regional Health Authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 
 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Strasbourg and Bulyea. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 

A petition concerning the appropriation of 25 per cent of 
profits from lotteries for health care needs; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 11, 169, and 437. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would 
like to make two introductions to the Assembly this afternoon. 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is first Mr. Ken Rauch, 
who is the provincial secretary here for our political party. 
 
But I also want to say that Mr. Rauch and I have had a 
long-time friendship over the years that I used to work in the 
private sector . . . or in the public sector, Mr. Rauch used to be 
an auditor for one of the branches in government. And I want to 
say to you that he made sure that not only was the agency of 
which I was responsible for, well managed financially, but the 
affairs of many of the departments within government of which 
he had responsibility. 
 
And today Mr. Rauch is doing an outstanding job as the 
provincial secretary for our party. And I want to ask all the 
members of the Assembly to welcome Mr. Rauch here and I 
know that he’ll enjoy the workings of the Assembly over the 
next little bit. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon too I 
want to take this occasion to welcome Mr. Jack Layton to the 
Assembly. He’s in your gallery. Mr. Layton, as you know, is 
one of the leadership candidates in the federal race, the federal 
NDP (New Democratic Party) race. 
 
You will know that Mr. Layton is a city councillor in Toronto; 
that he’s the past president of the Canadian Federation of 
Municipalities. We would describe Mr. Layton as a man with a 
vision to build a united Canada on the principles of 
co-operation and inclusion — someone who understands what 
governing is all about: about making decisions, about working 
with people, and managing the public affairs of communities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today Jack is in Saskatchewan to participate in a leadership 
debate in Saskatoon. And earlier this morning he received the 
endorsements of nine government MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), of which I’m proud to be a part of. 
 
And I know that over the next few minutes, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Layton will have the privilege of enjoying the debate of the 
House. And I know that when he leaves the House here today, 
he will say that questions that are answered by New Democratic 
governments are always of a higher calibre than anywhere else 
in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I’m 
privileged to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of this House, 51 students from Valley Christian Academy at 
Osler. I believe they represent probably some half-dozen towns 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2935 

 

in the area as well as students from Saskatoon, I believe. 
 
And they’re accompanied by Mrs. Florianne Nickel and Mr. 
Trace Block. And they’re going to be watching question period, 
and I’m sure with a whole lot of interest. And I’ll have the 
privilege of meeting with them later on and answering some of 
the other questions that they may have. 
 
So would you join me in welcoming them to our legislature this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, and to you and through 
you to the members of the Assembly I’d like to introduce, 
seated in the west gallery, my brother-in-law, Dale Degenstein. 
 
Dale is originally from Punnichy. He’s a journeyman electrician 
and has been in the building recently doing some cabling for all 
of us to utilize at some point in the future. He is also a very 
accomplished country and western musician. 
 
And I would ask all members to welcome my brother-in-law to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the legislature I would like 
to introduce Amanda Hoyt. She is seated in your gallery. 
 
Amanda is a grade 6 student at the W.F. Ready School and her 
home constituency is Wascana Plains. And this is the first time 
Amanda has attended the legislative proceedings. And she’s 
also accompanied by her dad, Vern Hoyt. 
 
So I ask all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two friends I 
want to introduce to you. First of all . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I would remind, I would ask to remind all hon. 
members this is the season of charity. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a man known to many of our 
members, Michael Androsoff, who is an EMS (emergency 
medical services) consultant. I’d ask him to please stand and be 
welcomed by members of the legislature. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, seated beside him . . . In case why hon. 
members are wondering why the Premier is looking abnormally 
pale today, I understand that’s not because of SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company). It’s 
because of Deneen Gudjonson, who’s a business person and 
community activist. She is especially active in the 
Saskatchewan Native theatre, which is attempting to renovate 
and reopen the old Roxy Theatre in Saskatoon to be a 
performing art centre for Native theatre. And she is also 
incidentally the next MLA for Saskatoon Riversdale. I would 
ask all members to welcome her. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We have three distinguished guests in the west gallery. They’re 
here on a number of business issues and they certainly want to 
also be introduced and recognized as trappers from northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the first one I want to recognize is the president of the 
Northern Trappers Association, Ivan Morin. Ivan is a teacher, 
he’s a firefighter, and above all else he really is involved with 
trapping. 
 
Next to Ivan we have Norman Wolverine, who’s also trapped 
many years when he was younger, but is now working very 
hard and has a very strong resource management background. 
And he also, Mr. Speaker, says that the fairest hockey referees 
are from Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
And next we have Paul Sylvester, who was the former chief of 
Birch Narrows, I believe, and he’s also a very eloquent speaker 
and also a trapper. And they met with me this morning to talk 
about the northern trapping issues. 
 
And I’d like the Assembly to welcome these very special guests 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly, someone who is no stranger to the floor of this 
Assembly but it’s one of those people that as members we know 
are here but rarely see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery sits Rachel Birns, a former page of 
this Assembly. And I’d ask all members to welcome Rachel to 
the Assembly. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the member 
from Athabasca in regards to saying welcome to the guests 
from northern Saskatchewan. I would say tansi and edlanetey. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, that as I looked at the three speakers, 
I’ve been at the trappers’ conventions for 16 years, and for 
many years each of these people have made a tremendous 
contribution in regards to policy development in the North, in 
regards to the fight in regards to the trapping issues when we 
dealt with the international situation. 
 
And Ivan Morin’s late father, Louis Morin, was also a 
tremendous leader in that regard and I’d like to recognize that 
as well. I know that Ivan follows in his dad’s footsteps in the 
sense that he can speak both Cree and Dene, which is quite 
unique. And also, as a teacher, he’s giving prime examples. 
 
And of course, the two other people there as well have been 
tremendous leaders in many fronts. So I guess, as the member 
for Cumberland, I’d like to ask all members again to give them 



2936 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from Estevan in welcoming young Amanda and her 
father to the Assembly today. 
 
As is mentioned, she’s attending W.F. Ready School. I’ve been 
there for assemblies and know the team spirit and the artwork 
and the warm hospitality of W.F. Ready. And so I welcome 
Amanda and her father this afternoon to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tenth Anniversary of the Nipawin 
Oasis Community Centre 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on November 28, I had the opportunity to attend the 10th 
anniversary of the Nipawin Oasis Community Centre. 
 
The centre was formed by Lyle Adderly, a mental health nurse, 
and MaryLou Hamilton, who was working on her Bachelor of 
Social Work degree at the time. 
 
The goal of the centre was to assist people with mental illness. 
Over the years, the function of the centre has changed 
dramatically. What was once a centre targeted to people with 
mental illness has now also become an avenue to assist 
low-income and at-risk families by offering a collective kitchen. 
 
The Nipawin Oasis Centre is run strictly by volunteers. These 
people devote many hours to making sure the centre runs 
successfully. Mr. Speaker, without people in our community 
such as the volunteers at the Nipawin Oasis Centre, many of the 
programs and services which are delivered throughout 
Saskatchewan would not be possible. These people spend a 
great deal of personal time to help enrich the lives of others and 
to those people we owe a great deal of gratitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a youth kitchen program was created last year in 
order to assist these youths by providing them with a nutritious 
meal. It involved youths ages 10 to 13 coming from school, 
making their supper, and cleaning up afterwards. This program 
was met with success, Mr. Speaker, so much success that this 
year there are three youth kitchens in use. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in congratulating all of 
the volunteers at the Nipawin Oasis Centre on their 10th 
anniversary and on all their hard work and dedication in 
achieving this milestone. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Synchrotron 
 
Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you search for the 
word synchrotron on the Internet, you’ll find 292,000 entries and 
almost 3,300 of those entries are about the synchrotron being 
constructed in Saskatoon at the University of Saskatchewan. 

Here’s one of those entries that I think members will find 
extremely interesting. In the Only in Saskatchewan contest, 
Karissa of Saskatoon, age 15, writes the following: 
 

Saskatchewan is a great place to accomplish my goals. It has 
a growing economy, which comes from things like the 
Synchrotron, and all the events that are held here. 

 
At 15, Karissa has a very good grasp of the opportunities open to 
her. Her future is wide open and she knows why. Like you and 
me, Mr. Speaker, she may not yet understand all the intricacies of 
the synchrotron but she does know it is one of the major keys to 
her success, right here at home in Saskatchewan. 
 
The synchrotron will begin its operations in January 2004, just one 
short year from now. That means when Karissa starts university a 
couple of years after that, the synchrotron, a highly developed 
university research community, and all the facilities of Innovation 
Place will be available for her. 
 
Young people know what we’ve got going for us here. They’re 
dreaming big, planning well, and willing to work hard to reap the 
benefits of innovations like the synchrotron. They know that in 
Saskatchewan the future is wide open. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Smart Ask! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
congratulate four young men from rural Saskatchewan who have 
once again brought our province to the national spotlight. 
 
Four high school students from Avonlea High School saw the 
program Smart Ask! on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) Television. These four took it upon themselves to 
find out how to enter and did enter. The boys developed a video 
and won entry into the program — all of this done without 
informing their parents or their school. The school received a 
letter congratulating them on their winning team, a team they 
had no idea had even entered. 
 
At that point Mr. Larry Bogdan, senior science teacher, took the 
boys under his wing and went into Regina to CBC Radio with 
his new Smart Ask! team. The game show was done in a typical 
trivia show format with buzzers and quick questions on various 
topics. They won against Lumsden High School and then it was 
on to the national finals. 
 
On November 23 the team was flown to Toronto compliments 
of CBC to compete in the national finals on CBC Television. 
The team won the first round against a Montreal team, had a 
day to rest and see the sights, and then round two. They gave it 
all they had but lost to Swan Valley, Manitoba in an exciting, 
down-to-the-second, mind-riveting finish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of this legislature on 
January 8 to tune in to CBC Television to watch four young 
Saskatchewan men from Thunder Creek. These, Mr. Speaker, 
are the kind of young people that will grow our future. 
Congratulations to Curtis Ridgway, Blake Holland, Ben Miller, 
and Josh Knowles of Avonlea High School. 
 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2937 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is more good news today. This time it is the success of 
Saskatchewan’s labour-sponsored venture capital funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with tax time soon approaching, Saskatchewan 
investors have the opportunity to put money into RRSPs 
(Registered Retirement Savings Plan), get a lucrative provincial 
and federal tax credit, and at the same time have the opportunity 
to invest in local projects in Saskatchewan through venture 
capital funds. 
 
Last year 10,000 people invested over $22 million in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. These funds made more than $14 
million worth of investments in rural and urban based 
Saskatchewan companies and created 285 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the next few months you will be hearing more 
about the Invest in Saskatchewan campaign as we partner with 
two of the provincial pool funds, Golden Opportunities Fund 
Inc., and Crown Ventures Fund Inc., in an advertising campaign 
that will encourage Saskatchewan investors to put their money 
to good use at home in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today’s announcement is another sign that the Saskatchewan 
economy is strong and growing, that working together, 
business, labour, and government can make a difference. Our 
future is wide open, Mr. Speaker, providing opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people through investment, tax savings, growth, 
and jobs. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Freedom Cup 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There will be no losers, only winners in the International 
Freedom Cup when the combined Consul-Eastend Rockets 
hockey team and the Kazakhstan Peewee Selects take to the ice 
in a series opener tomorrow evening. The Consul-Eastend team 
is thrilled to be part of this historic event and will be wearing its 
Team Canada jerseys to take on the world. 
 
This event started back in December 2000 when Hockey 
Ministries International, based at Briercrest Bible College, 
coordinated a trip to Kazakhstan. While there, the Caronport 
High School team played games, sponsored clinics, and 
provided many young people with their very first set of 
complete hockey equipment thanks to donations from many 
Saskatchewan communities such as Consul and even the 
National Hockey League. 
 
The Kazakhstan Hockey Federation was so encouraged by that 
visit that they requested an invitation to bring a team back to 
Canada. 
 
So at this time I would like to extend a warm welcome to the 
Kazakhstan team and congratulate the coordinators, the 

coaches, and constituents from Consul and Eastend for the time 
and effort they’ve put into the preparation and the realization of 
this event. This is yet another example, Mr. Speaker, of the 
outstanding spirit of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Education Facts 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. In Saskatchewan the future is 
wide open for those who dream big, plan well, and work hard. 
 
Our biggest dreamers are our schoolchildren and youth. Helping 
each and every one of them reach their dreams are people who 
work in our education system. Here, Mr. Speaker, are some 
facts that many may or may not know about how our schools 
are leading our students into the future. 
 
For instance: that in the most recent international study of 
student achievement, of 32 industrialized nations and all 
provinces, Saskatchewan scored number one in educational 
equity; that the Department of Saskatchewan Learning’s on-line 
Evergreen Curriculum receives more than 1 million hits per 
month and is visited by students from 95 countries; that in the 
past year and a half we’ve almost doubled the number of 
pre-kindergarten classes in Saskatchewan schools; that 
Saskatchewan has the lowest high school dropout rate in 
Canada; and that secondary students can now take 35 different 
courses on-line, providing equitable opportunities for students 
in our province no matter where they live. 
 
And there’s more. In 2003 every publicly funded school in the 
province will have access to high-speed Internet through 
CommunityNet. And our core curriculum includes Aboriginal 
content and perspectives provide all students with an awareness 
of our common history and heritage. All of these facts just for 
openers. 
 
That’s preparing for the future and I think those who work in 
education deserve our sincerest gratitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Julia Eros Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today in this Assembly to bring forth the name of a 
constituent who has been around and has seen it all. On 
November 22, Ms. Julia Eros celebrated her 100th birthday. 
Can you imagine the changes in her life she has seen over this 
period of time. 
 
Ms. Julia Eros was born in 1902 and has been a very, very 
hardworking pioneer of this great country. Ms. Julia Eros was 
excited when her daughter and four sons attended the birthday 
celebration at the Legion Hall in Spiritwood. 
 
There were many letters of acknowledgement and 
congratulations to her that day, a special letter from as far away 
as Her Majesty The Queen. Others came from close to home 
such as Jean Chrétien, the Prime Minister; the Lieutenant 
Governor; the Governor General; the Premier of Saskatchewan; 
the Leader of the Opposition; as well as other MLAs and 



2938 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

dignitaries. It was a great day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to wish the wisdom that comes from reflecting on 
the past, the strength that comes from faith, the joy and promise 
that comes from greeting each new day, and the love that comes 
from a life well lived — we admire the woman that you are. 
 
So I would ask all members to stand with me and thank this 
lady for all the work she’s done in her community and wish her 
a happy 100th birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority if 
the government had taken steps to ensure SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) had stopped improperly spending 
taxpayers’ dollars. I asked if SIGA is operating within the law 
and according to signed agreements, and here is what the 
minister said, Mr. Speaker — one single response, one word — 
“absolutely.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, less than 24 hours later, the Provincial 
Auditor had a much different answer. His answer was in two 
words, absolutely not. This morning the Provincial Auditor 
reported that the NDP government continues to allow SIGA to 
spend hundreds of thousands of dollars without legal authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister provide information to the 
legislature yesterday that clearly is not true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the 
Provincial Auditor, whom we welcomed as the auditor of 
record in 2000 to become involved with the SIGA enterprise, he 
has reported that we have made significant progress. As a 
matter of fact there were significant benchmarks that were set 
and met in July of 2000. That’s why we continued with our 
negotiations for a long-term agreement. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a plan in place to meet a sustainable progress in other 
benchmarks. These were the important ones that we did. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And by the way, I don’t know if the members overlooked the 
fact that SIGA has significantly reduced its expenses since that 
time, since the auditor’s Fall 2000 Report, and has doubled — 
has doubled, Mr. Speaker — its net income in the past two 
years. A $9 million decrease in expenses is not an insignificant 
amount; that is progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The auditor clearly indicated this morning that 
the progress at SIGA has significantly slowed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority) and SIGA had been following the 

auditor’s directions. He said that SIGA had stopped improperly 
spending taxpayers’ dollars. He said that SIGA is operating 
within the law and according to signed agreements. But today 
the Provincial Auditor reported that there are still serious 
problems at SLGA and at SIGA. 
 
He said there’s improper use of public money, that there are 
insufficient accounting policies, that there’s inadequate 
segregation of duties of employees. How marketing and 
promotion and sponsorship dollars are spent is a problem, that 
there is a lack of monitoring of table games, and that there are 
still the dollars outstanding that Dutch Lerat owes to the people 
of this province. 
 
The auditor further goes on to say that SIGA’s profits impact a 
great number of people in this province and by not adequately 
addressing how they are accounted for, that that puts many 
people at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how does he justify his lack of 
action to safeguard public dollars in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, when the . . . in previous 
reports, the same Provincial Auditor, whom I welcome, who is 
the gentleman and his office that allows our operations to be 
transparent and to maintain its integrity . . . And we’re working 
with that office to ensure that a major industry that the Leader 
of the Opposition so applauds — and I will quote some of the 
applauds from the Leader of the Opposition later on, Mr. 
Speaker — but he says, it is great for this province. 
 
Now we’ve been working with the Provincial Auditor on an 
ongoing basis. Rome was not built in a day. Consider the 
significant progress that has been made — $9 million less in 
expenditures; doubling the profits since we’ve had a new CEO 
(chief executive officer), new chief financial officer, and new 
policies in place. We continue to work on them. 
 
And I agree with the Provincial Auditor. Have we made enough 
progress? No, we’ve got a lot more work to do but we are 
moving in the right direction. And I believe, I believe . . . I have 
a great deal of confidence in my staff at SLGA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, we clearly are getting another 
answer from the minister today than we received yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, SIGA transferred thousands of 
dollars to organizations that they had no authority to transfer 
money to. They gave $400,000 to the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and 150,000 to the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing Authority. 
 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming was aware of these 
expenditures and did nothing about it. In fact, Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming approved the payments even though the 
Casino Operating Agreement makes such payment illegal. In 
fact, neither Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming or SIGA have 
the authority to give casino profits to either the FSIN or to the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Licensing Authority. 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2939 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, did the minister allow his department to 
approve hundreds of thousands of dollars in expenditures by 
SIGA when SIGA did not have the legal authority to make 
those payments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure if the 
member opposite is indicating that there is some, some 
intentional fraud carried on here. I don’t think that was in the 
report anywhere. 
 
The $400,000 that was paid to FSIN was to assist them in 
ensuring that they had a fair opportunity to enter into the 
negotiations for the new agreement, Mr. Speaker. It was quite 
appropriate. 
 
The $150,000 to Saskatchewan Indian and gaming licensing is 
to assist them in their training and eventual monitoring and 
regulation of charity gaming on reserves. I don’t see anything 
wrong with that. We’re assisting First Nations people in this 
effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Liquor and 
Gaming stands in this House and decides that he will make the 
rules that surround what can and cannot be done through the 
operating agreement for the casino. He decides how SIGA can 
spend their money. They are clearly not within the bounds of 
how the money can be spent that are the profits from casino, 
profits in this province. 
 
The profits from the casino must flow to the General Revenue 
Fund and then are to be distributed to First Nations trust, to the 
people of Saskatchewan through the General Revenue Fund and 
through community development. He does not have the 
authority to decide to give dollars to the First Nations or to the 
First Nations . . . or to the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Licensing Authority. Will the minister today justify how he can 
make these decisions when they clearly are outside the 
operating agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, the intent of the initial 
agreement in 1995 was to assist SIGA in the development of a 
process whereby they could regulate charitable gaming on 
reserves. The recent agreement that was signed, if the hon. 
member would care to refer to it, verifies and supports that type 
of assistance in order that First Nations may become their own 
regulatory body with gaming issues for charitable purposes on 
the reserve. So I see nothing wrong. 
 
We just reaffirmed what was initially the intent in 1995 and it’s 
. . . the Leader of the Opposition should read that agreement as 
well because there it says the $150,000 should be part of the 
payment to SIGA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well that 
the agreement that was signed in June has different stipulations 

than what was signed prior to June. This audit is to the end of 
March 2002. Those regulations were not in place at the time 
that this report was given and they clearly are outside the legal 
rules that should and could be followed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SIGA profits are to go to the General Revenue 
Fund, to First Nations trust, and to community development 
organizations. They are to be used for health, education, social 
services. They are to be used for First Nations families and they 
are to be used for community development. Yet this minister 
has chosen to turn a blind eye to what they are to be used for. 
He has chosen to disregard his responsibility to ensure that all 
profits do flow to the people of Saskatchewan where they are 
supposed to. 
 
Will the minister stand in this House and tell the legislature 
what specific steps he will take today to recover the taxpayers’ 
dollars that have been misspent by SIGA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, out of the $1.4 million 
roughly that we were to collect as a result of some difficulties 
that were encountered previously, we have recovered all but 
$150,000 and that will be paid the end of this month. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are doing the very best we can, working 
within our agreement, working in the best interests of the 
people of this province and First Nations people. And I’m 
hoping, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. leader is not now changing 
his mind about an article in a February . . . 2002, where it says, 
and I quote: 
 

Hermanson praised the FSIN for running a successful 
gaming business and complimented it (complimented it) for 
addressing governance challenges at SIGA. 
 
In his speech Mr. Hermanson said he believes “the 
financial success of SIGA is one of the great and largely 
untold business success stories in Saskatchewan . . . 
 

I hope he still believes that and feels that, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
beginning to think that he doesn’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Fund 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs. For years, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor and the official opposition have been asking the NDP 
government to fully account for all expenditures made by the 
First Nations Fund. But the trustees of the First Nations Fund 
have refused to fully account for the millions of dollars they 
receive from the province. 
 
Last year the First Nations Fund received more than $14 million 
from provincial gaming revenues. Yet the Provincial Auditor 
says that he was unable to determine if all the money was spent 
according to the laws governing the First Nations Fund’s 
activities. The auditor did discover, Mr. Speaker, that at least 
$684,000 was paid to the Painted Hand Development Corp. and 



2940 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

the White Bear First Nation in violation of provincial law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister continuing to allow the First 
Nations Fund to misspend millions of taxpayers’ dollars that are 
supposed to go to assist First Nations families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me say that this 
government appreciates the report of the Provincial Auditor, 
takes seriously his recommendations, and also bears in mind, 
takes account of the places where he says we’ve made progress. 
 
Let me say to the member in response to her question, there is 
no evidence whatsoever — and she should be very careful 
about what she says in this regard — there is no evidence 
whatsoever that any of this money was misspent. And in fact, 
she cannot . . . she cannot say that we don’t have enough 
evidence of how it was spent and conclude, Mr. Speaker, that 
the money was misspent. There is no evidence that it was 
misspent. 
 
We’ve called upon the trustees of the new First Nations trust, 
Mr. Speaker, to give an indication on where that money was 
spent. Let me say that changes have been made since March, as 
the member well knows, changes have been made to take 
account of all the issues raised by the auditor, and the member 
can be assured that money paid out by the First Nations Fund 
will be supervised very carefully from now on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor says the trustees of the First Nations Fund 
still have not established open and transparent detailed 
accounting practices in the distribution of funds. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has uncovered hundreds of thousands of 
dollars in expenditures made by the First Nations Fund without 
legal authority. And the auditor says there is little evidence that 
either the trustees of the First Nations Fund or the province are 
all that concerned about fixing this problem. 
 
So what is the minister doing to address this serious lack of 
accountability in the distribution of millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars by the First Nations Fund? And why is the government 
continuing to pay millions of dollars into the First Nations Fund 
while the trustees of the fund continue to refuse to be fully 
accountable to the taxpayers and to First Nations people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will surely 
know that this government has just signed a 25-year agreement 
with First Nations relating to gaming. The member must also 
surely know that in that agreement there is an agreement on 
both sides that the First Nations trust will be established and 
that there are conditions attached, agreed upon by First Nations 
in the agreement, to ensure that that trust is effectively operated, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And included within those conditions which the First Nations 
leaders accepted is the commitment to obtain from those who 

receive funds from the trust an indication of where those funds 
are expended. 
 
Let me also say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the people in Yorkton 
and the people around White Bear casino will be interested to 
know that the member has indicated that funds have been 
improperly spent in that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Social Services Department 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fall 2002 Report of the Provincial Auditor 
once again comments on the fact that the Department of Social 
Services is not adequately following its rules and procedures to 
ensure that only eligible persons receive social assistance. In 
fact he states that 21 per cent of the files examined did not 
contain enough information to verify the eligibility of the 
applicant and that annual verification of a person’s continued 
eligibility was not adequate. 
 
The auditor says that in 30 per cent of the cases he examined, 
there was a significant possibility payments were made to 
ineligible clients or incorrect payments were made to eligible 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are repeated concerns from previous 
auditor’s reports. 
 
The question to the minister is this: why has the minister not yet 
taken action to ensure the established procedures of his 
department are being followed to ensure the accountability of 
the system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member will be 
aware, I assume — or he should be if he isn’t — that the 
officials of the department have been looking very carefully at 
the recommendations of the auditor for some time and are 
working on improving our systems to keep track of information. 
And advances in the IT (information technology) world will 
assist us in that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me assure the hon. member and all the people of 
Saskatchewan that the taxpayer dollars spent to support the poor 
of our province are being well spent. I draw attention to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, to just an announcement that was made 
just yesterday pointing out that in the province of 
Saskatchewan, comparing November of this year to November 
of last year, that there are in the province of Saskatchewan some 
2,000 fewer families that are requiring assistance in order to 
meet their needs in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that over the last four 
years, introducing building independence and some other 
programs, there are 6,000 fewer families in Saskatchewan 
receiving assistance. And the best news is over 13,000 fewer 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2941 

 

kids growing up on welfare than just four years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor reports that Social Services has an internal 
auditor who reports to the department’s senior management. He 
states, and I quote: 
 

The internal auditor’s report on social assistance payments 
is not reliable. 

 
The Provincial Auditor says the high rate of non-compliance 
within the department’s rules and procedures prevents the 
internal auditor from determining a correct error rate (I say this 
again, error rate) for social assistance payments. He says the 
internal audits need to be done on a more timely manner 
because, without this, and I quote: 
 

. . . the department cannot be sure that its rules and 
procedures are working properly to ensure that the money 
is spent according to the law. 

 
Mr. Speaker, once again these were things the Provincial 
Auditor has pointed out to the department in previous years. 
And I again ask the minister, why has the minister not ensured 
these problems were corrected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks the similar 
question; the answer is similar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that internally work is 
continuing to improve the record collecting that is necessary in 
order to ensure the effective use of taxpayer dollars in support 
of those who are the poorest of our society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I find it significant that the hon. member and 
the members opposite do not like to hear about the progress 
being made to ensure that the future is wide open for those in 
our province who are going to work at increasing numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is no coincidence that in November of this month . . . of this 
year when the job numbers have gone up in this province by 
some 24,000, that the number of people . . . of cases on social 
assistance has gone down by 2,000. The fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Speaker, dollars are used . . . are being used effectively to 
ensure that we’re overcoming the roadblocks to child poverty. 
We’re giving tools to the parents of kids who are poor to get 
themselves attached to the labour market. That’s in their best 
interest . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the reason the 
questions are being raised today is because it’s the most recent 
report from the Provincial Auditor. Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor has raised a number of questions most recently, to 
which he says the ministers have not responded, or their 
departments. 
 
And I raise another area of concern, the area of maintenance 

enforcement. In this report, Mr. Speaker, the auditor points out 
that 20 per cent of the records they examined, which the 
department uses to monitor pursuit of child support, were not 
accurate. 
 
Inaccurate reports, not following rules and procedures, no 
verification of information. Mr. Speaker, the auditor says this 
has been a common criticism of the department by his 
department for the past several years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the department has a responsibility to its clients 
and the taxpayers of this province. How does the minister 
expect maintenance orders to be enforced if the records kept by 
his department aren’t accurate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I find it kind of curious, 
these questions coming from the members opposite. Would the 
hon. member suggest that if we should go back to the times 
when his good friend and former colleague, Grant Schmidt, was 
the minister of Social Services — who by the way has 
announced that he’s intending to take on the hon. member for 
Saltcoats for the Sask Party nomination in the next election — 
that that’s a better place to be? 
 
The fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, significant . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to get the hon. 
members a tad bit excited, just the thought of having Grant 
Schmidt in there leading the charge on social programming. Mr. 
Speaker, you can see the excitement; it’s written all over them. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those are the old days. We’re not going 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve made progress, significant progress for 
those who are low-income in our province and we’re going to 
keep making continuing progress, and we’re not going to go the 
extreme right wing directions that the Leader of the Opposition 
says. If he had his way he would rip $50 million out of the 
department. 
 

First Nations Fund 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, as recently as yesterday the 
minister in charge of Sask Liquor and Gaming assured this 
House that any problems with gambling had been straightened 
out. Now the Provincial Auditor tells us that as far as the First 
Nations Fund is concerned, nothing has changed. He says the 
trustees, quote “continue to make payments not permitted by 
law.” He says none of his recommendations last year have been 
followed. 
 
How can the government contemplate expansion of the 
gambling industry before the prosecutions unit decides whether 
or not there will be criminal charges and before the Provincial 
Auditor’s requests for reform have been complied with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — What was the question again, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 



2942 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

The member would not, I know, as he’s a lawyer, would not 
want me to comment on the situation with regards to 
investigations into whether any charges might be laid with 
regards to the activities of SIGA in the past, Mr. Speaker. But 
let me just . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well to the charges 
that arose . . . the incidents that arose in the past. 
 
Let me just say though this, Mr. Speaker, that it is quite clear 
from the actions of this government both with regards to Sask 
Liquor and Gaming and the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, 
that major changes have been made with regards to 
accountability in this area. And, Mr. Speaker, the agreement 
entered into between the government and First Nations makes it 
clear that First Nations trustees, the trustees of the First Nations 
trust, are undertaking very different . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Supplementary question. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yesterday the minister in charge told us the 
problems had been fixed. Today the Provincial Auditor tells us 
nothing has changed, nothing. 
 
Today I understood the minister to say that if a casino situated 
on land that goes into an urban reserve, if that land is created as 
an urban reserve, the province will no longer exercise any 
jurisdiction over gambling. And I wonder if he would clarify 
that for us. 
 
Is he telling us that where a casino goes on urban reserve, the 
province will cease to even attempt to enforce what they have 
clearly not enforced to date? Or in the alternative, if the 
government will continue to exercise jurisdiction over casinos 
on urban reserves, what steps will he take to make sure that the 
First Nations Fund trustees comply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the record is clear 
here with regards to the provincial jurisdiction over gaming. 
The reason for the 25-year agreement is plainly because that 
exists. The member is quite wrong if he’s suggesting that 
provincial jurisdiction would not continue to apply on First 
Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member then said what changes have taken 
place. Well, Mr. Speaker, the trustees have agreed in the 
25-year agreement to undertake greater accountability 
procedures, including, Mr. Speaker, providing evidence of . . . 
providing the reports they receive from the recipients of the 
trust on the basis . . . on what those monies were spent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And if those trustees do not comply with those requirements 
laid down in the trust, then, Mr. Speaker, we will ensure that 
they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would just like to 
bring to . . . put on the record that I did right after prayers today 
table the 2002 Fall Report from the Provincial Auditor, Volume 
2. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
ask for leave to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under rule 46. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Provincial Finances 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thank you to the members of the Legislative Assembly for the 
opportunity to bring forward a very important issue facing the 
province of Saskatchewan right now. 
 
And that is to understand the financial picture, the complete 
financial picture of the province of Saskatchewan. At the 
conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a 
motion that recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan 
change its position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people have looked at the province’s 
finances outside of this Assembly and they wonder why 
Saskatchewan has taken so long to move forward. Provinces 
across this nation — seven of them to be exact — have moved 
forward, have moved to a position of summary financial 
budgeting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think I want to begin by explaining that to 
many people in the province of Saskatchewan, as to the position 
that is followed by the New Democratic Party and the 
government of the day, and the position taken by many other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan has been known 
that we rely on Crown corporations the most of any province in 
Canada. And as a result the General Revenue Fund, which we 
debate in the Legislative Assembly through a process of a 
budget that is prepared by the Minister of Finance and treasury, 
we debate that budget each and every spring. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that budget contains about 60 per cent of the province’s 
economic activities. The remaining 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker, is 
within the Crown corporations. 
 
So for people to have a clear understanding of where the 
provincial position is for the entire economy, they must look at 
both the General Revenue Fund and the Crown corporations to 
get the full 100 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accompanying the General Revenue Fund and 
Crown corporations are two words, deficit and debt. And it is 
very clear, Mr. Speaker, that over the last couple of years, this 
government has, through its General Revenue Fund, produced 
deficit budgets. And deficit budgets, Mr. Speaker, as described 
by economists throughout the world is simply this: if your 
expenditures exceed your revenue, you have a deficit. So, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP government has maintained a deficit budget 
for the last three years at least, when you take a look at the full 
economic picture. 
 
One of the situations then is that when we talk about deficits 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2943 

 

and the accumulations of deficits, we arrive at the word, debt. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor, along with the 
documents that he has produced, show very clearly that the debt 
of government, that is the accumulations of all those deficits 
over the years of government, is now reaching $8.7 billion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a huge amount of money when we take 
a look at a province of our size; the fact that we are not 
growing. We in fact have either become stagnant or in fact, as 
Statistics Canada has released, we are declining in population. 
That is a huge debt for government only. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Now accompanying government debt as well, Mr. Speaker, we 
have to talk about the Crown debt because every person in 
Saskatchewan, maybe except for the government members 
opposite, know that there is only one taxpayer. The debt of the 
General Revenue Fund, the debt of our agencies, of our Crown 
corporations is the debt of the people of Saskatchewan. So 
we’ve got to look at that entire picture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in the mid-term report just produced a couple of weeks ago 
by the Minister of Finance, the minister has indicated that the 
mid-term . . . mid-year projection for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the debt will now sit at $11.9 billion. So in other 
words, we’ve taken a government debt through the General 
Revenue Fund of about 8.7 billion and we’ve added to that, 
Crown corporation debt of 3.6. So we’re now sitting at $11.9 
billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government members opposite expressed their 
opinions in this House a number of times a couple of years ago 
by stating, and I recall Mr. Romanow standing in his place and 
saying, we are reducing the debt. And the overall debt, in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, was being reduced. There were the sales of 
Cameco shares, there were the sales of the Husky Oil Upgrader, 
and those monies received were applied to debt. 
 
As a result, overall debt had declined to about $11.1 billion. But 
in a short two years, Mr. Speaker, according to the documents 
of the Provincial Auditor and the Finance minister in his 
mid-term . . . mid-year report, we have now reached or are 
going to be reaching 11.9 billion. 
 
So the question, Mr. Speaker, is how can we look at a complete 
and transparent financial picture? And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
summary financial budgeting. Summary financial budgeting is 
that . . . in that we would have the ability in this Legislative 
Assembly, through a model that the Provincial Auditor has put 
forward, we would have the ability to look at all of government. 
We would see the estimates of the General Revenue Fund as we 
see them today and in past years, and then we would see the 
expectations of all of the Crown enterprises as the Provincial 
Auditor refers to those entities. 
 
Those Crown enterprises would not be disclosing their game 
plan regarding, you know, marketing and anything in that 
nature. They would be disclosing their bottom line. But more 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, it would provide measurability and 
clear objectives for the members of the Legislative Assembly. 
We as legislators, the public at large would be able to see what 
the entire picture for the province is. 

And I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to the budget of a year ago. 
The budget that was presented in this House stated that the plan 
of government was that we were going to have in the General 
Revenue Fund a surplus — not very large; it was planned to be 
under $1 million. And that was for the year-end March 31, 
2002. 
 
Since then of course we’ve had the Provincial Auditor do a 
complete review of all Crown corporations, of all of the 
statements of the entire package of government, and now the 
Provincial Auditor has revealed in his fall document entitled 
understanding the province’s finance . . . finances, he’s revealed 
that the actual financial position of the province of 
Saskatchewan at March 31 is $483 million in the negative — in 
a deficit situation. 
 
So we have a General Revenue Fund that people are looking at 
during the debate on the budget in March and April and saying, 
well there’s going to be a surplus, small as it was. And then the 
auditor says, but really overall the entire financial picture of the 
province for that fiscal year ending March 31, 2002, the 
province actually was $483 million in the hole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those kinds of things will continue to happen 
unless we see financial . . . summary financial budgeting in this 
Legislative Assembly. We need to know that there were 
expectations that Crown enterprises from the previous year 
were going to drop by nearly $300 million in net revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at the auditor’s report, and he 
indicates that for that fiscal year there were . . . the dollars 
received — net dollars received — from Crown enterprises was 
$426 million. We also know that of that $426 million, 318 
million came from the SLGA, the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority. So when we take that number off for that 
one Crown enterprise of 318 million, we’re now left with only 
$108 million net profit of all other Crown enterprises. 
 
Now let’s take a look at what the government has put forward 
for this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. In its budget the government 
states that it will rely to balance the budget — as it’s so called, 
but we know it’s not a balanced budget because they’re 
borrowing money to offset their expenditures — they will be 
expecting $300 million from CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) in the way of a transfer. The 
auditor has just pointed out in the year previous that the 
maximum amount that came from Crown enterprises was 108 
million. It may be impossible in fact to achieve this $300 
million transfer unless it’s borrowed money. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the proposed 
budget of the government that is put forward, it is a deficit 
budget. The revenues do not exceed the expenditures. 
 
So the government has devised a very, very innovative way of 
saying, well we’re still going to balance the budget because 
we’re going to use something called the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is simply a line of 
credit. It’s a line of credit established and every time the 
government opposite uses that line of credit, the debt of the 
province goes up. 



2944 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

The Minister of Finance has indicated that, in his mid-term 
report, that the debt . . . the reason . . . some of the reasons for 
the debt increasing to $11.9 billion is that the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund usage has risen from a proposed $225 
million worth of borrowing in the spring to now a $324 million 
borrowing out of that Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
So our debt has risen and very clearly it points out that the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund in Saskatchewan is not really a fund; 
it is a line of credit. And each time it is accessed, the debt of the 
province goes up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of people have commented about the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund and how it works. And I would like to 
enter into the record some comments made immediately after 
the mid-term financial report. And this comment is from the 
Provincial Auditor, Mr. Fred Wendel, and I quote, he says: 
 

The Fiscal Stabilization Fund is not a proper accounting 
practice. It’s not following generally accepted accounting 
practices. It allows you to say that you’re not running a 
deficit. I would say it could well be worse . . . 
 

It could be over $483 million. In other words he’s commenting 
on the position of the year before. 
 
Norm Halldorson, who is the chartered accountant and a Chair 
of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the finance 
section, says this about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund: 
 

This has been an accounting shell game. There’s nothing to 
withdraw. There’s nothing there. 
 

And in a Regina Leader-Post editorial it says: 
 

Little more than 18 months after (opening up) opening the 
spending taps in his first provincial budget, Premier Lorne 
Calvert now hears the gurgling sound of a river of red ink. 
Calvert’s decision to increase spending by a whopping 
$448 (million) in March 2001 after years of restraint under 
Premier Roy Romanow now looks like too much too soon. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, you can see that if we are not looking at the 
complete summary financial documents, government can 
erroneously make huge expenditures without knowing whether 
or not the fiscal position of the province is able to bear that out. 
And we see that example, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that the 
General Revenue Fund surplus for that year was under $1 
million while the overall deficit of the province is, is $483 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other creative things that needs to be 
looked at — and we’ve seen in private practice the whole Enron 
episodes in North America and many other questionable 
accounting practices — one of the things that has been started 
this fiscal year by this government is the removal of 
balance-sheet-on-balance-sheet expenditures. 
 
We’ve seen the creation of something called the Education 
Infrastructure Corporation, where now the building of capital 
assets at the post-secondary level — that is SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
campuses, university campuses, the kindergarten to grade 12 

level — those expenditures now are going to be dealt with 
without having to actually expend the money in the year as 
we’ve always had in this budget, off balance sheet budgeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that points to, very, very clearly, the need to 
ensure that we have the entire summary financial budgeting 
process here in the Legislative Assembly each and every spring 
because this is the only way that that money will be tracked and 
accounted for. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming that we will start to 
have to pay back those portions that have been allocated over 
20-year periods or 30-year periods. We’re going to have to start 
ensuring that that is paid back. There will automatically mean 
that we will have to have a line item in someone’s budget that 
says, we’re now paying back 10 million or 15 million or 
whatever the case may be. So I think, Mr. Speaker, it clearly 
points to the fact that we need to look at summary financial 
budgeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a couple of more comments 
before I move my motion, in regards to previous comments 
made in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to listen to members opposite in Public 
Accounts Committee and to hear their, their opposition I think 
to the Provincial Auditor’s recommended . . . recommendation 
even though the Provincial Auditor has made that 
recommendation for at least, you know, a number of years. And 
in his document in the last two years, and I’m quoting now from 
the 2001 Fall Report, the Provincial Auditor says: 
 

It is time for Saskatchewan to change. The government 
should focus its overall financial planning information on 
the entire government. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I look back at comments made in this 
Legislative Assembly and I want to share some comments from 
Hansard, and these are directly from Hansard. And they say 
this: 
 

. . . that while these separate statements for these separate 
entities aid in understanding of the individual entity, they 
do not aid in providing what he says is an understandable 
overview of the entire activities of government. 

 
This was a comment made by a member in response to the 
Minister of Finance stating that, you know, the entities were 
actually provided. He goes on to say: 
 

When might we expect an implementation of summary 
financial statements? 
 
The B.C. government very clearly publishes . . . (its) . . . 
summary financial statements. The Alberta government 
provides summary statements. 

 
And on and on. 
 
So I guess my question is that if you really want to provide a 
complete picture for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan of the financial situation in Saskatchewan, why 
don’t you provide them with summary financial statements that 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2945 

 

are now being provided in many other provinces? 
 
Mr. Speaker, those comments are from Hansard dated June 21, 
1990 and they are made by the member opposite, the member 
for Regina Victoria, questioning the Finance minister of the 
day. 
 
So very clearly the message delivered by the NDP government 
in 1990 when it was not the government, when it was 
opposition, was we should be moving to summary financial 
budgeting. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to read all of his 
comments but they’re in the line of saying: why are you 
procrastinating; why are you studying; you’ve stated so many 
years that you’re studying this issue when you should be 
moving forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have the opportunity to move forward. They 
have the opportunity to support the resolution that has been put 
forward by the Provincial Auditor that says it’s time for 
Saskatchewan to change. 
 
And with those comments, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, 
seconded by the member for Moosomin: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to follow the 
recommendations of the Provincial Auditor and begin using 
summary financial statements in its budgets in order that all 
financial activity of the government be incorporated to 
provide the people of Saskatchewan with a much more 
accurate, honest, and transparent view of the state of the 
provincial government’s finances when the annual budget 
is presented. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to second the motion brought 
forward by my colleague, the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
When you look at the motion, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly a 
motion that everyone in Saskatchewan should be concerned 
about and should be raising the question with this government 
regarding the finances of the province and how we understand 
the finances of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that has been brought forward by my 
colleague talks about accurate, honest, and transparent financial 
statements so that people in Saskatchewan know exactly what’s 
going on and know exactly what the government is doing and 
how the government is, on many occasions, doing shady 
accounting to cover up its dealings in the financial field and the 
fact that it’s not really being totally truthful with the people of 
this province in how it reflects the finances of the . . . of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier on when the auditor released his audited 
financial statement for the fall of this year, he revealed — and 
I’m quoting right now, Mr. Speaker, from the Leader-Post, 

September 27 of this year — revealed Thursday the province is 
$483 million in the red this year and continued to lambaste the 
government over the way it portrays its financial books to the 
public. In his Fall Report, auditor Fred Wendel said the 
government did not live within its means and is stifling the 
economy . . . the economic growth the province has 
experienced, during the last seven years. 
 
In fact in his report, Mr. Speaker, Wendel renewed his call for 
the government to change the way it presents its financial 
figures to the public. What he tells us, Mr. Speaker, is the 
government focuses its budget on the General Revenue Fund, 
but that excludes nearly 80 . . . 40 per cent, pardon me, 40 per 
cent of the government’s other financial activities. 
 
For example, transactions within Crown corporations such as 
the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, Saskatchewan 
Housing Corp, Information Services Corporation, are made 
outside the General Revenue Fund. That means, Mr. Speaker, 
the auditor’s saying that means the people of Saskatchewan are 
not getting a clear picture of the way the government spends its 
money. 
 
So what does he recommend? He recommends that the 
government come forward with summary financial statements 
reflecting overall the total expenditures of government. What 
he’s continued to say, and I read from this article again, 
Saskatchewan’s financial situation in 2002 is about-face from 
last year. What he’s saying, Mr. Speaker, in 2001 the 
government raised $461 million more than it spent. The dismal 
2002 numbers erase any progress that was made against the 
accumulated deficit which sits at $8.7 billion. 
 
What it’s saying, Mr. Speaker, is this government continues to 
hide the true financial picture of the province of Saskatchewan 
so that it can continue to raise a curtain . . . or draw a curtain in 
front of the eyes of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and, Mr. 
Speaker, misleading the taxpayers in their views of the financial 
affairs of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Provincial Auditor points out that this NDP government 
last year didn’t make money; it actually lost money. It lost $483 
million. And, Mr. Speaker, what he was also saying when he 
released his report is that the deficit could end up being even 
higher this year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative that this government take a 
serious — not look — but consider seriously the 
recommendations of the auditor that we move to summary 
financial statements so we get a more clear picture . . . or a 
clearer picture of the financial state of this province. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, comments made by the 
member from Regina Victoria back in June, June 21 of 1990, 
and it’s very interesting — it’s very interesting. I’m sure that 
this NDP government will find these comments might . . . by 
the member, while he was sitting in opposition, very interesting. 
And so just for their pleasure, I would like to just quote a few 
comments from Hansard of June 21, 1990, and it states . . . it 
says . . . Mr. Van Mulligen states the . . . and he states: 
 

. . . that to fully understand the financial position and 
economic activities (of government) of the Government of 



2946 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

Saskatchewan, a financial statement showing a complete 
picture of what is owned, what is owed, the source of 
revenues and the nature of expenditures, is required. He 
refers to these as summary financial statements. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that very interesting. Ten years from 
— 10 years later the Provincial Auditor is telling us we need 
summary financial statements. 
 
And he goes on to state in his debate at that time, when might 
we expect an implementation of summary financial statements. 

 
He points out that the BC (British Columbia) government 
clearly publishes a summary financial statement, the Alberta 
government provides a summary financial statement. Manitoba 
is changing. In fact, it says many provinces and the province of 
Saskatchewan have moved to summary financial statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Victoria back in 1990 
also went on to say: 
 

I don’t know of any government in Canada that I think 
needs to move with greater speed and urgency in 
publishing summary financial statements than the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
And in that quote, he talked about a $4.4 billion accumulated 
deficit and growing. And what is it today, Mr. Speaker — 8.7 
and growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he also said . . . Then he ended his comments by 
again asking the then minister, the minister of Finance in 1990: 
 

Might we expect summary financial statements next year? 
Might we expect them the year after that? What is your 
timetable? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I find that very interesting because while the 
member from Regina Victoria, while he sat on this side of the 
Assembly as an opposition member, in the spring or the 
summer of 1990, is asking the former Conservative government 
for summary financial statements. 
 
But you know what was interesting? By the time the spring of 
1991 rolled around with an election looming on the horizon, all 
of a sudden those members forgot about summary financial 
statements. Their comment of the day was, we will not allow 
your government to pass its budget. And, Mr. Speaker, you’re 
aware of that. They said they would not allow that government 
of the day to pass the budget in the spring of 1991. And they did 
a good job and they didn’t do that. 
 
Why didn’t they do that, Mr. Speaker? Because they wanted 
then to turn from . . . take those same figures and take that 
budget that was presented in 1991 . . . Because there wasn’t a 
summary financial statement to show the total picture, they 
wanted the ability then to show that budget of $252 million 
deficit — which was a deficit, it was acknowledged at that time 
— but they wanted then to put their own emphasis on the 
budget and in the fall of ’90-91, after they were elected, turn 
that $252 million deficit into almost a billion dollar deficit 
decrying what the former government had been doing. And, Mr. 
Speaker, a deficit is a deficit, whether it’s through the ’80s and 

the Conservative government or the NDP in the ’90s. 
 
But the facts are, Mr. Speaker, if we had summary financial 
statements, it would clarify the issue of ministers of Finance 
taking and willy-nilly moving numbers from one can into the 
next can, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance has been 
doing. And as a result of that, with the lack of summary 
financial statements, the taxpayer of this province really does 
not understand what the fiscal position of the province is. And 
the taxpayers of this province do not understand the dire 
consequences of continuing on down the road we’re going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that if the member from 
Regina Victoria felt it was very important in the spring of 1990 
to suggest it’s time we move to summary financial statements 
and what can we expect that . . . can we expect that move 
immediately? It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that that 
member sitting in his caucus over the past 10 years with the 
different Finance ministers that have sat in the chair, would 
have been raising the same concern and suggesting to the 
Finance ministers of the day, it’s time we moved to summary 
financial statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a business that would be able to 
function in this province if they did not have an overall view of 
the expenditures in their business. Mr. Speaker, if they tried to 
set up one account over here and another account over there so 
they could . . . And in many cases we see that happens. I think 
the . . . I think the Enron group tried that, moving . . . taking 
from Peter to pay Paul and then from Paul back to pay Peter, 
and at the end of the day it caught up with them. 
 
And that’s what’s exactly happening here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we saw in the last provincial budget, we 
saw this government again creating little entities whereby they 
could say, well there’s some funds over here. But yet when you 
question them in estimates, Mr. Speaker, we find that these 
entities, like the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, actually have no real 
cash value. There’s no money there. 
 
And yet the Minister of Finance can stand up in his interim 
report about three weeks ago and say, well we were . . . had 
found ourselves in a bit of a shortfall so we’ve gone to the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund and we’ve withdrawn some money 
from that fund. And, Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear — there’s no 
money there. But they would have withdrawn some money. 
Actually, Mr. Speaker, what they did was they’ve borrowed 
money to transfer to the General Revenue Fund so that their 
deficit would not look as difficult and . . . as it actually was, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the motion brought forward by my 
colleague is an appropriate motion. It’s a motion that really 
raises the question of financing, of bookkeeping, and how we 
portray the finances and the expenditures and the revenues of 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
A summary financial statement or over . . . the overall pictures 
of government expenditures laid out before the public of 
Saskatchewan would give the taxpayers of this province a 
greater confidence because they would have a greater 
knowledge of what the fiscal responsibilities and the fiscal 
expenditures of this province were actually all about. And 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2947 

 

people . . . at one simple glance, Mr. Speaker, the public of 
Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of this province, would know 
beyond a shadow of a doubt exactly what the total fiscal or 
financial picture of the province was all about. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find it . . . it’s been a pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, just to stand and to second the motion that’s been 
brought forward by the member from Canora-Pelly and asking 
this minister when and if he has . . . and this government, this 
Premier, if they have any intention of moving forward and 
presenting summary financial statements so the people of 
Saskatchewan can see up front exactly what the expenditures of 
the province are, and the people of Saskatchewan know beyond 
a shadow of a doubt exactly how their government is handling 
its fiscal responsibilities. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m 
going to start by informing you that I have several comments 
I’d like to make, but at the end of those comments I will be 
moving an amendment to the motion of the members opposite. 
And I think after I explain all the good reasons, they’ll 
understand why. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when people tell me they’re 
considering running for election, I always ask them why. What 
is it you want to get done? Because I think it’s important, Mr. 
Speaker, that people who want to serve in public office have a 
song in their heart. And you know these songs ebb and flow and 
sometimes over time they grow new themes and they change. 
And having been on Treasury Board for several years now, I 
have developed a song in my heart about fiscal responsibility. 
 
Now it may seem an unusual topic for a song, Mr. Speaker, but 
I guess that’s just the way it is. I think any of the Finance 
ministers or people who have served on Treasury Board since 
we were first elected would certainly share some of this song 
because of the continuing need to deal with the result of the 
irresponsible financial management of the government of the 
’80s which certainly had many friends, associates, and 
co-workers in the present opposition. And I have a song in my 
heart, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that they never get a chance to 
do that again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — But I’m going to explain a little more 
about that. You know, there is a big difference in the way that 
we look at fiscal responsibility. And I’m just going to spend a 
little bit of time trying to explain the difference so that people 
can understand it from a point of view of someone who’s had to 
deal with it. 
 
I don’t know if you remember — I know that a lot of things 
have happened since then — but the Devine government of the 
’80s was continually late in tabling budgets. Some years they 
didn’t even bother. They delayed the release of the Public 
Accounts for years. No one knew what was happening within 
the finances of the Crown corporations while they stripped them 
of assets. 

Well not only do we have reduced debt and interest on the debt, 
but everything we do is now out in the open, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve had summary financial statements since 1992. We 
consider the Provincial Auditor as an important part of the 
financial process in government. We worked very closely with 
the previous auditor and we work very closely with the current 
auditor to make constant and steady improvement in financial 
accounting. 
 
(15:00) 
 
We’ve implemented better financial reporting through financial 
statements that include the Crowns, with mid-year and quarterly 
reports and the timely tabling of documents. We’ve 
implemented 80 per cent of the auditor’s recommendations. 
And our auditor says Saskatchewan completes its public 
accounts earlier than most provinces. 
 
For 2001-02 our public accounts were released four months 
after year-end. I contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with 1986-87 where 
they weren’t released for 13 months. And you tell me how you 
manage on that basis. The members for Swift Current and 
Moosomin should remember this, particularly because they 
were there. 
 
In 1990-91 the Provincial Auditor basically refused to sign off 
the books. I’m going to repeat that, Mr. Speaker. In 1990-91, 
just before we took over responsibility, the Provincial Auditor 
refused to sign off the books because they didn’t make any 
sense. And now, Mr. Speaker, he says our financial reporting is 
first rate. 
 
Now I just want to mention some of the things that the auditor 
has commented on. He says over the past eight years we’ve 
spent 2 billion less than the revenue that we’ve raised. He says 
that Saskatchewan’s finances continue to compare favourably 
with most other provinces. In terms of debt, we’ve gone from 
being the worst to one of the best in Canada. And the auditor 
says our revenue from taxes and other revenue was the second 
lowest as a per cent of our GDP (gross domestic product). So 
we take less out of our economy in taxes than any other 
province other than Alberta. So anyone who tells you that you 
pay the highest taxes, Mr. Speaker, is just not telling you the 
truth. 
 
The auditor also says that our federal transfer payments are the 
fourth lowest as a per cent of our revenue. Now this is, I guess, 
a lot of complicated financial stuff, but I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the opposition are very selective about what they 
choose to quote from the auditor and the auditor’s report. 
 
I just want to contrast our approach for a moment with the 
approach of the opposition and the Leader of the Opposition. As 
you know, they have a plan called the Grow Saskatchewan 
plan, although we kind of think it’s more of a slogan. And we 
think it’s a plan to grow deficit and debt. Whenever anybody 
wants to spend money, the Leader of the Opposition says, yes. 
Whenever anybody wants a tax cut, the Leader of the 
Opposition says, yes. 
 
Now we try to say yes as often as we can but we take time to 
stop and think whether the decisions are sustainable, whether 
they’re affordable, and whether they’re responsible. 



2948 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

And I say to the opposition, in the interests of accountability, 
show me your money. I want to see exactly what their 
accountable plan is to deliver on all these yesses that they 
spread so freely around. 
 
And I want you to contrast that again with our approach, Mr. 
Speaker. We have had the 10th credit upgrade that the province 
has had since 1995. 
 
And I want to commend the current Minister of Finance, the 
member from Saskatoon Mount Royal, because I think he has 
very high standards of financial management, accountability, 
and reporting. And it’s been a real pleasure to work with him on 
Treasury Board and all the other people who have come and 
gone to ensure that we make the best choices that we can for the 
people of Saskatchewan, while providing sustainable budgets. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, from time to time, economies take a dip and 
you make choices about how you’re going to handle those 
downturns. And they happen regardless of who the government 
of the day is. But I want to say that we always approach this 
with an intent to preserve the priorities of Saskatchewan people, 
but as well to make sure that our decisions are sustainable. 
 
And I’m going to just emphasize the value that we place on the 
work of the auditor, Mr. Speaker. The auditor had identified 
areas he feels we need to improve and I will just say that we 
will continue to work with him on those. 
 
But he has several conclusions that I think the public would like 
to hear for the record. He states that for the most part, 140 
different agencies: 
 

. . . have adequate financial management practices to 
safeguard public resources. 

 
He states: 
 

. . . the Government continues to improve its overall 
practices for managing public resources and public 
accountability. 
 

And he states that the Department of Finance: 
 

. . . does a good job (of) managing its responsibilities for 
safeguarding and controlling its assets and ensuring 
compliance with the law. 

 
Those are his overall findings, and he’s looked at about 148 
agencies that manage roughly $6 billion and he’s saying that in 
very large part they are very well run. He’s also highlighted 
specific examples of departments that have made significant 
progress. 
 
So I just say, Mr. Speaker, that we comply with the vast 
majority of the auditor’s recommendations and the only area 
where that does not occur is where there’s ongoing work taking 
place. 
 
And I think this evidence is supported by media reports. I’m 
just going to read a couple of the things that the media has said, 
Mr. Speaker, to just reinforce that this is not an opinion that we 
only share with ourselves. 

Saskatchewan has done a great job over the last few years 
in getting its fiscal house in order . . . Saskatchewan has 
done a great job in addressing what was a serious debt 
problem. It has its fiscal house in order and we’re quite 
pleased with what we see. 

 
This is a quote from David Rubinoff, Moody’s Investors, CBC 
Radio, January 29, 2002. 
 
Here’s one from the Leader-Post from this summer: 
 

Over the long term, the NDP has performed well since 
taking over the reins from Grant Devine’s Progressive 
Conservatives in 1991. It has managed to reduce the public 
debt . . . in the process reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio from 
69% to 34%. 
 

I think anybody who runs a household would know what it 
meant to reduce your debt level that far. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I’ll just finish that part with this 
quote from Moody’s Investors Service from this August: 
 

The province has established a strong record of following 
prudent policies that have resulted in . . . much improved 
financial position. The outlook is stable. 

 
And as we know, Mr. Speaker, stability has a lot to do with 
economic development and people’s choices about where they 
invest and where they locate business. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of accountability, I think 
it’s important to hold the opposition accountable for their 
proposed financial plan because, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan; 
they have a slogan. And I think it’s incumbent on them to tell 
the people of Saskatchewan where they stand. 
 
You know, two years ago and you may remember this, Mr. 
Speaker, because . . . but two years ago they howled because we 
weren’t taking the budget dividend from CIC. This year they’re 
howling because we are. The only thing that’s consistent, Mr. 
Speaker, is the howling. 
 
Two years ago they howled because they thought they were 
sitting on a fortune in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. This year 
they howl because we’re spending it. They howled because they 
thought there was no money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
and now they howl because we’re using it. 
 
Well you can’t say there’s no money in the fund, and then in the 
next breath complain that it’s being spent. 
 
Whenever our credit rating has improved they’ve howled 
because debt went down and they accused us of bragging. This 
year they howl when the summary financial statement debt isn’t 
going down. 
 
In 1998 they howled when personal income tax came down. In 
1999 they howled when the sales tax came down. It’s no 
wonder that we get Kyoto confused with coyote. They howled 
in 2000 when personal income tax came down again. 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2949 

 

Well you get my drift, Mr. Speaker. I don’t need to continue to 
make this case. But the fact is the opposition is completely 
incapable of articulating a consistent position on any financial 
issue. When you really come down to it, they’re upset because 
we’ve improved our credit rating, lowered debt, grown a record 
number of jobs in a difficult period of drought. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to remind them of some of the 
things that they have said. 
 
The member from Canora-Pelly has praised the government on 
several occasions and he might want to take note so he 
remembers his words. He said, and I quote: 
 

. . . I think you can include the official opposition as 
supporting what you have decided to put forward as far as 
improving the accountability. 
 
And yes, I do want to say that I wish to congratulate you 
(even) on putting forward the changes to the auditor’s Act. 

 
That was in Hansard, May 15, 2002. 
 
Again the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

. . . I’m not suggesting that you’re trying to mislead the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . 
 

We’re pleased about that. And: 
 
Mr. Minister, I am not suggesting that you are mishandling 
the finances . . . 

 
And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we appreciate the 
support of the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Now he’s not alone in this. The member for Melfort-Tisdale 
stated in the Public Accounts Committee that: 
 

. . . the summary financial statements (oh actually the word, 
the summary financial statements) in those reports are 
comprehensive . . . complete, and . . . well done. 

 
And the Finance critic admitted on CJME radio that: 
 

When you look at the two together, I think you get a 
complete understanding of the province’s financial picture. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will just say that we intend to continue 
working with the auditor because we do have a song in our 
heart about fiscal responsibility. And I remind the members 
opposite of their quotes, just to ask them to quit flip-flopping on 
these issues and to develop a little consistency on financial 
matters. 
 
And in recognition of our ongoing progress and commitment to 
working with the auditor, I wish to move an amendment. The 
motion is, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 
 
(a) recognize and support government’s efforts to improve 

accountability and the transparency of public 
finances by the introduction of mid-year financial 
statements, quarterly financial statements, and 
summary financial statements as well as timely 
release of public accounts; 

(b) recognize that the Provincial Auditor has noted 
repeatedly that Saskatchewan’s system of financial 
reporting is more timely and informative than other 
jurisdictions; 

(c) recognize that the Provincial Auditor’s office in its 
recent presentation to the Public Accounts 
Committee indicated that a modified form of 
summary financial budgeting would be appropriate 
for Saskatchewan; 

(d) recognize that it is apparent from the presentation to the 
Public Accounts Committee that there is work to be 
done in determining the form of summary financial 
statements for Saskatchewan; and 

(e) urge that the Department of Finance officials continue 
to consult with the Provincial Auditor to move 
forward toward the presentation of budgets on a 
summary financial basis. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and it certainly is my pleasure to enter into the debate on public 
finance. Really this is about public finance within the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly before I get into more specifics, I would just like 
to acknowledge the good work of my Treasury Board 
colleagues and the Minister of Finance for the fine work that he 
has done in preparing budgets for the Government of 
Saskatchewan the past few years. And I would like to say that 
the Treasury Board process is one that is very active with this 
government, it is one that has never been neglected, and it is 
one that has served this government extremely well. 
 
When we talk about the main motion, with regard to the 
members opposite, on summary financial statements, and we 
talk about the amendment that has been presented by my 
colleague, obviously I will be supporting the amendment. 
 
And the reason I will be supporting the amendment and not 
supporting the main motion is because when we look at what 
we are actually doing in the province of Saskatchewan, we have 
been providing summary financial statements since 1992. The 
fact of the matter is that this particular government provides a 
more complete picture of its activities than just about any other 
government in North America. And the reason for that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that not only do we provide a complete accounting 
of all activities of government on a summary financial basis, but 
we also provide a Consolidated Fund which is our General 
Revenue Fund. Just about everybody else does not do that to 
provide that much detail. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now currently we have a Balanced Budget Act that provides for 
activities within the General Revenue Fund or the Consolidated 



2950 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

Fund or the operating side of government. And we are meeting 
those targets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we looked at the summary financial statements . . . And 
what does that mean? It means all of the activities of 
government on the operating side, line departments, and also 
the activities within the Crown corporations. And the reality of 
the day is that what the members opposite would like — and 
this is really the critical issue with regards to this debate — is 
they would like to have the summary financial statements 
prepared as a budget item in a budgetary fashion in terms of 
performance measures and all of those things. 
 
And I think that this government is really not opposed to doing 
that at some point in time. And certainly we are looking at this. 
But the reality of the day is there needs to be recognition of 
what this government has done since it became government in 
1991 and compare that to what has been done not only to the 
previous jurisdiction but jurisdictions across Canada. 
 
And I would say having had an opportunity to examine in detail 
the operations of government as a Treasury Board member 
since 1999, that our record stacks up to any other across 
Canada. In fact, I have no problem defending that record of 
accounting and even talking about how we can improve that 
record as well in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you don’t have to take our word for this. I think what you 
should do is talk about some of the finance accomplishments 
just this year in ’02-03. What do the outside agencies say? Well 
guess what? We’ve had the ninth consecutive balanced budget 
on the GRF (General Revenue Fund), which was delivered in 
March 2002. There is no dispute on that. 
 
This is the sixth consecutive budget with new tax cuts. There 
have been tax cuts every budget year from 1997 to 2002. 
There’s been a 50 per cent increase in the corporate capital tax 
exemption from 10 million to as much as 15 million. And we 
are in the final phase of the personal income tax reform which 
takes place on January 1, 2003. And what that does is it de-links 
completely the personal income tax that is done in 
Saskatchewan from the federal income tax system, and it 
provides an incremental decrease as well and full indexing, 
which is the first thing and something that was neglected quite 
badly by the previous administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the average Saskatchewan family will pay more than a 
third, 37.3 per cent less provincial income tax in 2003 than in 
1993, Mr. Speaker. That is 37 per cent less provincial income 
tax. 
 
This family’s provincial income tax will be 2,500 on average in 
2003, 1,490 less than the almost 4,000 paid in 1993 — 
significant improvements on the personal income tax side. And 
in 2003, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s top marginal 
income tax rate will be the third lowest in Canada — the third 
lowest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In May 2002, Moody’s Investors Services upgraded 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating from A1 to Aa3. The province’s 
tenth consecutive credit rating upgrade in eight years. Now this 
just doesn’t happen by happenchance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

This happens because of hard work by every government 
member, by every Treasury Board member, by every line 
department in making sure that we have accountable and we 
have controls of expenditures. And when we look at the 
expenditure control that we have in this particular government, 
which I’m very proud of, is the fact that expenditures over 
budgeted items on our GRF are invariably within that 1 per cent 
or less than 1 per cent range. 
 
And I would compare that to any corporation in North America 
or any other government across Canada or in North America 
because we do have tremendous control of the budgeting items 
within the GRF, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when we look at the release of Public Accounts in 2002, 
this confirms Saskatchewan’s eighth consecutive balanced 
budget on the GRF side. 
 
Now I must also admit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I was also 
very pleased to see the new incentives for mineral exploration 
which was announced this past September. And I also was very 
pleased to see the major royalty and tax changes announced 
October 2002 to stimulate increased oil and gas exploration and 
development. 
 
And in the release of the mid-term report in November 2002, 
there was confirmation of the strength of the non-agriculture 
sectors of Saskatchewan’s economy, and job growth is on a 
record pace in this province. 
 
These are all indicators not of a government that is not 
accountable, not of a government that doesn’t have control of 
expenditures, but of a government that is making the right 
moves to grow the economy in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — So when we look at the release of the 
Provincial Auditor’s fall 2002 report which was just tabled 
today, all of this is reflected in that report. And what does it 
say? What does the Provincial Auditor say in his report? At 
March 31, 2001, the government finances continue to compare 
favourably with most other provinces. Saskatchewan’s 
accumulated deficit to GDP ratio is 11 percentage points lower 
than in 1991 and 23 percentage points lower than in 1993. 
 
And what does that mean? Now there’s a gap there. There’s a 
gap there. This government formed office in 1991 and the ratio 
of deficit to GDP was 11 percentage points lower than in 1991 
and 23 percentage points lower than in 1993. Now what does 
that mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
What that means is that there has been improvement in the 
government financial position in terms of debt reduction, but 
also growth in the economy. So today we have a GDP which is 
all of the activities, economic activities within the province of 
over $33 billion. And we have a tax supported debt ratio that is 
now one of the lowest we’ve seen in some 20 years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And all that means is that we have an excellent credit 
rating. We have debt reductions. 
 
And I hear the members opposite say debt went up. Well the 
reality of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that debt has gone 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2951 

 

down and no matter how they posture or yell from their chairs, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the debt has gone down. 
 
And I’ll explain to you why the debt has gone down since 1991. 
The previous administration ran deficits every single year on 
the GRF side while they were in power — every year. They ran 
up an accumulated deficit in . . . which is tax supported debt, 
every single year that they were in power, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And while they were doing that, on the side, the Crown side — 
which they weren’t even reporting on because they didn’t 
provide summary financial statements, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
they were equity stripping the Crowns. They ran them down to 
nothing. 
 
And when this government, when this government took office 
in 1991, and in 1992 when we went to summary financial 
statements, guess what we had to do? We had to recognize that 
equity stripping in those Crown corporations and we had to 
bring their debt into the GRF. And that’s where that massive 
accumulation occurred on the GRF because we had to . . . we 
were accountable in representing that debt fairly and absolutely 
correctly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So now, now we have a situation where we have been paying 
down that debt. We have been paying down their Crown debt, 
and we have to pay off the GRF that was owed by the Crown 
corporations, and every year since then we have paid off debt, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the other thing that people are not aware of and that the 
members opposite refuse to account for is that — guess what? 
— in 1992-93 we started expensing all the capital in education 
on a cash basis. 
 
During the 1980s and the first part of 1990 they borrowed 
money and the capital requirements to the GRF, over 80 per 
cent of those numbers were covering debt. So not only did we 
have to provide infrastructure support for schools in the 1990s, 
we had to pay off the debt that they had ran up in the 1980s, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — 20 years of building paid off by this 
administration, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we 
talk about the record of this administration, when we talk about 
honest and accountable government, this administration is 
light-years ahead of what that administration was in the 1980s, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about our support for an 
open and accountable, and we talk about the Provincial Auditor 
in terms of what the numbers we’re providing, when we talk 
about how we’d like to provide as much information as possible 
to the public of Saskatchewan, well I can tell you that we will 
be providing more information in the future. I can tell you for a 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we will be moving towards 
summary financial statements at some point in the future. 
 
I also recognize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that other jurisdictions 
have moved to summary financial statements. 
 
And I also recognize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there has been 

an important change, recently announced by the Public Sector 
Accounting Board and also by the chartered accountant institute 
of Canada — which provides the guidelines for our Provincial 
Auditor — and that indicates that there are some changes 
required in terms of how provincial governments across Canada 
look at their capital needs and how they account for those 
capital needs. And we will be proceeding along those lines at 
some point as well once we’ve had a chance to analyze 
carefully the recommendations from the Public Sector 
Accounting Board. 
 
But this government is not in a habit of hiding information. In 
fact it will never do that. It is as open and as accountable as any 
administration that I’ve ever seen. And I have an opportunity to 
see this administration from the inside. 
 
And I’ve been a critic like the members opposite. I was a critic 
at one time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I can tell you for a fact 
that every single member of this government takes their job 
very seriously, and providing accurate accounting is a very 
serious job that we all take very seriously. And we will be open, 
honest, and accountable to the people of Saskatchewan now and 
in the future. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s my pleasure to enter into this debate. I want to 
thank the member for Canora-Pelly for bringing forward the 
original motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that he very 
adequately explained the need for summary financial 
statements, and given his experience as the Finance critic for 
the official opposition and his experience as Chair of the Public 
Accounts Committee, I think he is in an excellent position to be 
able to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I am somewhat disappointed in the amendment as presented by 
the government. And I notice here they refer constantly — more 
work to be done, continue to consult. 
 
And it’s very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look 
at some of the quotes from Hansard 1990 — and others have 
referred to them earlier in this debate — quotes by the member 
from Regina Victoria as a matter of fact. And when you look at 
the government here talking about needing to do more work, 
more consulting, those kinds of things, well it’ll be really 
interesting to hear what the member from Regina Victoria had 
to say back then. And I’ll quote. He says: 
 

Well I’m sure that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will be 
resting a lot easier tonight, Mr. Minister, knowing that, 
notwithstanding a $4.4 billion accumulated deficit . . . that 
your studying the question of whether or not there should 
be a more complete accounting of the problem for the 
people . . . at home. I’m sure . . . they’ll be sleeping better. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in his suitably indignant fashion, he was 
ridiculing the government of the day for studying the possibility 
of moving to summary financial statements — 12 years ago. 
That’s exactly what their amendment is suggesting that we do 
now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we continue to study. 
 
And I guess my question would be for the member from Regina 



2952 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

Victoria: do you think that after 12 years, folks will be sleeping 
any easier this evening as a result of his amendment? 
 
(15:30) 
 
It’s also interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he was 
concerned about a $4.4 billion accumulated deficit. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if he is as concerned today as he was then, he 
should be even more emphatic about the need for summary 
financial statements, because comparing apples to apples, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, today we’re talking about a $8.7 billion 
deficit. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how did we get to where we are? 
Well first of all, as the new Premier was coming into office, 
there was a substantial and significant change in approach and 
the government decided that they were going to go on a bit of a 
spending spree. We know now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
debit itself has increased by $719.3 million since this Premier 
came into office. 
 
Just in the last mid-term financial statements alone, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the debt is up again $523.7 million. Now this 
apparently is due to $298.7 million of deposits withdrawn from 
crop insurance, $99.3 million deposits withdrawn from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, $34 million deposits withdrawn from 
the Forest Fire Contingency Fund, and $30.6 million in 
livestock loan guarantees. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn’t it interesting to note they 
would use the term, deposits withdrawn. If one was to look at 
the way people would normally use those terms, deposits 
withdrawn would mean that you are taking money from 
somewhere where there is an actual account; that you are 
somehow drawing down an actual account. But the government 
uses the terminology, deposits withdrawn, but the debts . . . the 
debt increases, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So if they are actually 
withdrawn, how does the debt increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And I think that there are a tremendous amount of decisions that 
are being made that really, people are finally starting to 
understand, really only involve just using a Visa card to pay off 
a MasterCard. This isn’t, this isn’t the kind of accounting that 
the Provincial Auditor would like to see the government use 
when he suggests summary financial statements. 
 
And the member from Regina Victoria, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was absolutely right in one sense. The Provincial Auditor and 
previous provincial auditors have been recommending for quite 
some time that governments need to move to summary financial 
statements. There are 7 of the 10 provincial governments that 
utilize summary financial statements. The federal government 
utilizes summary financial statements. 
 
So it’s not that the Provincial Auditor or the official opposition 
here or anyone is suggesting something new, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is something that is becoming a matter of 
common practice across the entire country and yet we seem to 
have this NDP government resisting it at all costs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I have participated in those Public Accounts meetings 
where government members have come up with virtually any 

kind of argument — and in some cases ones verging on the 
ridiculous, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in order to justify not 
utilizing summary financial statements. 
 
I think the most interesting one that I heard was from a member 
of the Public Accounts Committee who suggested that it 
probably wasn’t a good idea for the people of Saskatchewan to 
really get a full picture of the province’s finances because then 
their expectations might be too high. Now that was one of the 
reasons we were given for the government not wanting to move 
to summary financial statements. 
 
But if I could, Mr. Speaker, just refer to the Provincial 
Auditor’s report from 2002 for just a second. I think he does an 
adequate job of explaining the need for summary financial 
statements and the kinds of things that he expects that it might 
do and some of the inadequacies that it may meet at this point. 
The financial planning information . . . Quoting from the 
Provincial Auditor’s report now, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The financial planning information now published by the 
government focuses on an incomplete picture of its 
finances as set out in one government fund called the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
So there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Provincial Auditor is saying 
that we are not getting a complete picture of this province’s 
finances and the people of Saskatchewan are not getting a 
complete picture of this province’s finances. 
 
The Provincial Auditor goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that planning information focused only on the General Revenue 
Fund is not sufficient to understand the overall financial picture 
of the government and to have an informed debate on the 
affordability of new or existing government programs. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that is a very poignant 
statement because that certainly is one area where the people of 
Saskatchewan have some grave concern. We have got the NDP 
running around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, spending $80 
million on cellular service in rural Australia when there are 
huge chunks of my home constituency, Mr. Speaker, that don’t 
have adequate cellular service. But they’re going and spending 
$80 million in rural Australia on cellular service. 
 
Now possibly had this government moved to summary financial 
statements and had they been able to get a look at . . . get a full 
picture of the entire government, just hopefully, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, just hopefully someone over there just might have 
looked at that and said: whoa, wait a minute; why are we 
spending $80 million in Australia if it looks like we’re going to 
be short in crop insurance and it looks like we’re going to be 
short in other programs here at home? 
 
But no, that is not the case. Those all are separately accounted 
for. And there is no way to be able to get an overall view of the 
finances of government, and the Provincial Auditor has told us 
that over and over and over again. So consequently we get 
spending decisions on the part of the NDP like the decision to 
spend $80 million in Australia. We get spending decisions on 
their part like the decision to spend $88 million on Information 
Services Corporation — a computerized land titles system, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t work. 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2953 

 

Now they’re contemplating going out there and they’re 
contemplating spending millions and millions and millions of 
dollars again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on outsourcing IT services 
to a Texas based company, as a result of them just having laid a 
proposal on the minister’s desk. They didn’t make any effort to 
tender any part of this. They aren’t going to make any effort to 
include any of the local homegrown IT sector. 
 
And what EDS (Electronic Data Systems) is proposing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they’re just simply going to turn it over to 
them and they’re going to cut the cheque. And at the end of the 
day, who will know? Who will know? 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it probably is interesting to note that 
the very same company, the very same Texas based company 
that the NDP are wanting to farm all of their IT services out to 
for potentially millions and millions of dollars, is the very same 
company that took a federal gun control program that was 
supposed to be $2 million and two pieces of paper and turned it 
into a $1 billion boondoggle. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that if we could get to a point 
where the government adopted summary financial statements 
and we as legislators, the citizens of this province, and all 
stakeholders could get a total picture of the finance of 
government, we might not see some of those kinds of asinine 
decisions being made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, an area of interest for me with respect to 
summary financial statements and how that might affect the 
critic area that I’m responsible for is the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. 
 
Now this is another fund much like the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund that the government claims that they can draw from. In 
the case of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, they’re claiming they 
can draw from that to balance the books. But as we all know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no money in that fund. That fund 
simply does not exist. Any money that’s ever transferred from it 
is borrowed money; therefore the debt of the province increases. 
 
Well the same is true with the Forest Fire Contingency Fund, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Forest Fire Contingency Fund, when 
it was originally set up in excess of two years ago, at one point 
did have $50 million. But this government forgot to pass the 
legislation in order to legally have that fund in place, so that 
original 50 million lapsed back to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Then the legislation was introduced the following year and 
there was a balance of $40 million created in that Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. However this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they used the smoke and mirrors trick that they did . . . they use 
with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund basically ends up being nothing but a 
number on paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that has caused — 
that has caused — some very real concern for a lot of 
communities in this province; particularly this year, given the 
large number of forest fires and the seriousness of those forest 
fires. 
 
It appears now that the fund doesn’t exist and that the 
department is going to be way over on forest firefighting costs. 
And we still have an outstanding commitment from the 

Premier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to cost share the cost of fighting 
those fires with some of the municipalities. 
 
Now I understand that in the last week or so, some of those 
municipalities have, in fact, started finally getting their 
invoices. They are finally getting some answers from this 
government in terms of what it’s going to cost them. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I was just speaking with some SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) officials last evening and 
they were suggesting that, in some cases, the bill that these 
municipalities are receiving are two and three times in excess of 
their assessment. I mean, this is going to be something that’s 
going to be very, very difficult for them to be able to pay, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I think even more than that, the way that this government 
treated those municipalities by holding off on submitting 
invoices to them until last week is a pretty shoddy way to treat 
the third level of government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those 
municipalities, their fiscal year-ends are December 31. So they 
are now in a position of trying to put a budget together for next 
year and all of a sudden, out of the blue, having to deal with 
these huge invoices. And certainly in some cases it’s going to 
impact decisions around personnel and taxation at the local 
level. 
 
But the point that I’m making here, Mr. Speaker, is that if the 
government was to go to summary financial statements and we 
could get a good overall view of the financial situation of the 
position of the province, then decisions around priorities could 
be made based on need, based on availability of funds. You 
wouldn’t have the separation where spending out of the General 
Revenue Fund is in no way whatsoever connected to any of the 
other spending that goes on in the Crowns or that . . . As the 
member from Canora-Pelly was indicating just a little while 
ago, now we’ve even got the government moving more money 
off balance sheets. We’ve got them now moving money for 
capital construction in education off of the balance sheet. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Now there once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a complete 
disconnect between what goes on in the General Revenue Fund 
and the spending that goes on in other areas of government. 
Consequently, sometimes I think it creates a tremendous 
amount of frustration and cynicism on the part of citizens of this 
province that they can see exorbitant amounts of money being 
spent and very little rhyme or reason to the way that it’s being 
done. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think with that I will just conclude 
by saying that I think it’s very important that the government 
move to summary financial statements as quickly as possible. 
We know that the financial situation of the province is 
deteriorating very quickly. We know that the deficit has 
increased dramatically. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the overall debt of the 
province has increased dramatically since this government came 
into power in 1991. In 1991, Mr. Speaker, the total debt of the 
province was $17.6 billion. By the year 2002, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP has moved that all the way up to 19.8 billion. 
 



2954 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, I would, I would suggest that the 
member from Regina Victoria was absolutely correct when he 
suggested there is an urgency to moving towards summary 
financial statements. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — To have permission to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the members. I 
have a friend in the gallery, Mr. Doug Elhert, from Watson who 
is a farmer and an entrepreneur and a student now. He believes 
in learning for life and he believes in Saskatchewan and he’s 
here today to look at the proceedings of the legislature. And I’d 
like everyone to welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena in welcoming 
Mr. Elhert here. I have gotten to know their family fairly well 
over the last couple of years. In another capacity I am a 
marriage commissioner and I have actually performed marriage 
ceremonies for two of their sons. And it’s been very interesting 
and I have really enjoyed their company. And I would like to 
welcome Mr. Elhert here as well today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Provincial Finances 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first part of 
the resolution as amended, Mr. Speaker, asks the Assembly to 
recognize and support the government’s efforts to improve 
accountability. 
 
And I want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker, because to listen to 
the opposition, you’d think there was a problem in terms of the 
reporting of the province’s finances to the people of the 
province. And I’m here to say, Mr. Speaker, as the opposition 
well knows, nothing could be further from the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, prior to 
1991 we wouldn’t have been having this debate about financial 
reporting because there were great delays prior to 1991 when 
those people were in office, Mr. Speaker, in the release of 
public accounts. There were no summary financial statements at 
all, Mr. Speaker, and there were incomplete rules about the 
legislative requirements for tabling of documents. There were 
no mid-year reports and there were no quarterly financial 

reports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But since 1991, I want the people of the province to note, Mr. 
Speaker, what this government has done to improve the 
transparency and accountability in public finances. 
 
The first thing that we did after attaining office was to bring in 
summary financial statements, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of 
confusion, most of it coming from that side of the House where 
they say we should have summary financial statements. The 
member from Regina Victoria it was said had called for 
summary financial statements when he was in opposition. 
 
Well guess what? Summary financial statements, Mr. Speaker, 
were introduced by this government in 1992. And every year 
we’ve published summary financial statements which have all 
the information, Mr. Speaker, all the information for the 
government departments, the agencies, and the Crown 
corporations all together in one book, Mr. Speaker. And that is 
called the Public Accounts. The Public Accounts. 
 
And I want to say something else, Mr. Speaker. As the 
Provincial Auditor noted at the Public Accounts Committee 
recently, which is chaired by a member of the opposition, 
Saskatchewan is one of the first provinces ever to get out the 
public accounts each and every year before other provinces do, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to have more to say about what the 
Provincial Auditor says about the summary financial 
statements. 
 
So we brought in the summary financial statements so that all 
the information was available in one source for the people to 
look at. And if it wasn’t available, Mr. Speaker, and we didn’t 
have summary financial statements, we wouldn’t be having this 
debate. 
 
If you look at the record of what the members opposite have 
said, they have got up in their places and said that the Provincial 
Auditor has looked into the books and the summary financial 
statements and he has said that there’s a deficit of $483 million. 
Well that’s absolutely true. That is what he said. How would he 
say it, Mr. Speaker, if there were no summary financial 
statements? 
 
So in one breath they say, well the summary financial 
statements show there’s a deficit; in the next breath they 
consistently say, we should have summary financial statements. 
It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t make any 
more sense than they made when they were in government and 
were part of a government — some of them worked for Mr. 
Devine when he was the premier; some of them sat in the 
legislature with Mr. Devine; some of them worked in the 
constituencies to get Mr. Devine elected. 
 
Mr. Devine didn’t produce summary financial statements. Mr. 
Devine didn’t produce mid-year reports. Mr. Devine didn’t 
produce quarter reports. Sometimes Mr. Devine didn’t even 
produce a budget. And that’s what they supported, Mr. Speaker. 
And there could be nothing further from the record of this 
government than the record of the Devine administration that 
they supported. And it is absolutely bizarre, Mr. Speaker, that 
these individuals would come into this House and stand up and 
tell the people of the province how they have financial 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2955 

 

accountability and transparency — something we never had 
when their party was in office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — So I want to set the record straight by 
saying that this government introduced summary financial 
statements which we have each and every year released on a 
timely basis. But we didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. We said, 
we’re going to have a report every six months on the state of the 
province’s finances, and that’s called the mid-year financial 
statement, which was released a few weeks ago. And when that 
comes out, Mr. Speaker, I appear in front of the media — and 
the opposition is there, everyone is there — and we say this is 
how we’re doing this year. That’s the mid-year financial 
statement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this very year we took another step, we 
introduced quarterly financial statements. And now every three 
months, Mr. Speaker — every three months — we lay in front 
of the public all of the financial information about what’s 
happening with the government departments and how the 
budget is doing. That’s what we do. 
 
But we didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. We brought in 
legislation mandating the tabling of all government financial 
reports; the tabling in this legislature so that the representatives 
of the people can see it — something we never had under the 
previous administration. And, Mr. Speaker, we introduced 
balanced budget legislation. 
 
And we need to be very clear about this, Mr. Speaker, because 
the members of the opposition get up, and they’ll run out and 
say to the media that there’s a problem with our financial 
statements. And what I’m going to quote, Mr. Speaker, is what 
the Provincial Auditor’s office actually says about the quality of 
our financial reporting. And this quote, Mr. Speaker, is from Ed 
Montgomery of the Provincial Auditor’s office in his remarks to 
the Public Accounts Committee meeting of October 24 this year 
— and the member for Canora-Pelly was there; the member for 
Melfort-Tisdale was there; and the member for Carrot River 
Valley, who just spoke, was there. And note these words, Mr. 
Speaker, this is what the Provincial Auditor’s representative 
said. He said: 
 

. . . Saskatchewan’s Department of Finance works hard to 
ensure you receive timely financial statements and as a 
result, Saskatchewan’s financial statements are completed 
earlier than most provinces . . . 
 

And then he says, and then he says this. He says: 
 

In fact, I think they’re one of the best performers on that in 
Canada. 
 

That’s what he says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And the Provincial Auditor also testified at 
the Public Accounts Committee. And this is what the Provincial 
Auditor, Fred Wendel, said. He said, and I quote: 
 

. . . the government does a very good job of producing the 
actual results. And we’ve said that many, many times, (and 
it’s been in many reports, Mr. Speaker) that the Department 
of Finance does an excellent job of telling people what 
actually happened. 

 
That is what the Provincial Auditor says, Mr. Speaker. The 
opposition likes to confuse the issue by saying that somehow 
something is hidden and kept from the people. That’s what they 
did when they were in office. That is not the record of this 
government. And you don’t have to listen to me, Mr. Speaker. 
We can take the word of the Provincial Auditor about the 
quality of the financial statements that are produced by this 
government. 
 
And I want to say while I’m on the topic, Mr. Speaker, that we 
not only heard and hear the members of the opposition saying 
that somehow all of the finances are not reported — which is 
absolutely false, Mr. Speaker — we hear them saying that 
somehow the debt of the province is going up. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is . . . it was in the mid-year financial 
statement that we went into some debt this year. Why? Why? 
I’ll tell the members opposite why — because we had one of 
the worst forest firefighting seasons in the history of the 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not trying to be dramatic. There was a 
danger that people’s homes would be burned down; there was a 
danger that the city of Prince Albert would start on fire. And 
we, yes, we went into some debt to put those fires out. And I 
say to those members opposite who sanctimoniously come into 
this legislature and say that we shouldn’t go into any debt, what 
would they do? Would they let the city of Prince Albert burn 
down? Is that what they would do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I’ll tell you something else, Mr. Speaker. We had livestock 
producers in this province this summer who had cattle and they 
had no feed and they had no water, and they needed assistance, 
Mr. Speaker. And this government went out and provided $34 
million in loan guarantees to people with cattle and no water 
and no feed because they needed to be helped out. 
 
And I say to those members opposite, and I say to the people of 
the province, Mr. Speaker, what would they do? Would they 
say to the producers of this province, you’ve got cattle but 
you’ve got no feed and no water and we’re not going provide 
you with loan guarantees? 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, if that’s what they would say, I say 
shame on them. Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we went into debt to the tune of $34 
million in loan guarantees to support the livestock producers 
and I’m proud of the fact that we did that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m proud of the job that the people from the Department 
of the Environment did — and we supported them monetarily 
— to put the forest fires out because, Mr. Speaker, they did an 
excellent job under very difficult circumstances. And all this 
opposition can do is complain about the fact money was 



2956 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

borrowed to put those forest fires out. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we went into debt this year — yes, 
we went into debt this year — to pay out the largest crop 
insurance payment ever made to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want the people of the province to know that we 
took in about $500 million in premiums for crop insurance and 
we are going to be required to pay out $1 billion, estimated, in 
crop insurance payments. And the question is, Mr. Speaker, if 
you have 500 million in premiums and a payout of more than 
$1 billion, what are you going to do? 
 
They say don’t spend more money than you have. Don’t go into 
debt. What do they mean? That they’re not going to meet the 
obligations to the farmers for crop insurance? Mr. Speaker, it is 
absolutely ridiculous. It is ridiculous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I say to those members opposite and I 
say to the people of the province that when you have two years 
of devastating drought, when you have one of the worst 
droughts in the history of the province, and when the livestock 
producers need assistance because they have no feed and no 
water, when the forests are burning down, and when the farmers 
are entitled to receive the crop insurance that they contracted 
for, Mr. Speaker, any government that would not meet those 
commitments would not be fit to govern. 
 
And any opposition that says you shouldn’t have done those 
things is not fit to govern and they never will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
make it absolutely clear that what the Provincial Auditor is 
talking about when he talks about budgeting on a summary 
financial basis is not what the members opposite are talking 
about. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has said that the books of the province 
of Saskatchewan are prepared the way they should be prepared 
and are among the best in Canada. That’s what the Provincial 
Auditor says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But he says something else too, and this is what we should 
acknowledge. He says that he believes that the Government of 
Saskatchewan should move to a different system of budgeting 
and that what we should do is start to budget and plan and 
estimate on a summary financial basis. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
looking at that very carefully. 
 
And contrary to what the member from Canora-Pelly may have 
intimated in his remarks and has said at other times, the 
members of the Public Accounts Committee from the 
government side did not, at the Public Accounts Committee, say 
that they were opposed to summary financial budgeting. And 
that’s what we’re talking about; we’re talking about summary 
financial budgeting, not reporting. And it’s not what they said. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Canora-Pelly is looking 
quizzically about that, but I say to him, you can read the motion 
that the Public Accounts Committee came up with because the 
motion said that the Department of Finance and the Provincial 
Auditor should continue to work together to develop a way that 
we could do some summary financial budgeting in the future. 
 
And the members say well, why would you want to do that? 
Why wouldn’t you just do it right now? Well I’ll tell the 
members why, Mr. Speaker. What the budget of the 
Government of Saskatchewan does now is to present 
information about revenues and expenditures of government 
departments. That’s the document that we present to the 
Legislative Assembly. If you moved right now to a system of 
full summary financial budgeting, you would bring in all the 
government agencies and the Crown corporations. 
 
Well let’s think about that for a minute, Mr. Speaker. You 
would bring in, for example, the Crop Insurance Corporation. 
Now if you consider what happened this year, we can see that 
we took in half a billion dollars in revenue and we’ll spend 
more than $1 billion in payouts and we’ll go into some debt to 
meet those payouts, which is what we should do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I say to the members opposite, if they want to think about 
this for a minute, imagine having a budget presented to the 
legislature where the Minister of Finance was expected to 
estimate the revenue for Crop Insurance, which you might be 
able to make some estimate of, but also the expenditure for that 
given fiscal year in crop insurance. It’s very difficult. 
 
We can tell the public, Mr. Speaker, in the budget, how much 
the legislature will give to the Department of Learning or the 
Department of Health, will appropriate money to them. But it’s 
very . . . And we can also say, by the way, how much they will 
spend. We can say the Department of Learning will spend $1.1 
billion and the Department of Health will spend $2.3 billion. 
That’s one thing. And that will be funded through tax revenues, 
taxation on the people. 
 
But it’s another thing, Mr. Speaker, to say that the Crop 
Insurance Corporation revenue will be a certain amount of 
money because you don’t know. It depends how many farmers 
sign up for crop insurance and what kind of coverage they take. 
And it certainly is difficult to say what the expenditures of the 
Crop Insurance Corporation will be. 
 
A similar point could be made, Mr. Speaker, about the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. The Workers’ Compensation 
Board is an agency of government. It’s a statutory agency and it 
has a statutory fund. But it does come into the summary 
financial statements. 
 
And if the members opposite really believe that you can budget 
for the Workers’ Compensation Board and crop insurance the 
same way you would for the Department of Learning, well I can 
only say, Mr. Speaker, that they need to think about this a little 
more carefully. And that’s what this resolution says. It says that 
we’re going to think about it a little more carefully. 
 
But I want to read another quote from the Provincial Auditor’s 
office, Mr. Speaker, and this is a quote from Mr. Montgomery 
when he was testifying before the Public Accounts Committee. 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2957 

 

And what he said, he did not say we should budget on a 
summary financial statement basis, what he said was: 
 

. . . (the) modified summary budget model . . . includes all 
three components of government — that is, the . . . 
(General Revenue Fund), the government service 
organizations, and the government enterprises. This model 
is prepared on the same basis as the province’s summary 
financial statements with one exception. The exception is 
that for government service organizations the model shows 
only the budgeted net income and not their complete 
revenues and expenditures. 

 
And he goes on to say this, Mr. Speaker. He says: 
 

. . . there is a link to the plan voted on. You can see the . . . 
(General Revenue Fund), revenue, and operating expenses, 
and surplus. And it includes the planned plans for the 
significant components of government. For example it 
shows the planned net income for the regional health 
authorities, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, CIC, and other 
government service organizations. 

 
And then he says this, Mr. Speaker . . . And you know I think it, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is noteworthy that the member from 
Swift Current, while I’m quoting the Provincial Auditor, is 
saying I’m making a ridiculous argument. Well the member 
from Swift Current may think that what the Provincial 
Auditor’s office says is ridiculous, but we treat it with respect 
over on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why, as 
the Provincial Auditor noted in his report last spring, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has implemented 80 per cent of the 
recommendations made by the Provincial Auditor. And we’ll 
keep working to implement the others, but we’ve implemented 
80 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Provincial Auditor said in his report that he had worked 
well with this government and we had worked with him to 
implement his recommendations. And if the member from Swift 
Current wants to say from his seat that the arguments of the 
Provincial Auditor’s office are ridiculous, he can. But I think, 
Mr. Speaker, he would be well advised to listen to what the 
Provincial Auditor’s office had to say. And I want the 
opposition to listen to these words. 
 
Mr. Montgomery from the Provincial Auditor’s office said this. 
He said: 
 

. . . regardless of whether an overall plan is presented, (and 
they do want an overall plan) in all jurisdictions legislative 
assemblies (note this, Mr. Speaker) only review and vote 
the expenditures of their equivalent to the General Revenue 
Fund. So they’re generally not (I underline the word not, 
Mr. Speaker) voting the expenditures of government 
enterprises or government service organizations. 

 
So what the Provincial Auditor’s office is saying, Mr. Speaker, 
is that in other jurisdictions which the members have referred 
to, they don’t actually treat Crown corporations, agencies like 
the Crop Insurance Corporation, the same as government 
departments. There are differences. It’s on the transcript, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

And what this motion, amended motion, very sensibly says I 
think is that we urge the Department of Finance officials 
continue to consult with the Provincial Auditor to move for . . . 
move toward the presentation of budgets on a summary 
financial basis. 
 
And it says, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that it is apparent from 
the presentation of the Public Accounts Committee — and I just 
read what the Provincial Auditor’s office had to say — that 
there is work to be done in determining the form of summary 
financial statements for Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I want to say to the public is this, Mr. Speaker. That 
we are saying we want to work with the Provincial Auditor to 
get it right — and that’s what we’re doing to get it right. 
 
And bear in mind that what we have done, as I said at the 
beginning of my remarks, is we have introduced summary 
financial statements, mid-year financial statements, quarterly 
financial statements, The Tabling of Documents Act. Why? To 
improve reporting. We have, as the Provincial Auditor has said, 
implemented 80 per cent of the Provincial Auditor’s 
recommendations. 
 
And our record is very clear. We have been working with the 
Provincial Auditor and what this resolution says is we’re going 
to continue to work with the Provincial Auditor. We’re going to 
move toward summary financial planning in the correct way; 
not the way that the members opposite would have us do. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our record can reassure the people of the 
province that our accountability and transparency will be there, 
contrary to what we could expect I think from the other side. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I’m very appreciative of 
the auditor’s office for their work in continuing to refine the 
summary budget concept to address some of the issues that I’ve 
mentioned today. And I look forward to continuing progress as 
we develop a framework to implement this kind of presentation. 
 
Now the members opposite think that you can implement this 
concept immediately. But I want to remind them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they need to keep in mind that our budget process 
operates under the parameters set out in The Balanced Budget 
Act and this Act is currently based upon the General Revenue 
Fund statements. 
 
One of the key provisions of the Act is that a four-year plan be 
laid out at the beginning of a government’s mandate and that 
the plan adhere to the same accounting system for the four years 
of the term. So obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be 
counter to The Balanced Budget Act to introduce a wholesale 
change to the budgeting process before the current plan is 
complete, which it will be with the next budget. 
 
We also need to answer the question about how we refine The 
Balanced Budget Act to reflect a change to summary budgeting. 
 
To sum up, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very pleased to enter into this 
debate, this side of the House respects the recommendations of 
the Provincial Auditor. During our term we have worked with 
that office to dramatically improve Saskatchewan’s financial 
reporting and accountability, and we’re second to no one in the 
quality of our statements. 



2958 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 2002 

 

So I would just like to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that 
our plan is to continue to work with the Provincial Auditor with 
a view to improving our planning information the same way we 
have improved our reporting, and I’m pleased and proud to be 
supporting the amended motion today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, I was wondering how to vote on this motion until I 
picked up the Provincial Auditor’s report today. And I read in 
that Provincial Auditor’s report that in the last two years, since 
this Premier was sworn into office, in two years only, there is a 
$1 billion variance, 1 billion in the . . . (inaudible) . . . 1 billion 
additional debt. And when I read this I said to myself, what 
does the Minister of Finance think he’s running here, a gun 
registry? 
 
(16:15) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. Speaker, we have heard, we have 
heard members opposite argue that their record on financial 
accountability has been an improvement over the Devine 
government. I think that is probably a fair statement but it 
certainly comes nowhere near answering whether the motion 
before this House would not be an important reform and a step 
forward for accountability. And I think clearly it is and I will be 
supporting this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things the Devine government did, one 
of the things the Devine government did was it transferred 
money from the Crowns to the GRF, and the Crowns were 
simply accumulating debt. So money in the GRF was simply 
debt. 
 
Well now what is the NDP doing? Well they’re doing exactly 
the same thing. They are simply ramping up debt in the Crowns 
to try and then . . . Then the minister tells us that he’s balanced 
the budget. So we’re another $1 billion in debt, but the minister 
says he’s balanced the budget. 
 
Now I have to admit I don’t understand. I don’t understand how 
you balance the budget while you go another billion in debt. 
More important, the Provincial Auditor doesn’t understand it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the most important statement of all in the 
auditor’s report is when he says, on 231: 
 

. . . making transfers from one fund to another, and back 
again, has no effect on the Government’s overall financial 
position. 

 
And that is precisely what we are doing. I think in common 
parlance that’s referred to as kiting — moving finances from 
one account to another and back again and then we’d say we’ve 
balanced the budget. But in the process of balancing the budget, 
we’re further in debt. 
 
We need to have one statement that tells us clearly, concisely, 
and once and for all what the total financial position of the 
province is. And I would argue that this is more needed in the 
province of Saskatchewan than in any other province, and that 
simply is because our Crown sector is by far the largest of any 

province. 
 
The GRF represents only 60 per cent of the financial activity of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. The other 40 per cent is in 
the Crowns. That is the highest percentage in Canada. And 
therefore if you want, if you want a statement that represents 
and reflects the correct financial position of the province, you 
don’t get it by a General Revenue Fund statement that reflects 
only 60 per cent of the financial activity of the government. 
 
Well we have now had two budgets . . . we’ve now had two 
budgets in which this Minister of Finance has said he balanced 
the budget and the Provincial Auditor has said, no you did not. 
Now we’ve had two budgets in which he spent a rainy day fund 
that the Provincial Auditor says doesn’t exist. 
 
And I’m very curious to know what’s going to happen this year. 
Is the Minister of Finance going to now rise in his seat in March 
and deliver what he frankly admits is a deficit budget and say 
that the accomplishment of the Romanow government in 
getting us out of debt has been reversed by the new 
administration and we’re now back into deficit financing? Is he 
going to do that? Or is he again going to produce a budget that’s 
balanced even though we’re way further in debt? Or is he, in the 
alternative, going to bail and leave it to his desk mate to deliver 
the next budget? And I think we’re all very interested in seeing 
which it will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have here before us a sensible motion that 
what we need is one financial statement that tells us at a glance 
what is the financial position of the province. This motion was 
brought forward by the member for Canora-Pelly; however, 
indirectly it was brought forward by the Provincial Auditor. 
He’s the one who has suggested it. 
 
Now I know that when my friends in the NDP were in office, 
this was something they would have supported. And certainly 
when they were in opposition, they were opposed to Grant 
Devine trying to balance the books by accumulating debt in the 
Crowns to move into the General Revenue Fund. They would 
have said, that’s a sham, that’s a fraud, that’s a scam. Well now 
that’s what’s happening under the NDP. So I’m sorry that 
they’ve gone back on their principles. 
 
And I would simply say to the Saskatchewan Party, and 
especially to their finance critic, it is my hope that when you’re 
government, you will follow through on the good intentions that 
you have . . . that you have undertaken. You have said you 
believe in one consolidated summary financial statement. And I 
hope that, I hope that, unlike the folks over there, you won’t 
forget it the moment you take office. 
 
Only in that way I say will we really move forward. And I 
would respectfully submit to members of the government that 
you should be ashamed in saying that your handling of the 
finances has not been as bad as Grant Devine, while at the same 
time refusing to take that next step forward, that next reform, 
which you know as well as we know is needed. You know the 
Provincial Auditor is right, and you know that you can do the 
right thing and institute this. It’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I want to remind the member that he 
should be addressing all of his comments, whether it’s with 



December 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2959 

 

respect to his colleagues in the opposition or members on the 
government side, but through the Chair, through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Okay . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Them. 
The ones who are looking so embarrassed right now, Mr. 
Speaker, that was to whom I was directing my remarks. And I 
apologize, I will certainly direct them through the Chair from 
thereon. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if we have the one summary statement then 
we can no longer go through the charade of, as the Provincial 
Auditor again told us this year, moving money from account to 
account and saying that that has somehow magically changed 
the financial situation of the province when clearly it has not. 
Let us finally once and for all put an end to this practice of the 
Finance minister moving money from account to account. 
 
I was joking a minute ago, but I’ll now be in all earnestness. 
Mr. Speaker, we know in our personal and private finances, it 
doesn’t work. To accumulate debt on the Visa account to pay 
the chequing account or vice versa, it’s all debt. And the only 
way we know our financial position, as individuals, is to 
consider it as a totality and to look at the entire picture. But to 
transfer . . . To acquire debt over here to show a positive 
balance over there, we know that that is simply to deceive 
ourselves, maybe an attempt to deceive the bank or somebody 
else, but it usually doesn’t work. We’re usually only deceiving 
ourselves. And this deception needs to end. 
 
This billion dollar boondoggle needs to end. Mr. Speaker, we 
need to know exactly where we stand on our foreign 
investments by our Crowns. 
 
You know, I saw the other day that Don Ching was talking 
about our foreign investments and our Crowns being in a 
positive balance. Well actually, ironically, I believe they are if 
you include the investments in Britain, the Chunnel project, 
under the old Devine government. And I think there can’t be 
anything more humiliating to Don Ching than that the only way 
he can get SaskTel’s investments in the black is by him and the 
NDP trying to take credit for the Chunnel involvement of the 
old Conservative government. 
 
And ironically for a government that got so many things wrong, 
SaskTel’s involvement in Britain was highly lucrative. And in 
fact it was so lucrative that the NDP thought that this global 
investment was a good idea. They’ve run around the globe since 
then, and they have lost money. They lost money in cable in 
Chicago. I understand our Australian investment is now penny 
stocks. And yet they still try and take credit for the SaskTel 
investments in Britain. 
 
So let’s have a . . . let’s have financial statements that are 
transparent, that tell the whole story. And let’s finally admit that 
it isn’t good enough for the government to say, well they’re 
better than the folks before them. Let us accept what the 
Provincial Auditor has been telling us for several years. This is 
correct, it should be done, and if this government won’t do it, 
another government hopefully will. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

The Assembly adjourned at 16:29. 
 
 


