















































Hansard: May 13, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1335 
 May 13, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about certain inadequacies in the province’s tobacco legislation. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Carrot River. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of Saskatchewan about recent changes to 
the crop insurance program that resulted in a 7 per cent 
premium increase for insured farmers for reduced coverage, 
including the exclusion of spot loss hail and variable rate 
insurance. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Kelfield, 
Landis, Handel, Dodsland, and Ruthilda. 
 
And I’m pleased to present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today from people from Hendon and Wadena that are 
concerned about the tobacco laws. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to do with the overfishing of the Lake of the Prairies. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Spy 
Hill, Esterhazy, Crooked Lake, and Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition regarding 
crop insurance premiums. The prayer is: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and to hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Glentworth and McCord. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have a petition concerning crop insurance premium hikes and 
consequent coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers in the 
Cabri and Pennant areas of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens who are 
concerned about the deductible on the prescription drug plan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate reasonable annual deductible 
amounts for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by folks from Estevan, 
Corning, Bienfait, Roche Percee, and Lampman. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and 
Gladmar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents in southwest Saskatchewan concerned with the 
government’s decision respecting the prescription drug plan in 
the province. And the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Aneroid, Simmie, Pambrun, and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
halt crop insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Conquest, Outlook, Dinsmore, 
Macrorie, Milden. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition from farmers in my constituency 
who are outraged by the changes to the crop insurance program 
in Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people from Paddockwood, Meath Park, and Albertville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increased premium rate for 
crop insurance. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
would be no surprise that I have a petition today of citizens 
concerned about Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And again, the signatures show how well travelled this highway 
is because they’re from Holdfast, Simpson, Kenaston, Watrous, 
Imperial, Regina, and Wainwright, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the commercial 
fishing on Besnard Lake. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
to bring about a resolution to the Besnard Lake situation, 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Humboldt, Saskatoon, and Wilkie. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise with a petition today from citizens who are deeply 
concerned about the crop insurance program that’s been 
unveiled and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Climax, Woodrow, Killdeer, and Limerick. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petition has 
been reviewed and is hereby read and received as an addendum 
to a previously tabled petition being sessional paper no. 31. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I am truly pleased to introduce to the Assembly and 
welcome on your behalf, and behalf of all the members of the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, 14 tremendous students from the fine 
school of Ituna who are here visiting us today. And they’re with 
their teacher, Ms. Shirley Fowler, and their chaperones, Laura 
Berezny, Barb Kuschak, and Tracy Ivy. And I’ll be meeting 
with this fine group of people after question period, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome this 
fine group of youngsters to this Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a class of students 
here from Marion McVeety School in Regina Lakeview. There 
are 21 students who are in grade 4 and they’re seated in the 
west gallery. And they’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. 
Sheila Acton, as well as parents, Rhonda Hipperson, Carol 
Wakelam, Barb Hendrickson, Cathy Johnson, and Marion 
Finucane. 
 
And I would ask all members to welcome them here to the 
legislature. They live in this neighbourhood so they know about 
the building, and I’m sure they often are curious to hear and see 
what happens here. So let’s welcome them all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Week 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is 
home to many business and economic success stories and it is 
filled with opportunities for our youth. In order to celebrate and 
recognize our achievements and the possibilities that exist here 
in our province, this government has declared May 13 to 17 to 
be Saskatchewan Opportunities Week. 
 
Our government is proud to do its part in the celebrations 
around this special week and we are glad to do what we can to 
help provide a positive focus on the accomplishments of the 
people of this province. 
 
This week’s festivities include a trade show to showcase 
innovative Saskatchewan products and services, a 
Saskatchewan business ambassador’s breakfast, a youth rally 
announcing the winners of the Only in Saskatchewan contest, 
and a mini job fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan does have many challenges to face, 
but we will not let them detract from our pride in what we have 
accomplished and in what we can accomplish. For most of the 
past decade we have been among the top provinces in terms of 
economic growth. We have many entrepreneurs creating 
opportunities in both the urban and rural sectors. And for the 
coming year, the investment intentions of the business 
community are expected to increase by 9.3 per cent — the 
highest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s all come together and recognize what we 
have here at home in Saskatchewan and let’s celebrate 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Week. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Police Week 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today in the House to ask all members to recognize May 12 to 
18 as National Police Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, National Police Week is an excellent opportunity 
to strengthen the partnerships between the police forces and the 
communities. The four objectives that govern this particular 
week, Mr. Speaker, are: (1) to act as a vehicle in which to 
reinforce ties with the community; (2) to honour police officers 
for the public safety and security they provide to their 
communities; (3) to promote the work police do in their 
communities; and (4) to inform the community about the police 
role in public safety and security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all across Canada this week, communities will be 
paying tribute to the dedicated and committed work of those 
men and women who are proud members of municipal and 
federal police forces. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we would be remiss if we didn’t pay 
extra tribute to our police personnel because we know the 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

province’s high crime rate, coupled with the lack of resources 
due to underfunding, have made a difficult occupation that 
much tougher. 
 
All of Saskatchewan should be justifiably proud of the 
province’s municipal and federal police forces. Their dedication 
in this often dangerous line of work goes above and beyond the 
call of duty. We owe much to them for providing us with safety 
and security 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recognition of police week, I ask all members 
of the House to honour those who keep us, our families, and our 
communities safe from harm. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Tourism Saskatchewan Web Sites 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there is more good news for Saskatchewan people during 
Opportunities Week — more good news for people who want to 
visit Saskatchewan and more good news for Saskatchewan 
people who want to see more of our great province. We have 
some of the world’s best natural and cultural tourism 
attractions, and now they will be much easier for tourists to 
access. 
 
This morning the minister of Information Technology helped 
launch seven new tourism Web sites which will enable the 
industry to do better booking, planning, and merchandising. 
These sites will receive $672,000 of financing under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Western Economic Partnership 
Agreement. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Tourism Regina and five rural tourism 
regions will have their Web sites integrated with Tourism 
Saskatchewan’s site so that all may benefit from a common 
database. 
 
Annually tourism is a $1.3 billion industry in Saskatchewan 
which directly employs 21,000 people. We expect these 
numbers to grow and technological advances like those 
announced today will ensure this growth will happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from across Canada, from the US (United States), 
and from around the world, people are escaping to 
Saskatchewan. From the Cypress Hills to the Athabasca Sand 
Dunes, from Taylor Field to Duck Mountain, from Wanuskewin 
to Lac La Ronge, from Yorkton to Meadow Lake, people are 
enjoying the awesome, natural, and cultural . . . natural beauty 
and cultural heritage of our wonderful province. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because it’s the right thing to do. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Mining Week 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in this 

Assembly to share with my colleagues some facts regarding the 
National Mining Week which is underway starting today. 
 
The Saskatchewan Mining Association reports that mining 
contributes more than $2 billion to the provincial GDP (gross 
domestic product). Almost 20,000 people are employed, either 
directly or indirectly, through the mining industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is the world’s leading producer and 
exporter of both potash and uranium. We account for almost 30 
per cent of the world’s production of both of these 
commodities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Mining Association also states 
that Saskatchewan has the fourth highest sales of minerals in 
Canada, after Ontario, Quebec, and BC (British Columbia). 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add that there is so much more 
that we can do in this important industry; so much more to do in 
terms of cutting restrictive red tape in the industry; cutting the 
high taxes the industry faces; and aiming our sights to become 
number one in Canada in terms of sales. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to take the brakes all the way off this 
industry in Saskatchewan. We need this important industry to 
spread its wings to fully realize what it can do. The 
Saskatchewan Party believes in the mining industry and how it 
can play a major role in our plan to grow Saskatchewan by 
100,000 people over 10 years starting right after the next 
provincial election. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

South Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra Wins Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We in Regina have 
had the good fortune over the years of being able to attend the 
annual excellent performances of the South Saskatchewan 
Youth Orchestra under the very capable direction of Alan 
Denike, who by the way plays a pretty mean bassoon in our 
grown-up orchestra. 
 
The young people in the orchestra grow up and move on but 
always behind them is a new crop of musicians. The only thing 
that does not change in the SSYO (South Saskatchewan Youth 
Orchestra) is the quality of the performance. These youth can 
really play, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now music lovers of the American Midwest know our 
secret. Recently the SSYO attended the Chicago Heritage 
Music Festival. The SSYO was one of seven youth orchestras 
but the only one from Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to announce that the young 
musicians came home with all three trophies available to them 
in their class, including the award for outstanding instrumental 
group. 
 
They toured Chicago, including a performance by the Chicago 
Symphony. 
 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Regina we are very proud of our youth 
orchestra. We are fortunate having one more opportunity to hear 
them this session when they give their season finale on May 25. 
This concert will feature some of the Chicago repertoire and 
other works. This is an opportunity that no orchestral enthusiast 
will want to miss. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nipawin Physician Honoured at Convention 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Dr. Bev Karras of Nipawin was recently honoured by her peers 
with an award for meritorious long medical service to the 
community. She was presented with the honour at the 10th 
Rural and Remote Medicine Convention in Kelowna, British 
Columbia. 
 
Dr. Jill Konkin, president of the Society of Rural Physicians, 
said in announcing the award: 
 

Many rural communities don’t have enough doctors. Others 
are privileged to have a series of doctors contribute to the 
care of their community. Only a few have the long-standing 
contributions of physicians, such as Dr. Karras, who have 
made a real commitment to their community. With this 
award we are recognizing those physicians. 

 
The Society of Rural Physicians established the Rural Service 
Awards on its 10th anniversary to recognize long-serving rural 
doctors. The society was established in 1992 and currently has 
more than 1,300 members. 
 
Dr. Karras is also the immediate past president of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Dr. Karras 
in being honoured with this prestigious award, her outstanding 
commitment to rural health, and her service to the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Valley School Division/SaskPower 
Partnership 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, another example in a 
long list of reasons that justify the Crowns, model corporate 
citizens. 
 
This morning the Saskatchewan Valley School Division No. 49 
and SaskPower announced a partnership worth 2.5 million to 
upgrade 18 schools and administrative facilities. This 
partnership also provides education for students on energy 
conservation through the Destination Conservation program. 
The electricity and natural gas savings of this project will 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions into our air by 920 metric 
tonnes annually which would be the equivalent of taking 13 
cars off the road or planting over 200,000 fully grown trees. 

As part of this program, students and teachers will notice a new 
lighting system which will eliminate eyestrain. Upgrading or 
replacements of worn equipment will improve building 
operation controls. Over 12 years the energy performance 
contract with SaskPower will help the Saskatchewan Valley 
School Division save the electricity used by 105 homes for one 
year, or burning 845 100-watt light bulbs continuously for an 
entire year. 
 
This will also mean a savings to the Sask Valley School 
Division of $161,693 that can be diverted to a repayment 
schedule to pay capital expenditures of 2.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this partnership will also spur about $630,000 in 
spinoff business through subcontracting work for local 
electrical and mechanical contractors which . . . 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re finding 
out that Canada is in the midst of a job creation boom. In the 
first four months of the year 2002 there were more jobs created 
in Canada than in all the other G-7 countries put together. 
 
The Canadian job market is on fire. And this should be good 
news except for one thing. While every other province in 
Canada is creating jobs, here in NDP (New Democratic Party) 
Saskatchewan jobs are being killed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada to 
lose jobs last month while job growth in all the rest of the 
country was surging ahead. Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP so out 
of step with the rest of the country? Why is the NDP killing 
jobs while everybody else, every other province in Canada, is 
creating jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is: why 
is the Leader of the Opposition out of step with every 
economist, every analyst in the way he looks at the jobs and the 
job impact on agriculture in Saskatchewan? Why is he out of 
step with the business community who see a positive future? 
Why, Mr. Speaker, is he out of step with the young people of 
Saskatchewan — 75 per cent of whom graduate from university 
and stay here to work, and 90 per cent of the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
grads who stay here to work? Why is he out of step with them, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. He understands full well that 
Canada has lost 35,000 jobs in agriculture, that Saskatchewan 
has lost 50,000 jobs in agriculture since 1987. He understands 
that. But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, what the people of 
Saskatchewan understand — he’s got a negative attitude 
because he’s only got one goal and that’s political power. 
Nothing else means anything to him or the members who sit 
with him in the opposition benches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s 
lack of understanding on this issue is absolutely appalling 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

because, Mr. Speaker, in fact it’s young people that are leaving 
Saskatchewan. In the last year 6,500 jobs in Saskatchewan have 
disappeared for people aged 15 to 44. And in the last two years 
19,000 jobs have disappeared for people between 15 and 44 
years of age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is killing thousands of jobs for our young 
people and forcing thousands of young people to leave the 
province to find work. Mr. Speaker, in just two short years the 
NDP has killed 19,000 jobs for young people. 
 
The question is, why is that government killing young people’s 
jobs? Why are so much of the job loss actually represented by 
young people who have lost jobs and left the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, the Leader of the Opposition. Why is it that he can’t 
understand that the 50,000 jobs that we’ve lost in agriculture 
have been offset in other areas of our economy, Mr. Speaker? 
Why is it that he can’t understand that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, where was he for eight consecutive years when the 
economy of this province was growing? He never stood in this 
place one time. In 2001, Mr. Speaker, we had some very 
difficult times in this province as it relates to agricultural jobs. 
But I tell you he was here the year before that, and when the 
economy and the jobs were growing, he never said a word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what this is about. This is about a 
Leader of the Opposition who has one goal and one goal only 
— negative. Every day he gets up, Mr. Speaker . . . You know, 
it’s almost like Groundhog Day. The groundhog gets up to see 
if spring is coming and the sun is shining. This guy crawls out 
of his hole to see if there’s anything negative he can talk about. 
That’s what he’s about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister 
can blather on with the rhetoric, but the facts speak for 
themselves. Mr. Speaker, 19,000 jobs lost by young people. Mr. 
Speaker, these are more than just numbers. 
 
Now we knew that the NDP didn’t care about our seniors. We 
found that out when they hiked long-term care fees and had to 
back down in disgrace. 
 
Now we also find out that they don’t care about the young 
people in this province. They don’t care about the people who 
will provide a future for this province. They don’t seem to mind 
that 19,000 young people have lost jobs in Saskatchewan over 
the last two years. 
 
The minister says everything is fine. He says the opposition is 
being negative. Mr. Speaker, the government is being 
irresponsible by not putting forward a plan to stem the outflow 
of job loss by our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did Saskatchewan lose 19,000 jobs by young 
. . . for young people in the last two years? Why is the NDP 
content to drive out young people from our province? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we listen 
to this Leader of the Opposition every day. He’s the guy who 
developed the plan for ethanol, some mythical plan for ethanol 
that no one except them understands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s the guy who last fall got up and outlined a three-point plan 
for economic development growth. Did you want to know 
something, Mr. Speaker? When we brought that plan to the 
light of day and when even he started to realize that it couldn’t 
work, he quit talking about it. 
 
He’s got a one-line economic development plan, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s in 10 years he’s going to grow the population by 
100,000. That’s the plan. Now how do you get there? You 
know what, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — He doesn’t know. He doesn’t know 
and I want to tell you why he doesn’t. He offered up a great big 
tax reduction package. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — He offered . . . well, and let me tell 
him about it. He’s going to cut the corporate capital tax in half 
and, Mr. Speaker, he’s going to eliminate the small business 
tax. And they’re all over there cheering. But you want to know, 
Mr. Speaker, what none of them know? None of them know 
how he’s going to pay for it, Mr. Speaker, because the only way 
to do it is deficit budgeting. That’s their plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
does not understand that we’re going to pay for these things by 
growing the province, something that his government has failed 
to do over the last 11 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the minister is jealous 
because we have a plan and he doesn’t. Nevertheless, we see 
more damage caused by the NDP in Saskatchewan every day. 
 
Look at Saturday’s papers: Tuition fees are soaring; contract 
talks with teachers are at a stalemate; the outgoing president of 
the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) says the 
provincial health system is falling apart and that’s a direct result 
of the NDP government’s failure to grow the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s what happens when you drive 19,000 
young people out of work in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the NDP propose to pay for health care 
and education in the future if they keep driving young people 
out of jobs, out of the workplace, and in fact right out of the 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan to create jobs and to bring young 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

 

people home. Why is the NDP content to kill jobs? Why don’t 
they care about young people? Why don’t they have a plan to 
grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 
he’s going to grow the province, he’s going to grow the 
economy. You know what? He’s going to get out of his 
negative attitude hole and he’s going to stand up with his 
watering can, Mr. Speaker, and he’s going to spray some water 
on this economy and miraculously it’s going to grow and it’s 
going to create 100,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is some reality to governing. There is some 
reality to understanding what it’s going to take to build this 
economy. There is some understanding to know that agriculture 
has lost 50,000 jobs and we have replaced them in other areas 
of this economy, Mr. Speaker. And we didn’t do it by standing 
in an opposition bench and watering the plant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We worked with the business community, we worked with the 
educators in this province, we worked with the people of 
Saskatchewan. They’re the people that grow the jobs, they’re 
the people that grow this economy, and it’s not going to come 
from some mythical plant from the member from Biggar. It 
isn’t going to come from him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farmland Ownership 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. The Standing Committee on Agriculture will 
begin hearings this week to review The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Act, as directed by the NDP’s 2002 Throne Speech. 
 
A few months ago, the minister indicated to the Farm Land 
Security Board members that the Act would be changed this 
spring. As well, comments by the minister to the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 
have led many people to believe that the NDP do intend to 
introduce changes to the legislation that would allow more 
landowners in Saskatchewan by non-Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the Standing Committee on Agriculture does 
its work, will the NDP commit to making changes to the land 
ownership laws during this sitting of the legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Watrous, the member understands fully that during the Throne 
Speech of this year, we included in the Throne Speech the 
process of reviewing the farmland security Act, and that’s why 
we established in this province the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture. 
 
The Standing Committee on Agriculture over the next several 
weeks is going to review, with Saskatchewan people, the kinds 
of voice and concern and issue and thinking that Saskatchewan 
people wanted directed. That information will come back to the 
Standing Committee and to the Government of Saskatchewan, 

at which time we’ll then make a decision about the future of the 
farmland security Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
members on this side of the House agree with the minister that 
this Act is a concern. There are farmland owners in 
Saskatchewan who are having great difficulty because of the 
restrictions on the out-of-province land ownership. 
 
Earl and Jack Zenert have owned and operated a mixed cattle 
and grain farm near Drake for many years, but decided to sell 
their farm in 2000. They’ve had very little interest over the last 
two years and have had to rent out their land. 
 
This winter, however, an offer did come in from Ringstead 
Ranch of Millarville, Alberta. The owners of this ranch would 
like to buy the whole farm parcel, move a family onto the farm 
for permanent Saskatchewan residency, and start up a large 
livestock breeding herd operation. But their application for 
exemption to the Farm Land Security Board was turned down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is the existing legislation, which prevents 
new economic development and growth in Saskatchewan, how 
is that good for our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as you may know and the 
House may want to know, Mr. Speaker, that through the course 
of its work the Farm Land Security Board approves somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of 95 to 97 per cent of all the applications 
that come before them. And in this particular instance, Mr. 
Speaker, the Farm Land Security Board has made a decision 
that it’s not prepared to make that kind of an approval. 
 
And I say to the members opposite this is precisely why we said 
that we’d have the farmland security Act under review. That we 
want to take a look at this piece of legislation because there are 
many circumstances, Mr. Speaker, of which this piece of 
legislation, in my view, needs to be upgraded. This piece of 
legislation needs to be brought into the modern time. And this 
piece of legislation will assist, Mr. Speaker, in my view, in 
some of the . . . (inaudible) . . . the future investments that 
farmers in Saskatchewan will make. 
 
And that’s precisely why, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of 
legislation is coming through the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture and back to this Legislative Assembly during this 
session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — . . . but serious enough to review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the owners of Ringstead Ranch have made efforts 
to try to make a deal to work with the . . . for the Zenerts and 
for the province. They have even offered to have the family, 
who would take up permanent residency and manage the 
operation, take majority ownership to comply with the 
Saskatchewan residency regulations. But again, the Farm Land 
Security Board rejected their offer. 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

The Zenerts would love to sell their whole farm parcel as one 
unit and are anxious to get out of farming. They believe the 
Ringstead Ranch would contribute to the community by moving 
a new family into the area and hiring local workers for their 
farming operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this deal would not only be good for the Zenerts, 
but it would be good for the economic development in the 
Drake area. 
 
Will the NDP commit to loosening the restrictions of the 
farmland ownership in Saskatchewan before this legislative 
session ends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you. As I’ve said already in my 
previous two answers, this kind of a case that the member from 
Watrous brings forward is precisely the reason why we have in 
front of the standing committee today, Mr. Speaker, the 
examination of this piece of legislation. Because it’s our view 
that this piece of legislation is restrictive, Mr. Speaker, and it 
provides, from time to time, issues of which doesn’t allow for 
other people to come and do business in our province. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, to you and the members opposite, you 
too sit on the Standing Committee on Agriculture and so you’ll 
need to examine, you’ll need to examine your own constituents, 
Mr. Speaker. Because on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
they will be confronted with issues, as well, where their people 
who support their party will say to them they shouldn’t change 
that piece of legislation. So they’ll have to deal with people 
who they see on a regular basis who’ll be encouraging them not 
to change the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say to the members opposite, we’re going through the 
process today. You need to support the work of the committee 
and bring a recommendation collectively to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Aircraft 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, on a TV news item at noon 
today there was a piece about one of the government-owned 
aircraft no longer being in service. So my question, Mr. 
Speaker, is to the Premier. 
 
Did the provincial government recently buy another aircraft, in 
particular a King Air aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t know why all the other 
ministers are so scared of question period. This is a pretty 
friendly crowd from what I can see. 
 
I want to tell the member opposite that in fact the one 1975 
Cheyenne that we have in the air service has been grounded. It, 
of course, does have 16,000 hours on its airframe and, as such, 
its maintenance record was simply too much to maintain it. We 
have not purchased an aircraft. Instead what we have opted for 
is to look for a lease and to lease a new — well, new to us — a 
used aircraft, a used propeller aircraft. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on a review of 
Transport Canada’s Web site, it does in fact show that a new 
registration has been issued as of last Thursday, just this last 
week. And it’s registered to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) for a KingAir airplane, with a base 
here in Regina. 
 
I’d like to know, Mr. Speaker, how much did the government 
pay for this aircraft? Under which budget is it to be included? 
And what was the purchase price of this aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we have not purchased 
an aircraft. What we have done is leased an aircraft for a short 
period of time. It’s a five-year lease, approximate cost is about 
250,000 per year. This is certainly more economical than 
having purchased, and one of the reasons we’ve had to do it is 
we need to replace an aircraft. 
 
The KingAir 200s are a smaller aircraft than the 350s. They are 
the workhorse of the air ambulance fleet and this will still be 
the . . . this will now be the new standard for ours. 
 
In terms of the aircraft in the fleet, the second Cheyenne — 
which is again another 1975 Cheyenne — is nearing its time out 
on its life and as such will be basically used for backup 
purposes. 
 
I will make all members aware shortly to their own offices of 
the new operational protocols which will be in place to help 
manage the restraint that we’re going to find as a result of 
having two active aircraft and one in backup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, just to follow up on that 
question. The registration does not go onto an aircraft until 
there is an ownership change. 
 
Now on the Transport Canada Web site, it shows that the 
province of Saskatchewan is the owner of this new aircraft. Is it 
leased from CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan)? Are they the purchasers of this aircraft? And 
who is this aircraft for? Is it for the cabinet ministers; is it for 
the Premier? In fact is it . . . considering the recent notoriety on 
Ron Clark’s travel account, maybe it’s for him. Does he need 
his own aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly this 
aircraft, I have already explained, is a leased aircraft. It is not 
leased from CIC; it is a lease that we have entered into 
otherwise. And certainly the aircraft is there for the use of civil 
. . . of the civil service and the members of this legislature in 
their activities. 
 
I notice that the member for Lloydminster, last year, billed 
some $14,000 in terms of air travel using these very aircraft. So 
I think if anybody understands the need for these aircraft, 
certainly the member for Lloydminster should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

 

Health Care Issues 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
The Saskatchewan Medical Association held its spring meeting 
this last weekend. During its presentation to SMA, outgoing 
president Dr. Bev Karras referred to existing health systems in 
the province as hallway medicine because the system doesn’t 
meet the timely health care needs of patients. 
 
Dr. Karras says and I quote: 
 

This rationing of access has reached levels which threaten 
the professional integrity and morale of practicing 
physicians, and compromises our ability to provide 
reasonable patient care. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP is severely 
limiting access to operating time and compromising patient 
care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government has set 
forward its action plan for health. And one of the issues that 
we’ve been dealing with are the management of waiting times 
for surgery and we are doing that together with the 
professionals, members who . . . of the SMA are included in 
that, as well as the hospital administrators and other people. 
 
What we are going to do is we’re going to work with the people 
who are running the system to make sure that we have the 
resources that will allow for the care that’s needed in this 
province. And what we will continue to do is work with the 
SMA, work with others who are in the system to make sure that 
everything works for the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard over and over again from this government that they will 
work with people. The people of Saskatchewan are wondering 
when there’s going to be any results from their work with the 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Karras says a contributing 
factor to the difficulties faced in providing timely health care is 
the critical shortage of physicians, nurses, and other health care 
providers. She says and I quote: 
 

We continue to hear about patients being discharged too 
early or having their surgeries cancelled because there are 
no beds. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are putting more money into health care, 
but waiting lists continue to grow. In the 1999 election 
campaign, the NDP promised to hire 500 more health care 
providers. It has not worked and it has not happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why have the NDP failed to hire more health care 

professionals and where is all the money going? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that 
we do on this side of the House is spend a lot of time and effort 
to try to prevent truth decay. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite have a way of skirting around what is 
accurate about what is happening in our system. 
 
And what I would point through to the member opposite and 
say is that we have more doctors this year than we had last year. 
And we’re moving slowly and carefully. We do things like 
increase the number of spots at the medical school; so now we 
have 60 instead of 55. We’re working with all kinds of 
bursaries and other ways to make sure that we have the right 
kind of tools that we need to make sure that we get physicians 
practising right across the province. 
 
We’re working together with the nursing profession around 
magnet workplaces that encourage people to go to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that because that’s 
the right thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, Dr. Karras says providing 
sustainable, quality health care that meets the needs of patients 
and communities in a timely fashion should be the end goal. 
Sadly, we are a long way from achieving this goal in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall the NDP announced an action plan for 
health care in the province but so far doctors are not witnessing 
any results. Instead, doctors deal with, on a daily basis, these 
issues. They deal with reduced operating times, they deal with 
outdated equipment, and they deal with a lack of RNs 
(registered nurse) in the operating rooms, in the emergency 
care, and also on the wards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, when are health . . . when are 
health care providers and patients going to see results from the 
NDP’s action plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Part of our problem in this province is 
dealing with members like the member opposite and the 
negative attitude that they have. I would have to give . . . A 
practical example of this, Mr. Speaker, is that a year ago we 
announced that we’re going ahead and building a long-term 
care facility in Weyburn. 
 
Guess who didn’t show up? The member opposite didn’t show 
up and she has been fighting that project right from the 
beginning. And what we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is work with 
the people in the community, not those members opposite who 
create a negative environment around many, many issues. 
 
And so what we will do is we’ll work with the nurses, we’ll 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

work with the doctors, we’ll work with the people in the 
community, and we’re going to continue to build a very good 
system for all of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 45, The 
Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 32 — The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The whole system 
of land surveys and that whole operation that this NDP 
government has started this year has turned out to be a total 
disaster, and it’s going to be a privilege and a joy to discuss this 
today because it comes up, Mr. Speaker, I believe in the next 
two or three Bills as well. So we’ll have a good opportunity to 
discuss this and to voice a little bit of information that comes 
factually to us from all sides. 
 
This piece of legislation, as the minister indicated, authorizes 
the controller of surveys to refund fees in whole or in part, or 
allow on-line searches of plans to access the plans that were 
maintained by the former chief surveys officer, among other 
changes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this whole LAND (Land Titles Automated 
Network Development project) project has become a total 
disaster. First of all we know the amount of money that it’s cost 
and I think we’ll discuss that a little further on today. But it’s 
been a fine example of how socialist NDP thinking exists that if 
they can’t do it themselves then obviously no one else could. 
And that’s why they had a budget that started off with this 
whole concept some time ago of under 20 million. 
 
They didn’t bother checking to see if some private enterprise 
was prepared to come in and make a commitment — a 
commitment to say we’ll provide this service for this amount of 
money. They’d know exactly what it was. By now they’ve 
taken that amount of money and it’s been multiplied by about 
four or five and they still don’t have the system going. 

Land Surveys Act — total disaster. We recall some of the other 
plans that have existed in the province before. This is by far the 
one that has been the most mismanaged. This whole LAND 
project came up for debate many times in this legislature and 
around the province. The idea of computerizing the system may 
be worthy but the way the NDP has gone about it has been a 
total recipe for disaster, total recipe for disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have spent in the vicinity of $80 million — 
$80 million. It doesn’t work. So far it only is operating, more or 
less, in only part of the province. 
 
And how effective is it? You yourself, Mr. Speaker, will be 
reminded very well, some days ago, when I held a sheet of 
paper in this particular House and indicated that in the old 
system all the information that individual needed was in that 
one piece of paper. And then I rolled out what you get now, 
which is 20 pieces of paper, each one with a separate cost that 
was greater than that one single piece of paper before. 
 
That’s The Land Surveys Act. That’s how this NDP 
government functions. And it’s this kind of a mentality that has 
driven this province to the situation that we discussed, Mr. 
Speaker, in question period where we asked: what’s happened 
to the jobs? What’s happened to the growth? 
 
And it’s just as in the LAND system. They don’t want anyone 
else coming in from outside and taking the land because they 
have it figured out that if we keep enough people out, 
eventually all the NDP will own all the land in the province. 
 
It’s as the minister of Economic Development said some time 
ago, the fewer people that are around here the more there is for 
the rest of us. It’s that mentality that drives this kind of 
legislation, this kind of legislation that doesn’t allow other 
people in, that doesn’t allow other ideas to come in, and just say 
if it doesn’t come from those few individuals on those benches 
opposite, it obviously can’t be worthwhile doing. 
 
Well we’re seeing with The Land Surveys Act, Mr. Speaker, 
what a total disaster this is, how mismanaged this is. 
 
A number of years ago, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of 
visiting the Ukraine, a land that’s been rife with socialism for 
just about a century, just about a century. And you know it’s 
unfortunate, but when I came back here to Saskatchewan I can 
see that in 50 years the NDP have been able to do to 
Saskatchewan just about what it took the Communists 100 years 
to do in the Ukraine. They’re efficient, but inefficiency at . . . 
but efficient at mismanagement. Efficient at mismanagement. 
 
How else could you spend, Mr. Speaker, $80 million in such a 
short period of time, spend so much money and accomplish so 
little for all the rest of us? It’s a complete disaster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government’s own records said . . . say that they’ve spent 
up to 80 million. And those are the numbers that they are 
releasing to the public, Mr. Speaker. Those are the numbers that 
we’re releasing to the public. This project isn’t finished. This 
project isn’t completed. This project isn’t working. It doesn’t 
even cover all of Saskatchewan up to this point. Where this cost 
will go by the time they’re done, we have absolutely no idea, 
Mr. Speaker. It could definitely, in the way they’ve been going, 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

 

end up getting close to double this — 100,000, I don’t think 
would surprise anyone. 
 
Well they don’t have the Saskatoon office going, they don’t 
have the Prince Albert office going. They’ve already spent 80 
million. It’s not working where it is instituted. What will the 
cost be when they finally get it working throughout the whole 
province? And when will that take place? The inefficiency and 
the waste that this project has at present time is truly amazing, 
Mr. Speaker, truly amazing. When we ask questions about this 
system, Mr. Speaker, we hear from the ISC (Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) chief executive that 
millions more will still have to be spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t it have been a whole lot simpler if this 
government would have just left its socialist, NDP, self-centred 
mindset alone for once and just said, is there someone out there, 
is there someone out there who would come and give us an 
offer to put the system in place? 
 
If they would have said, for 80 million bucks, who would come 
do it, they would have had people flocking across the border — 
bad roads or not, they would have come with plans. They would 
have come with plans for a fraction of the amount they’ve 
misspent so far. 
 
They didn’t even ask the question. They didn’t even ask the 
question. Had they asked the question and had the number come 
back, yes, it’ll cost 100 million to put this into place, they might 
have been justified trying to create their own system. But they 
didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t do that. 
 
They didn’t even contact provinces next door, provinces who 
have systems in place, provinces who have a similar survey 
system as we have here which is different from what they 
happen to have in much of Ontario and much of Quebec. They 
have a different land survey system here. They could have gone 
to the provinces that had a similar system and said, could you 
come and help us; do you have some ideas; could we use your 
same system? But no, they wouldn’t do that. 
 
Reminds me a whole lot, Mr. Speaker, of the Education 
minister of some years ago who, when they found out that they 
had a problem with the math curriculum, instead of going to the 
province with the highest math scores and saying, we want your 
curriculum, they said no, we’ll have to create our own. That’s 
the way the NDP thinks. We have to create our own system. 
 
Well it wasn’t more than a month or two ago we got the results 
again, Mr. Speaker. Math students in Saskatchewan are lacking. 
So they had to create the idea themselves. They think they 
know it all. They couldn’t do it in the math system in schools. 
They can’t do it when they count quarters of section of land 
across this province. It’s been a total disaster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We receive all kinds of calls, faxes, e-mails at our office from 
people who’ve attempted to use the system and get back 
misinformation or get back information that comes in 20 pages, 
as I’ve just finished explaining, instead of one page. Only the 
NDP could waste this much money and get so little for it. 
 
One way we know that we have a white elephant on our hands 
is when we put the freedom of information request on the 

travelogues of people involved with the Crown corporation ISC 
and we learn that well over $100,000 were spent on travel to 
places around the world — Florida, California, and Europe — 
to ask to see how many sales they’ve made of this great plan. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, they’ve sold this plan to exactly 
the same number of people that they sold their math curriculum 
to — none, zero, nil, whatever term they need to have to get it 
through to them. It’s been a total disaster, no success 
whatsoever. But they’ve spent another $100,000 on trips around 
the world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe if we look at where they went, it 
might explain why they were going. It might have had precious 
little to do with selling this system. They went to Florida, 
California, Europe. Well those are places that tourists go to 
sightsee and visit and have a good time. That’s where they’re 
going to try and sell this program. But they’re unsuccessful. 
 
I’m somewhat suspicious, Mr. Speaker, that these are just nice, 
friendly little junkets they’re going on — trips to sightsee, look 
around the countryside, maybe buy some artwork, take that 
home. It had probably precious little to do with selling the 
system because if it did, either the system stinks or the selling 
was totally inept — one of the two, or both. It could have been 
both. But it was one of those situations. 
 
Florida, California, and Europe, Mr. Speaker. That’s where they 
go to sell this program, but totally unsuccessful. 
 
There are many questions that have to be asked about ISC and 
all the related pieces of legislation introduced in the Assembly. 
Bill 32 is one of those. We have sent this Bill to many 
interested third parties to get their opinion. We are still getting 
responses to those, and there’s a whole lot more time needed to 
debate this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members on this side are waiting their turn to 
get up and discuss with the members opposite — and for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan — what a disaster this is, 
how this is so indicative of the mismanagement that we see 
from day to day to day from the NDP across the way over there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for those reasons, and very good reasons they are, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 32 at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 33 — The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a . . . 
Members on my side would like for me to repeat exactly what I 
said. And I think we can probably oblige them because this 
Land Titles Act, Mr. Speaker, is sort of a — not a divine 
comedy — it’s a political comedy, that the people opposite 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

could actually create such a piece of legislation that happens to 
be very much else but just a bad joke. 
 
If it was just a joke, we could probably all enjoy it, but it’s a 
bad one, Mr. Speaker. It’s an expensive joke, and it’s a joke that 
creates a lot of confusion and work for people across this 
province at great expense to the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quoting the Justice minister’s second reading 
speech and referring to what he said on this, Bill No. 33 allows 
for: 
 

. . . new provisions concerning the process for the sheriff’s 
sales of land by court order; new provisions for removal of 
a court certificate of impending litigation from a title; 
clarification of the circumstances in which the title can be 
held by joint tenants with no (surveyorship) . . . and in 
which an application (must) be made to a court to end a 
joint tenancy. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister states that the key in this Bill is 
to ensure that there’s a clear definition for each new parcel of 
land after a new plan has been approved. Now the system . . . 
They’re changing the whole way of doing things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You’re quite aware of some of the old systems that worked 
well. They worked well in our province for over 100 years. 
When you discuss concepts such as metes and bounds, where if 
you had a particular piece of property and you bought part of it 
you might get all the land with the exception of the northern 
500 feet, this sort of thing. And that’s what’s meant by metes 
and bounds. You wouldn’t divide it up and put down a separate 
title for it; it would just indicate what was happening with it. 
 
This particular concern is things that we hear about a lot in our 
office. Many rural people are calling us, Mr. Speaker, or they 
e-mail or fax us about the problems with this new computerized 
LAND system. It’s a headache, Mr. Speaker. It deals with land 
descriptions and new parcels of land in ways that are totally 
different. 
 
The old system, Mr. Speaker, worked perfectly well. Neither 
you or I, Mr. Speaker, are aware of any situations where metes 
and bounds were used and a problem was created. People 
understood what that was . . . meant. People knew what the 
north . . . you know, the north third or the north half of a 
particular piece of land was. They understood those sorts of 
things. 
 
But apparently, those systems and those values that we used to 
have, to be able to use descriptions that made eminent sense to 
everyone in this province, are no longer good enough. We have 
to have some new systems, apparently. So we spent $80 million 
on this particular aspect as well. 
 
The question that has to be asked: how many pieces of 
legislation are we going to see regarding ISC and the LAND 
system? There are already two on the order paper in terms of 
problem with this system. 
 
Now we need to just look at that, Mr. Speaker. This system isn’t 
even totally working. It’s not even covering the whole province 
and we’re already operating with corrections. We’re already 

making corrections and amendments to something that isn’t 
even totally in place. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, it would have been a whole lot 
easier had that group of people opposite, those NDP socialists 
who want to create the world for themselves — and we know 
what a disaster that happens to be — if they would have gone 
someplace else, used someone else’s system, modified it for any 
differences that happen to exist in this particular province, we 
wouldn’t have to deal with a whole lot of amendments to a 
system that isn’t even in place. 
 
It’s a whole lot like General Motors or Ford or Chrysler putting 
a recall in place after the first car comes off the assembly line. 
We’d say, well, what a mis-thought car that must be. You got to 
recall it and the first one hasn’t even come off the assembly 
line. 
 
That’s as ludicrous as this piece of legislation is, Mr. Speaker, 
and as ludicrous as the whole concept of their new land titles 
and LAND system that happens to be. The whole ISC concept 
isn’t working. It isn’t working. 
 
We have many, many people, as I said, Mr. Speaker, who are 
frustrated with this, who have lots of questions. And when I 
started speaking on this particular Bill, Bill No. 33, I had a 
number of my colleagues ask me very immediately, as soon as I 
said that, would you make sure that you go ditto on this one as 
you did on Bill No. 32 because we all want to get up, we want 
to speak on this one as well because there is so much 
mismanagement that needs to be discussed, needs to be 
clarified, and brought to the light of day. 
 
And for that particular reason, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 33 at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 9 — The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up this afternoon and say a few words on Bill 
No. 9, a Bill that’s been brought by the Minister of Justice to 
make some changes and, according to the minister, we got the 
impression that these were kind of housekeeping kind of 
changes. 
 
But on first glance, we already began to see some problems 
with this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And so I think it’s important that 
. . . to spend a few minutes this afternoon just discussing, for the 
benefit of the legislature, some of the problems that we see 
here. 
 
Now one of the things that’s being talked about to begin with, 
Mr. Speaker, is the confidentiality that is required when 
business deals are taking place surrounding the exchange of 
property from one owner to another. And certainly it’s 
important, Mr. Speaker, that when property changes hands and 
real estate agents are involved . . . And often there are other 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

 

outside agencies that are involved, whether they be law 
enforcement or a financial institution, Mr. Speaker. Through 
this entire process, of course, confidentiality must be 
maintained in order to maintain the integrity of all the 
institutions involved. 
 
And certainly for the individuals who are involved in a property 
sales on a personal basis, Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to be 
able to assure them that when . . . Confidentiality respecting 
their business and their personal lives certainly remain at a level 
where what could happen in a deal such as this purchase of a 
property that confidentiality will remain at a high level. 
 
In the case of people being moved about, what could happen of 
course, Mr. Speaker — you take a financial institution that may 
be involved, they would be dealing . . . could be dealing with 
one person who’s specifically involved in helping with the 
transaction. 
 
And of course in Saskatchewan you know so well — and of 
course the Leader of the Opposition raised it very clearly in 
question period this afternoon, Mr. Speaker — is that we have a 
great deal of out-migration in Saskatchewan. And of course 
what happens in cases such as that, Mr. Speaker, is that — 
especially for financial institutions, law enforcement agencies, 
real estate brokers, and what have you, Mr. Speaker — is that 
when people move to another jurisdiction looking for a better 
life for themselves, is that then someone new then comes into 
the picture and starts to deal with the people involved in the real 
estate transaction. 
 
And so then it’s important — important, Mr. Speaker — that we 
have procedures in place in this province to protect people who 
are involved in the buying and selling of real estate and to 
protect them because someone who’s been first involved with 
the, with the transaction and then has been removed and 
someone else replaces them, that the first person carries that 
confidentiality with him. 
 
It’s important that people who are involved in real estate 
transactions on a personal basis, a personal level, Mr. Speaker, 
that there’s an assurance out there that as a society we recognize 
that their personal life is no one’s business but their own. And 
certainly that’s something that we want to maintain rather 
stringently. 
 
And now some other aspects of the Bill too, Mr. Speaker. One 
of the things that has often been found is that this government, 
this NDP government, is not afraid of putting tight restrictions 
on other agencies other than themselves to be able to provide 
reports back to auditors and what have you. 
 
And certainly they’re talking about the Saskatchewan Real 
Estate Commission needs to file an annual report every year. 
And certainly by the time their end of their year comes around, 
Mr. Speaker, in the past they’ve been provided with 60 days to 
get the report in. 
 
Well often, Mr. Speaker, the real estate business in 
Saskatchewan has at times — and maybe certainly not in the 
recent times — has been quite busy. And 60 days of course, is 
certainly not an adequate amount of time and the government is 
looking to up that to 90 days. 

And that’s certainly something that we would like to be able to 
discuss probably sometime in August with the Justice minister, 
at that time. And I think that would be a great opportunity to be 
able to discuss with the Justice minister, why they’re looking at 
freeing up the tight restriction that was placed upon the 
Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission. 
 
Because we certainly don’t see from this government that same 
kind of enthusiasm towards an appropriate time frame when it 
comes to job creation. We take a look at this government in the 
last election. They talked about creating 30,000 new jobs. And 
of course, what’s happened is that they’ve lost 19,000 jobs — a 
kind of a switch of almost 50,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we look about the appropriateness of time frames that 
are involved, you know, they’re putting expectations upon the 
Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission. Unfortunately we’ll 
have to go to another election before we’ll be able to do the 
same thing for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another aspect of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, that we have questions 
about and certainly we’re going to take the opportunity when 
we get a chance in Committee of the Whole — which we see as 
again as sometime in August, Mr. Speaker — is that when it 
comes to real estate, often — well not often — occasionally, 
occasionally, Mr. Speaker, is that through the business of real 
estate and the transaction that will take place that on a rare 
occasion a real estate broker or a real estate agent will make a 
mistake. It doesn’t happen very often. Certainly the people in 
the real estate profession are very professional, Mr. Speaker, 
and we want to applaud them for all the efforts they have . . . 
they’ve made in the past of trying to help Saskatchewan grow. 
Certainly that would go against the grain of this NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the incumbents, of course, upon real estate agents, 
the real estate brokers, would be to carry a degree of insurance 
that would protect themselves and most specifically to protect 
their customers, to protect their customers, Mr. Speaker, against 
errors and omissions. 
 
Now certainly in the past, of course, we’re well aware on this 
side of the House — maybe the other side of the House is not 
quite as well aware as we are — is that very seldom do real 
estate agents have to be invoked for their errors and omissions 
clauses in their . . . in contracts, but it does happen on a rare 
occasion. 
 
And real estate agents in a prudent manner, Mr. Speaker, have 
always carried an appropriate amount of errors and omissions 
insurance. They’ve always carried it with a reputable insurance 
agency. As you know, Mr. Speaker, in a society where you 
allow competition, insurance agents then sell errors and 
omissions insurance plus they’d be very aggressive in trying to 
promote their errors and omissions insurance so that real estate 
brokers and their clients can be protected in case something 
goes wrong in a real estate transaction. 
 
And for years, for years, Mr. Speaker, this has worked very, 
very well. The insurance business, through its competitive rates 
and competitive opportunities, has provided outstanding errors 
and omissions insurance. And certainly, it’s certainly been a 
well regarded safeguard when it comes to the clients of real 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

estate brokers and real estate agents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now but unfortunately, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we see in 
this Bill that the government for some reason or other is taking 
a look at changing this. They are taking a look at changing how 
insurance for errors and omissions are to be carried for real 
estate agents and brokers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve already mentioned, for years real estate agents and 
brokers have been able to go into a competitive market and 
been able to purchase their errors and omissions insurance and 
it’s worked very well. Now the clause that we’re seeing in this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, talks about a specified carrier — a specified 
carrier, Mr. Speaker, in regards to errors and omissions 
insurance. 
 
(14:45) 
 
As we know, that then will restrict down to a company of one 
whom real estate agents and brokers are going to be able to 
purchase their errors and omissions insurance from. Now this 
certainly would be an inappropriate type of process in a 
competitive insurance market. And certainly when we have a 
government such as we have here, this NDP government who 
already own their own insurance agency, is that it leaves a great 
deal of questions out there as what’s going to happen to errors 
and omissions insurance. 
 
Is then, as an example, a Crown corporation, the Saskatchewan 
SGI, going to be the designated carrier for errors and omissions 
insurance for real estate brokers in this province, Mr. Speaker? 
And on this side of the House we have a great deal of concern 
with that. Now because we’ve certainly seen where SGI, when 
it gets out of its basic core insurance, it seems to have a lot of 
trouble trying to compete and actually does not do very well 
when it’s not dealing with its core business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what is the intent of this government? To have a Bill with no 
specific that’s going to put into regulations who is going to be 
the carrier for errors and omissions insurance for real estate 
brokers, Mr. Speaker? And that’s a great deal of concern to us 
on this side of the House. 
 
As you know, in a competitive market, insurance agents who 
sell errors and omissions insurance must provide top quality 
service. And certainly to the real estate agents and brokers — 
and certainly to the clients of those agents and brokers — and 
now we go to a specified carrier that we’ve brought forward in 
regulations rather than in an Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does that mean then that we’re . . . that the real estate agents 
and brokers, and certainly the buyers and sellers in the real 
estate market, are going to be left at the whim of regulations 
carried out by the Department of Justice? We have a great deal 
of concern around that. Because certainly we want to make the 
marketplace in Saskatchewan as friendly as possible because 
it’s incumbent on this time in our history that the real estate 
market be as friendly as possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we know, real estate property is slow right now in 
Saskatchewan. We know that the NDP government has talked 
many times about how buoyant the market is. Well as an 
example I would like to explain to the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, what we consider a definition for buoyancy, and that 
certainly is not the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In a buoyant economy, Mr. Speaker, there would be a demand 
for housing. In Saskatchewan we don’t see that. There’s a 
demand for sales. There’s a lot of people trying to sell their 
property, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact in the area where I live, in the . . . near Prince Albert, 
and surrounding the city of Prince Albert, and I know also that 
inside the city of Prince Albert that through the late winter and 
early spring there was approximately 700, 700 houses for sale 
in the Prince Albert city and immediate area. Seven hundred 
houses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that’s . . . that does not speak to those of us on this side of 
the House of a buoyant market. And so when we see restrictions 
like this coming in a Bill, we’re kind of wondering, Mr. 
Speaker, how this is going to help a downturn in the market 
when we’re putting restrictions on buyers and sellers and 
certainly those agents who are involved in the movement of real 
estate property. 
 
Now we take the city of Prince Albert, and what we should do 
to explain to the members opposite, the NDP government, is 
that they need to understand what an up market might look like. 
Some friends of mine, Mr. Speaker, are trying to sell their 
house in Prince Albert. They moved . . . from Prince Albert, 
they moved to the city of Lloydminster. Certainly the member 
from Lloydminster is very proud of his city and all the activity 
that is going on there. 
 
Well these friends of mine, Mr. Speaker, they moved to 
Lloydminster from Prince Albert. They put their house up for 
sale. They bought a house very, very similar, very similar, Mr. 
Speaker, in Lloydminster. And lo and behold, in Lloydminster 
there was 28 houses for sale when they bought, Mr. Speaker. 
So, of course, when they bought that left 27 houses for sale. 
Unfortunately they are selling an almost identical house in the 
Prince Albert area, Mr. Speaker, and there’s 700 houses for 
sale. 
 
Now certainly we don’t want to think that the city of 
Lloydminster is anywhere near the size of Prince Albert. 
Certainly it’s only about 75 per cent of the size of the city of 
Prince Albert. But in reality then, there should only be 75 per 
cent more houses for sale . . . or 25 per cent, pardon me, houses 
for sale in the city of Prince Albert. But there’s not. There’s 
hundreds of per cent more for sale in Prince Albert, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, it works out to about 300 per cent more. And 
that’s the difference between having an upturn in the market 
and a downturn in the market. 
 
And certainly in Saskatchewan, in real estate, we’re seeing a 
significant downturn as people continue to leave in droves as 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the 
Opposition, mentioned in question period today. And the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote was unable to defend and 
was all . . . had to blame it on the farmers — it’s the farmer’s 
fault that things are going bad in this promise . . . province. 
Certainly they want to turn and blame the farmers, because after 
all the farmers didn’t vote for the NDP, Mr. Speaker, so 
therefore it must be their fault that things are going bad in the 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

 

province. 
 
Well unfortunately for the rest of Saskatchewan, maybe the 
farmers of Saskatchewan are just a little bit more enlightened, 
just a little . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just like to remind the 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers that the motion before the 
House is Bill No. 2, second reading, The Real Estate 
Amendment Act. And if he should stray once in a while, he 
should try to bring his topic back to the debate on that particular 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, of course I’d be . . . When I talk 
about the changes to The Real Estate Amendment Act, we want 
to be very clear that what I am talking about has very much to 
do with real estate and the amendments to the Act and how this 
. . . the changes to the Act, this Real Estate Amendment Act, 
has a severe negative effect upon real estate, real estate 
transactions in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course, as was mentioned earlier in question period, 
when we bring people into Saskatchewan, who are trying to buy 
and move to Saskatchewan, and yet we see a government who’s 
wanting to have changes to The Real Estate Act, and this 
amendment that talks about real estate brokers and agents only 
being able to purchase errors and omissions insurance from a 
single carrier, from . . . removing competition in this field. It 
must be a very large field of insurance, or should be an even 
larger area of insurance in this province, Mr. Speaker, but 
unfortunately, because of the downturn in the real estate market 
in this province, it’s probably not anywhere near as big as it 
should be or anywhere near as big as it could be. 
 
And so then what this government’s doing is bringing in a 
clause here in this Act that will probably even further restrict 
the opportunities for people wanting to come into Saskatchewan 
now, because every time we turn around, Mr. Speaker, we 
certainly see red tape piling up everywhere, and here again in 
Bill No. 9, An Act to amend the Real Estate Act, is more red 
tape — more red tape for the people who are wanting to come 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
Maybe what the government is doing, on the advice from the 
Minister of Industry and Resources, is put red tape in place so 
people can’t leave the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So when we see clauses like this that are brought in — 
specifically this one in Bill No. 9, An Act to amend The Real 
Estate Act — is that the intent of this government is make it so 
prohibitive people can’t leave this province? And we certainly 
see that in many areas of the red tape that they create is that this 
NDP government seems to have a tendency to put up a red wall 
— a large red wall — around the province of Saskatchewan to 
keep people out. 
 
And certainly, when we have clauses such as this brought in, in 
The Real Estate Amendment Act that speak very clearly to 
putting even further pressure on real estate agents and brokers, 
is that we’re very, very concerned that the intent then of this 
Bill is to further restrict the opportunities in business 
surrounding real estate. 
 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we need to, we need to hold this 
government accountable for further red tape that they’re putting 
on the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s something that’s a 
great deal of concern to us on this side of the House is the 
amount of red tape that they have a tendency to put in front of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Every time you turn around there’s more red tape. We see that 
in this Bill again — a restriction on real estate in this province, 
on real estate transactions. And so we can’t see how that’s 
going to help grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Because of this type of clause that’s been brought in this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s incumbent that more work needs to be 
done. Certainly we, on this side of the House, have received a 
significant amount of mail and faxes and e-mail in regards to 
this clause. And I’m sure that the government members 
opposite have also been receiving an equal or maybe even more 
— maybe even more — mail, e-mail, faxes, Mr. Speaker. 
Because certainly much of the correspondence that we’ve 
received has already been carbon copied to us and has already 
gone to government members. Certainly some of it has gone to 
the Minister of Justice. 
 
So then we know that the government is quite well aware that 
there is a problem with this Bill. And when we see a Bill such 
as this that’s going to bring in even further restrictions, we have 
a great deal of concern in regards to real estate, real estate 
opportunities, and any restrictions that this government might 
bring on real estate agents and brokers in this province. So I 
think it’s more appropriate at this time that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 34 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a privilege to enter into the debate on Bill No. 34, a 
Bill that enables the setting up of the Prince of Wales 
Scholarship, something that is certainly viewed as a helpful and 
positive mood in the education field. 
 
The Bill indicates that initially there’ll be 10 scholarships, the 
value of $500 each, set up for students entering grade 12 in 
community high schools. The minister indicated that there are 
presently 17 high schools that meet the criteria and have been 
designated as community schools, another 11 K to 12 schools 
that have been designated as K to 12 schools, and those grade 
11 students from these 28 schools will be eligible to apply for 
the scholarship. 
 
Most of these community schools are in areas of our province 
that are somewhat underprivileged. Some of the families 
perhaps don’t have the stability and social structure required to 
support young high school students to continue and finish their 
high school graduation, and so many . . . oftentimes these young 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

people are left to their own resources and certainly don’t have 
the financial wherewithal to complete their education. And of 
course we certainly know how important education is to our 
young people, for without it, they are severely handicapped and 
their future certainly is in question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess one of the questions that we would have as . . . deals 
with the community schools and the designation of other 
schools in the future. How many of the present community 
schools are located in rural Saskatchewan versus urban 
Saskatchewan? Oftentimes these changes take place in areas the 
rural . . . in urban Saskatchewan, and rural Saskatchewan gets 
left behind. And there’s definitely a need. Perhaps the numbers 
aren’t there to fit their criteria for classification as a community 
school. Or perhaps there isn’t a community initiative in some 
areas. But that . . . there certainly doesn’t mean that there isn’t a 
need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another question that we would have as far as the establishment 
of this scholarship is, what are the criteria for being approved 
under the scholarship process? There’s oftentimes when there’s 
these type of funds are available, there are those in our society 
who change their situation so that perhaps they can take 
advantage of some of these funds and maybe, probably don’t 
need them. 
 
And what type of safeguards will be put in place, Mr. Speaker, 
to guard against that? It’s certainly not always possible to 
prevent that entirely, but if adequate safeguards are put in place, 
the money can be directed to those people who will benefit 
most from these types of scholarships, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then of course completing high school and completing 
grade 12 is only part of many students’ educational process. It’s 
the first step, Mr. Speaker. A number of students go on to 
post-secondary education, whether it be attending one of our 
universities or our technical colleges. And what we have seen 
just in the weekend’s papers, we’ve seen that the University of 
Saskatchewan has announced some fairly substantial increase in 
tuition fees. And so there will be additional help needed for 
these students who will be qualifying for the Prince of Wales 
Scholarship to get their grade 12. 
 
(15:00) 
 
As I said, that’s just their first step. And if they don’t have 
family backing and financial resources of their own, we 
certainly will need an increase in bursaries and student loans to 
. . . so that those students, those graduating students from our 
high schools, will be able to continue on with their education in 
our post-secondary education systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another part of the . . . of Bill 34 allows for the 
amendments . . . or is an amendment to The Education Act 
which allows amalgamating school divisions to have a grace 
period to harmonize their mill rates. Quite often if you have two 
or more school divisions amalgamating, they will . . . it’s not 
uncommon for them to have different mill rates. And to require 
them to have the same mill rate after amalgamation could cause 
them hardships in a number of cases. 
 
There’s . . . the most recent example of amalgamation process is 
taking . . . part of my constituency is being affected by the 

amalgamation of the Buffalo Plains, Indian Head, and Cupar 
school divisions. And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that 
for the 2000 tax year those three school divisions, they have . . . 
they will be operating as one school division but it’ll be an 
informal process for this upcoming school year and they will 
achieve complete amalgamation in the fall of 2003. 
 
But for the taxation year of 2002, those three school divisions 
have three different mill rates, Mr. Speaker. And so therefore 
with this amendment and the provision of allowing them to 
phase in and . . . so that they can eventually harmonize their 
mill rates, I think it would be useful in this whole amalgamation 
process. 
 
There’s the greater issue of amalgamation, Mr. Speaker, which 
this Bill doesn’t address, and . . . But there are some issues that 
I would like to outline at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly we are happy to see that this amalgamation process is 
a voluntary process, that it’s not being forced upon the boards 
of education unlike the plans a couple of years ago when this 
government was bound and set on a forced amalgamation of 
rural municipalities and we saw the backlash and the 
dissatisfaction with rural residents with that type of a process. 
And this is certainly a much better approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it certainly has . . . there are some concerns that should be 
addressed, Mr. Speaker, as far amalgamation. The government, 
the Minister of Learning has announced financial incentive to 
school boards of education who want to undergo the 
amalgamation process. 
 
A word of caution to those boards from the experience of other 
boards who have either completed amalgamation or are in the 
process of amalgamating, that the financial incentive probably 
won’t offset all the additional costs if the boards of education 
are going to take this amalgamation process seriously and do all 
the work that’s required to achieve a good product at the end of 
the day. However, the financial assistance that the Minister of 
Learning has announced is helpful and useful in that process. 
 
And then there’s also a question of boundaries of these new 
school divisions. Do they fall . . . are they logical? Do they fall 
within other boundaries of service providers? Perhaps one could 
look at the health districts. Do the school . . . do the new school 
division boundaries fall within the health districts. 
 
But perhaps the health districts aren’t the best example to use 
because this government had an opportunity to rationalize and 
. . . the health district boundaries so that they made some sense 
and that they would follow a common trading . . . practices and 
those sorts of things, and they certainly didn’t. They backed 
away from it and they just accepted the old boundaries. 
 
And then we have some unusual circumstances with the new 
health region boundaries. In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatoon Health District comes all the way down to 
Strasbourg. Well, Strasbourg is a 40-minute drive out of 
Regina. It really doesn’t make any sense to have those . . . that 
whole area of my constituency in the Saskatoon Health District. 
Those boundaries should have been realigned. 
 
So it seems like there isn’t a lot of direction being given by this 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

 

government as far as rationalizing and making new boundaries 
that make some sense and would help for the efficient delivery 
of government services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the . . . this mill rate, as I said this mill rate adjustment is a 
very . . . of great concern to boards of education that are looking 
at the amalgamation process or are undergoing the 
amalgamation process. And particularly when there’s an 
ever-increasing . . . the ever-increasing cost of our K to 12 
system of education is being funded by the property tax owner. 
 
We’ve seen again this year in this budget, where the boards of 
education are asked to get one more mill from their property tax 
owners. The computational mill rate has been raised from 16 to 
17 per cent. 
 
We’re hearing from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) that the . . . that this much touted increase in 
funding in the K to 12 system by this government is going to do 
great things and yet it’s not even paying the bills. It’s not 
providing enough money to pay the increases in the teachers’ 
salaries or the increases in the . . . in utility bills and so on. And 
therefore many boards of education are forced to increase their 
mill rates. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, this whole amalgamation process leads 
to the question of this government’s complacency and 
acceptance to manage a declining economy and a declining 
population, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we really need in this province is we need a vision of 
growth, a plan to grow the province so that we have a bigger 
pie, Mr. Speaker, so that there is more money for education, 
there’s more money for health, there’s more money for 
agriculture. 
 
But these people, this NDP government really has no plan. The 
only thing they do is they look at managing . . . crisis 
management, putting out the fires and saying, well okay, I guess 
if we’ve got to lose 35,000 students in our K to 12 system over 
the next 10 years, I guess so be it, that’s the way it has to be and 
therefore we need fewer school divisions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
concerns that we have with this Bill. We would like to consult 
with the stakeholders and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 10 — The Tax 
Enforcement Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 
minutes to talk today about The Tax Enforcement Amendment 
Act. And at first sight, Mr. Speaker, it looked like this Bill 
probably had no problem passing, until we got into the part 
where the minister explained about the amendments to the Act 
that: 

. . . the Lieutenant Governor in Council (will have) the 
authority to set the property value I just mentioned in 
regulation. 

 
That was a quote from the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all have concerns on this side of the 
House when it comes down to removing something from the 
floor of the legislature which we can scrutinize and discuss in 
here and debate, and removing it into regulation where it’s out 
of sight from anyone in the public. A figure like this would be 
set behind closed doors probably by the bureaucracy. 
 
And we’ve seen in the past by this government, the bureaucracy 
seems to be running the show over there and driving the agenda 
right now. An example I can use is with CIC right now and Mr. 
Hart, and with the new ethanol plan that this government 
supposedly has or the plan that Frank Hart has and the 
government is just following with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see from time to time through every 
department in government when something is in regulations, 
something is slid through that actually the elected members of 
the House here have no opportunity to go out to the public and 
say, what do you think of this; do you like this; is it good for 
you? It’s actually brought in, it’s enforced, and it’s actually 
happening before anybody has the opportunity to debate the 
issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve spoke to this Bill a couple, three 
times now, and we’ll have a number of questions in committee, 
so at this time I would be willing to let this move to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les 

prestations alimentaires familiales 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right, 
Susan Amrud, who is the director of legislative services, with 
whom you will all be familiar; Lionel McNabb to my left, who 
is the director of family justice services — it used to be 
maintenance enforcement and other things — also you will be 
familiar with Mr. McNabb; and behind me to my right, Darcy 
McGovern, who is Crown counsel in legislative services, also 
you’ll be familiar with him. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the 
minister, welcome, and to your officials as well. I think some of 
the pieces of legislation that we’re discovering today are ones 
that I think everyone in the province has sort of hoped would be 
coming down the path sometime because there have been 
substantial concerns over the past with things like . . . 
particularly the topic talked about, Bill No. 8, The Maintenance 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

Amendment Act. 
 
And to that extent I think the fact that we’re at least looking at 
those, obviously we’re fairly supportive or we wouldn’t be in 
the Committee of the Whole at this time. And so essentially 
this, I believe, is supposed to be a streamlining of our 
legislation with what’s happened federally. 
 
I’d wonder on some confirmation on that, and whether our 
legislation is now an identical overlap of what happens in other 
provinces or if we have some things that are unique to 
Saskatchewan? And if so, what are those? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, just to confirm the issue 
raised by the member. Indeed, this is a matter which is being 
undertaken by all provinces and it does merely serve to 
streamline the provisions for the affected parties. They’ll no 
longer have to reassert the issue of family maintenance or child 
maintenance once the child becomes 18 years old. 
 
And I might say too that this has received wide consultation 
across the province with both those interested in the matter 
from a family perspective and those interested in it from a legal 
perspective. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Just to sort of go on down that same road that 
we were on, is this legislation basically identical to what’s 
happening in other provinces? If not, then in which way is it 
different? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — It’s exactly the same, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think that the part that 
we’re discussing that this Bill deals with is the matter of 
educational responsibility. Where now that’s an ongoing thing 
unless someone has to have it stopped, which is probably a 
good issue, rather than to have to have some 17-, 18-, 
19-year-old have to initiate the fact that they want that 
maintained. 
 
What precautions are there in Bill No. 8 that would ensure that 
this doesn’t end up being someone in a lifelong educational 
venture and say, well now I’ve sort of attached myself to the 
family jewels so education now is open to me forever? What 
precautions are in there? And I think the term reasonable 
education is there. What is the generally accepted definition of 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises an interesting 
point, Mr. Chair, about the potential for someone to, a child to 
be engaged in education or kind of engaged in education for a 
very long period of time and what issue that might raise for the 
payer . . . a parent. 
 
Under the present legislation, which would require some 
assessment as to whether at the age of 18, if the payer objected, 
the child is still if you want eligible for maintenance, would 
require those kinds of assessments already. So we have some 
experience of the courts making decisions about the educational 
experience of children who are faced . . . who are the subject of 
child maintenance orders. 

Generally the courts are recognizing support up to the level of a 
first degree, but the courts will respond in a reasonable way to 
that problem. And if there’s some concern about the decision 
made by the court, of course there are options available to the 
parents. 
 
So we’re having some experience already with that particular 
question and it seems not problematic. Reasonable decisions are 
being made by the courts. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I think I want to go to one or 
two questions dealing with the . . . how the courts are going to 
operate in this. 
 
I guess it’ll be something we’ll have to watch to see if the 
courts suddenly decide that one degree is not really worth a 
whole lot anymore, now it becomes two degrees and becomes a 
master’s, and those sorts of things. 
 
So it’ll obviously have to be something that we watch and, as 
the minister said, the courts up to this point have been fairly 
reasonable and consistent in their judgments. 
 
Will this have any impact on the amount of work that courts 
have to do? Like do we see the court load increasing, 
decreasing, or will it just basically the same because the same 
number of families that are coming through the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well because there wouldn’t be a 
need to apply to have someone covered beyond the age of 18, 
when that was desired by all involved, this would actually save 
some time for the court’s process, the court system. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think that’s a fairly major 
plus because I think one of the concerns that’s out there is that 
courts always seem to be bogged down, overloaded, and there’s 
long court waiting times. If this is one of those efforts that tends 
to reduce the load in our court system, I think it’s a very big 
plus to that extent. 
 
Having said that, that concludes the questions that we have on 
Bill No. 8. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Enforcement of Canadian 
Judgments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des 

jugements canadiens procurations 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister if he has other officials 
to introduce, if not, that’s fine. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. We believe that we had a Bill 
somewhat similar to this passed three or four years ago. And 
I’m wondering if this is just an extension of that that moves 
beyond monetary matters to things that are more non-monetary. 
I’m wondering if the minister would want to respond to that and 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

 

maybe give us a brief listing of the kinds of things that are 
covered in here that are non-monetary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member is 
quite right that under the present legislation non-money 
judgments are not addressed and this Act will rectify that, that 
issue so that such things as injunctions, restraining orders, 
orders requiring specific action on the part of a person, those 
kinds of things will be the subject of this legislation. 
 
It also will include orders that define certain rights in 
relationships, such as adult guardianship. So a number of issues, 
quite rightly, as the member mentions beyond money 
judgments. I guess the most familiar would be an injunction 
stopping somebody from . . . ordering somebody to stop doing a 
particular thing. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. If I read the Bill correct, this is 
not an amendment . . . Well, it does make certain amendments. 
Is the part that relates to the monetary aspect that was passed a 
number of years ago, has that changed at all, or is that . . . that 
part of this whole concept still identical to what it was years 
ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member’s quite right 
that the old provisions dealing with money judgments remain in 
operation in the same way. It was regarded as easier and better 
and cleaner to bring a new Act to cover the whole package of 
amendments rather than to make a number of specific 
amendments. 
 
So this really restates the money judgment question and adds 
the non-money judgment issues too, so that now it’ll be pretty 
straightforward for those affected to register all of the issues 
that they have on their concern . . . in their concern with another 
province, if somebody has moved from Saskatchewan to 
Alberta, Manitoba, whatever. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. This Bill, I believe, is similar to 
some of the other ones we’re discussing today where we’re sort 
of doing a parallel legislation here as other provinces. And I 
will probably have the same question for each particular Bill 
because I think it’s somewhat important to ensure that. Are 
there any differences between this Bill and parallel legislation 
in other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — This Bill, Mr. Chair, is the uniform 
Bill proposed by the Uniform Law Conference of Canada and 
will in time be the legislation across the country in each of the 
provinces and territories. And they are in the process of 
legislating, in the same way as we are, this uniform Bill. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Provinces are sort of adopting that parallel 
legislation on a piecemeal basis like they are doing it when it 
suits them for whatever reason. And I’m just curious how long 
. . . Do you have any idea how long before all provinces will 
have a similar piece of legislation? Because if another province 
doesn’t have an identical piece of legislation then the carry-over 
and the movement back and forth becomes somewhat difficult. 
So where are we at with all provinces being on side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, we don’t have an exact 
date, but plainly with Saskatchewan introducing this legislation, 

it will spur other provinces to move along. So we would 
anticipate in short order that all provinces will implement this 
. . . will introduce and implement this legislation. And it’s not 
regarded as a controversial matter, so it really is just a question 
of getting it done across the country. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And as again with the previous Bill, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s one of those directions that I think is noteworthy 
that we’re putting in some legislation in place dealing with 
family and family law that’s similar across, across our nation. 
To that extent we have no more questions on Bill No. 26. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires procurations 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. This particular Bill, I think, has a 
few more specific details in it that we’ll want some clarification 
on and probably particularly the aspect dealing with 
corporations. 
 
Now I think what we’re trying to address here is that people 
who have a responsibility for enforcement or for maintenance 
don’t try to and evade that by having their money shovelled off 
into some strange corners and then, you know, sort of say that 
that is not under their control. 
 
I would like for the minister to discuss . . . I have sort of a key 
term that’s in here, and that is the control of corporation. And 
we may have some other questions on that specifically as it will 
relate to family businesses where you have a number of families 
and different percentages of control. 
 
So I wonder if the minister would want to go into some detail 
on what is specifically meant by control of a corporation? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member 
raises an important question and one which does need to be 
clear in people’s minds. If a person who is the subject of a 
maintenance enforcement order is the sole shareholder of a 
corporation, I think the member will understand there’s no real 
challenge there. It’s clear that the corporation is just the alter 
ego of the person against whom the enforcement order is made. 
 
It becomes more complicated when the member is not . . . or the 
person is not the sole shareholder or in fact . . . and particularly 
not the majority shareholder, or even more complicated where 
the . . . where somebody else is running the company and 
owning the shares in the company rather as a kind of surrogate 
for the person against whom the enforcement order is made. 
 
It could be a new spouse; it could be a friend; it could be a 
brother or a sister. So it might then not be clear quite whether or 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

not the person against whom the enforcement order is made is 
in fact making money as a result of running a company, because 
it’s being run by somebody else on his behalf. 
 
So in those instances the maintenance enforcement office would 
apply to a court to actually make a decision as to whether or not 
that company is in fact being run for the person against whom 
the enforcement order is made. So where there’s any doubt, the 
maintenance enforcement office will apply to a court to get the 
doubt clarified. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think, as the minister 
correctly states, that there’s so many variations in ownership of 
a corporation that it may be something that in legislation it 
would be almost impossible to cover it in detail and therefore it 
needs a court statement to clarify that. 
 
It’s our understanding that for the most part legislation in other 
provinces is quite similar, particularly British Columbia. But 
British Columbia has a section entitled a balanced approach to 
enforcement against a corporation, which doesn’t exist in ours. 
 
And I’m wondering, if we’re sort of looking for overlapping 
pieces of legislation, there must have been a specific reason 
why our Saskatchewan legislation doesn’t include that concept 
of a balanced approach to enforcement against a corporation 
and why it was chosen not to include it in our legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member will probably know that 
courts will not very easily go behind the status of the 
corporation to look at shareholders running it, and treat 
shareholders and corporations as the same. And that’s a 
long-standing kind of legal tenet. 
 
But the view of the government is, and the view of the 
Department of Justice is, that because if there is any confusion 
at all or any doubt at all about whether the corporation is being 
run for the person against whom the maintenance order is made, 
then the court will resolve those questions and the court will do 
so in a reasonable way, and will not easily confirm that the 
person . . . or will not, without clear evidence from the 
maintenance enforcement office, look behind the corporation. 
 
So it’s our view that the provision the member mentions in 
place in British Columbia is not necessary because the courts 
will already respond in that way based upon the evidence 
presented by the maintenance enforcement office. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. So it seems what’s happened in the 
British Columbia situation is they have put a check and a 
balance in place which we have then just entrusted to the courts 
without putting it in legislation. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well essentially that’s true. But I 
think the member needs to remember too that when an 
assessment of this sort is being made, the court will hear from 
the corporation, will hear from those who are on its . . . who are 
shareholders if they want to make a presentation, will hear from 
the president, and will hear from the offices of the corporation. 
 
So the corporation itself will have an opportunity to present its 
side of the case, and presumably will try to argue that it is not a 
corporation run by or for the person not paying. So there are, I 

think, fairly significant checks and balances in that whole 
process to ensure that the right decision is made. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I guess that’s another one of 
those items we’ll have to watch carefully where the courts go 
with that, because I think in the business family the fact that a 
corporation is basically treated as an individual is a fairly sacred 
concept and we would hate to see that destroyed through the 
side door as this one might. 
 
There’s another phrase in Bill 27 in which we discuss how 
information is sent back and forth, and particularly when 
someone is going to be losing their driver’s licence. And we see 
that in this section there is a term, “. . . ordinary mail; or . . . any 
other prescribed means.” And we notice that there isn’t . . . 
Registered mail doesn’t seem to be a key factor in that. I’m 
wondering why it isn’t set up in such a way that it has to be 
done by registered mail so that’s there’s a definite record of the 
item being sent and received. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member’s right, Mr. Chair, that 
no longer would the decision to suspend a license be 
communicated or the notice of withdrawing a licence be 
communicated by registered mail. I understand that those who 
think that this might be happening to them go to great lengths to 
avoid the service of the registered mail, making it more time 
consuming, more difficult to administer. 
 
It is also the way in which SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) administers other matters of suspending licences, 
and it is SGI that has a pretty up-to-date address for the person 
in question — at least that was the address when they renewed 
their licence. So it’s a quicker and easier and simpler process 
which we can follow. 
 
As the member will know, this is a fairly effective way of 
enforcing payment by those who need to ensure that they’re 
responding to their responsibilities. And we want to make it as 
effective as possible. And by no longer requiring registered 
mail, it does make it more straightforward and easier and 
quicker as they say. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a couple of 
questions on Bill 27 and possibly be that some of the questions 
might even be dealing with Bill 28, and if they do, you can just 
indicate and I can re-ask them under the Bill 28. 
 
Over the last year I’ve had about three or four cases dealing 
with out-of-province maintenance orders. So I guess I’m here to 
look for some information and, at that end, to see how this Bill 
will, I guess, help me dealing with them cases. 
 
In surprisingly all three cases I’m dealing with, it’s . . . the 
spouse is living in the same province, BC; the other spouses 
with children are here in Saskatchewan. Will this legislation 
help in process of . . . In all three cases, the spouse in BC isn’t 
paying maintenance. So what the spouse here in Saskatchewan 
is trying to get a maintenance order in force and they’ve 
registered here with the Saskatchewan end of it. And then 
apparently the Saskatchewan end, if I’m right, contacts the BC 
end. But so far, they haven’t been able to get anywhere at that 
end. 
 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

 

And I know the one case has been six months. You know, 
there’s letters going back and forth into BC, has written letters 
to the man and they’re . . . What I’m . . . I guess my first 
question, will this new legislation help streamline or make it . . . 
or put some more teeth into making maintenance orders a little 
better to be enforced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In response to 
the member’s question, some of what he raises is more 
appropriately raised in Bill 28. We’ll get to that when we get 
there, and there are some facilitating measures there. And in this 
Bill, there are also some facilitating measures. 
 
In the circumstance in which a person lives in British Columbia, 
say, or another province but has a source of funds inside 
Saskatchewan, say, it might be, say, money from Workers’ 
Compensation or it might be an estate of a person who’s passed 
away and that money is being administered here and will be 
transferred to the person in British Columbia. That’s a sum of 
money . . . those are examples of sums of money which can be 
attached by the maintenance enforcement office to pay the 
maintenance enforcement order. 
 
So that’s a relatively minor modification but an important one 
for those receiving maintenance orders. It gives a . . . gives a 
number of sources of income to pursue. So if the person living 
outside the province has a source of income inside the province, 
that will now be a source which can be pursued by the 
Saskatchewan maintenance enforcement process. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately, the 
cases I’m dealing with, if I can remember right, they have no 
assets here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But one of the cases did deal with, I think it was joint 
ownership of a house in BC. The man had remarried and his 
new wife and him, the house . . . and both are owners. Under 
this legislation, does that deal with that asset? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The province in which the property is 
situated would be the province . . . would be the province whose 
rules would be applied to the dispute or the issue. But we can 
obviously do a lot of the . . . we can do the work here by 
contacting the other province. The member will be aware of 
that. That doesn’t always get the matter resolved, as the 
member knows. 
 
But we . . . When we get to Bill 28 we’ll see ways in which we 
. . . they’re instituting mechanisms to make this process a heck 
of a lot easier. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I look forward to asking a couple of questions 
then on Bill 28. I have one more question on this Bill. 
 
Just going to the end of it they’re talking about licensing. If the 
spouses in BC have licences, does this make it easier now to 
revoke them licence, or put the charge on? Could you do a little 
more explaining on it. I have a hard time following the Bill. If 
there’s any more teeth with that, how does that deal with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises an interesting . . . 
He’s got all these interesting questions that are of significant 
concern to those trying to find access to money to raise 

themselves and their families. 
 
And I know from my own experience, not personally but as an 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) too, that the whole 
process of maintenance enforcement can be very, very 
frustrating when you just can’t get your hands on that money 
and you know that the person is either playing fast and loose 
with whether they have a job or not, or the . . . everybody I 
think will have had many examples of this. 
 
The issue of drivers’ licences in other provinces will again be 
dealt with by the maintenance enforcement rules and 
regulations of those other provinces. But I might say that . . . 
but if it’s here in Saskatchewan then we have an arrangement 
with SGI — the government has an arrangement with SGI — 
whereby those licences can be suspended and withdrawn. 
 
(15:45) 
 
With a number of provinces the Government of Saskatchewan 
also has — or the maintenance enforcement office also has — 
arrangements whereby if somebody’s licence is suspended or in 
another . . . in that other province, they come here and apply for 
a driver’s licence, they won’t get one either. 
 
So there’s a lot of co-operation between provinces to try to 
facilitate the enforcement of maintenance orders. And in a 
federal system like ours, if that jurisdiction is not administered 
by the federal government, then there does need to be 
mechanisms whereby the provinces find solutions amongst 
themselves to these challenges. 
 
And I think these . . . this and a number of other pieces of 
legislation indicate that the provinces have worked hard to try 
to find the solutions and that while they . . . all those solutions 
won’t be found, there are significant . . . there is significant 
progress here. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support 
Orders Act/Loi sur les ordonnances 

alimentairies interterritoriales 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few questions, 
probably pertaining along the same line of there with this Bill. 
What are the changes to the legislation will . . . that are going to 
be enacted dealing with other provinces? And also, is there any 
. . . going to be changes in how other provinces deal with 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raised the question of the 
main thrust of The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Act. And 
as a little bit of background, the member might be aware that 
each of the provinces, and indeed each of the premiers, have 
committed themselves to responding in this way to enacting 
legislation which will facilitate the enforcement of orders 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

outside of the province in which they’re granted, which is an 
important part of facilitating and speeding up the process. 
 
And all of the provinces have committed themselves to pass this 
legislation before the next time the premiers meet which is the 
fall, I think, or maybe even August. So it’ll be done this session 
right across the province. 
 
And just coincidentally, this will also integrate the process with 
the process in the United States so that whether people move 
around in Canada or in North America they will be covered by 
the same kinds of rules and regulations. 
 
And essentially if an order is obtained here in Saskatchewan 
and the subject of the order leaves, goes to another province, 
once that is identified, once the residence of the person is 
identified in another province, the enforcement of that order can 
begin immediately. There won’t be any need to follow any 
procedures other than for the maintenance enforcement office to 
send the file to Alberta or Manitoba or British Columbia for 
enforcement. So that will save quite significant periods of time 
and facilitate the whole process and consequently improve the 
situation of those who are receiving the orders. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I imagine a couple of 
constituents will be happy with that because I know the one 
case was on a 10-year maintenance order. So when I pass this 
on to her, I know she’ll be, once the Bill’s passed . . . And when 
will it be proclaimed, I guess? Because that’s the next question 
they’ll be asking me when I go home and I pass this 
information on to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I want to thank the member for 
his indication that he and his constituent will support this 
legislation. I’m sure he’ll also encourage her to vote for the 
NDP at the next election. 
 
The . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. Maybe I was 
expecting a little too much then. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That sounds entirely reasonable to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well there you go; you never know. 
The . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can we quote you on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think I’m already quoted on that. 
 
As the other provinces pass their legislation and we all work on 
common regulations and common pieces of paper and common 
forms, it’ll take a little while but I think we can all expect this 
whole process to be operational in the fall, certainly by the end 
of the year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With that, I think I 
only have one more question on that. Are all provinces on board 
with this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Each of the provinces and I guess the 
territories too. And the territories. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Just one question. Does this Bill 

affect a person’s right to have the amount of support they have 
been ordered to pay reviewed in those cases where their 
circumstances change? And what would the process be on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, it does facilitate that process, Mr. 
Chair, in the same kind of way as, as the order is sent to another 
province in the event that somebody . . . the payer lives there. 
Similarly a change will be sent as well. So it’s a much quicker, 
more efficient, more effective process. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as with the other pieces of 
legislation that involve the families of this province and taking 
of the children and the maintenance, we support the philosophy 
as basically behind these. We’ll look to see how in detail it 
works out. So we’re quite prepared to end the questioning on 
this particular Bill as well, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — Committee members, Bill No. 28 has 50 clauses 
and 8 parts. Would the committee give the Chair leave to deal 
with this Bill by parts? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 50 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les 

prestations alimentaires familiales 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Enforcement of Canadian 
Judgments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des 

jugements canadiens procurations 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 
sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires procurations 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(16:00) 
 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support 
Orders Act/Loi sur les ordonnances 

alimentairies interterritoriales 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair: — The minister responsible for Northern Affairs is 
here and I invite him to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I just want to take a few minutes to basically introduce 
my staff and also to — there’s a couple of students watching — 
to explain what the department of . . . or the estimates portion is 
all about. 
 
So first of all I want to say hello to Kelly and Kaylie Rediron 
from Pinehouse who are watching television and they are going 
to be watching for a while. 
 
And what we do during this process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we 
go through different departments and what we’re spending in 
each of the departments and agencies of government so people 
out there know what exactly is going on. 
 
So with that I’d like to introduce my deputy minister, Alan 
Parkinson; and also next to Alan we have Cheryl Stecyk, and 
she’s the business manager. And both of these officials work for 
the department of Northern Affairs. 
 
And obviously, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, there is 
officials from across the way that will be asking questions of 
the minister, and we’ll certainly do our very best to answer. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Mr. Minister of Northern Affairs, welcome to your 
officials. It’s a pleasure to be able to spend a little time this 
afternoon working through the Office of Northern Affairs, the 
budget that you have. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess a few of us on this side of the House, and 
probably on your side of the House also, are not totally aware of 
the importance that your government places upon the 
involvement of your Office of Northern Affairs in northern 
Saskatchewan, certainly north of the northern administrative 
district line. 
 
And I’m wondering if you’d take a few minutes this afternoon 
to help everyone understand the extent of the involvement of 
Northern Affairs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I just want to point out that in terms of leading all the 

negotiations and the discussions and the enhancement of 
northern strategies, Northern Affairs has been very actively 
involved in a number of files. And this is, of course, for all the 
folks out there to know that, first of all, we are the lead 
negotiating department that takes care of the northern accord. 
And the northern accord, of course, is a $20 million 
federal/provincial agreement over the next five years that we’re 
trying to put in place to make sure that we have economic 
strategies for the North. 
 
As well, we have done a tremendous amount of work in leading 
some of the forestry files and working hand in hand with the 
Economic Development minister. As well, we’re also 
responsible for the northern version of CREDOs. And what 
CREDOs are is, of course, the community regional economic 
development organizations and they are the northern version of 
REDAs (regional economic development authority). So 
certainly Northern Affairs also takes care of that. 
 
As well, we are the lead department for the Northern Mines 
Monitoring Secretariat. And this secretariat negotiates and 
works with many mining organizations and many mining 
companies. And I can tell you that the Northern Mines 
Monitoring Secretariat is a world-famous secretariat because 
they have done a number of tremendously positive work with 
the mining sector. So Saskatchewan, through the Northern 
Affairs portfolio, has really shown the rest of the country and 
the rest of the world how to deal with northern mining 
companies when it comes to specifically meeting to address 
some of the issues of many northern people. 
 
So I think overall, if you look at some of the facts and the 
figures and some of the past successes and certainly some of the 
future challenges that we face, that Northern Affairs is going to 
be a very solid and a very important part of this government. 
And whether it’s forestry, whether it’s commercial fishing, 
whether it’s trapping, whether it’s roads, whether it’s mines, 
Northern Affairs has been very, very active. They’ve been very 
involved and that action and the activity and the involvement is 
going to continue for years to come. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that brief outline. 
Certainly on this side of the House we’re a little more used to 
you being able to harangue us for longer periods of time so 
maybe I can warm you up a little bit and give you that 
opportunity yet this afternoon. 
 
You spoke about the northern strategy and certainly we have 
some awareness of your northern strategy. But I think we need 
to have a clear picture from you of this northern strategy and its 
effect upon the people of northern Saskatchewan and what it’s 
going to entail for the people of northern Saskatchewan as they 
seek economic independence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well what I’ll do just for the sake of 
not appearing to harangue the opposition which I’m . . . of 
course I plead not guilty, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would just point 
out that the response is very straightforward. 
 
Northern Affairs has been working with Economic and 
Co-operative Development, Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs, and Executive Council on putting together key 
components of Saskatchewan’s northern strategy. 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

One of these components, the strategic opportunities 
assessment, is now complete. It consisted of careful analysis of 
the potential economic and social opportunities that exist in the 
North, and what can be done to realize these opportunities. The 
other two initiatives under the strategy are the Northern 
Development Board, and the Northern Development 
Agreement. These two entities are also close to finalization. 
 
To date an Interim Northern Development Board, the province, 
and the federal government have met several times negotiating 
an economic agreement that’ll see several initiatives specific to 
northerners that will enhance employment and training 
opportunities for northerners. 
 
The INDB, which is the Interim Northern Development Board, 
was established to represent the input of northerners in regard to 
the agreement. It’ll also continue to serve as an interim board 
until such time that the agreement is ratified. 
 
And I can tell you that the ratification and the permanent 
Northern Development Board will be certainly worked on over 
the next several weeks. And I anticipate very quickly into the 
future I will make the announcement on the changes, and 
certainly what strategy that . . . you know, to share that strategy 
with all northern people. 
 
Once the NDA’s (Northern Development Agreement) in place, 
there’ll be further developments to report on that relate to the 
goals and objectives set out in Saskatchewan’s northern 
strategy. 
 
So there’s been a lot of tremendous work being done in the past 
and certainly in the last several months. And when we talk 
about building up Northern Affairs and enhancing Northern 
Affairs and making it a very solid part of the government, this is 
exactly what we intend to do. 
 
So we talk about the northern strategy. We talk about the $20 
million agreement. We talk about CIC’s role in trying to 
enhance that as well. So there’s a lot of work being done in 
Northern Affairs. And certainly in the Northern Development 
Agreement and in the strategy we have employed shows that in 
spades, that there is some solid commitment to the North and 
we’re continuing to build on that. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. When we talk about the . . . when you talk about the 
northern strategy and certainly it’s . . . I think it’s incumbent on 
all of us to understand and the economic development that 
needs to take place in the North and it needs to take place in the 
North in the very near future. 
 
And one of the strategies that was used by your department in 
the past was that the deputy minister, to my understanding from 
previous ministers, was located in La Ronge so that he would 
be closer to so-called the action in northern Saskatchewan. And 
I understand now the deputy minister is not in La Ronge any 
more. I wonder if you can verify that. And if so, what was the 
reasoning the government and your department used not to 
house the deputy minister in La Ronge at this time? 
 
(16:15) 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you for that question. 
There’s no question that we did change the strategy. And 
certainly as a new minister, we were warned by the previous 
minister that it’s important to have as much of a presence of 
Northern Affairs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And to answer the question . . . I think I want to preface that by 
simply indicating, as we have students watching, is how the 
government works, of course, is you have a minister that is 
responsible for a certain portfolio. Then you have a deputy 
minister. And of course every minister has a corresponding 
deputy minister. And having all the DMs in one place certainly 
allows us as a government to coordinate activity. 
 
So the reason why we moved the La Ronge DM position back 
to Regina here was for the simple fact that as a Minister of 
Northern Affairs, I felt that it would be more effective, and 
certainly something more efficient, if we had the deputy 
minister here in Regina to engage all of his other colleague 
deputy ministers. 
 
And I feel if he is here from 8 o’clock in the morning till 6 or 7 
at night engaging other DMs in Highways and housing and 
health care and so on and so forth, that makes for a more 
effective lobby. And that certainly makes for a more efficient 
way of delivering benefits back to northern Saskatchewan. So 
having your deputy minister engaged with his colleague DMs is 
so very important to bring a new face to Northern Affairs and to 
bring a more effective structure in place. 
 
Now the other important thing is that we have been told on 
numerous occasions, and very good advice for a number of 
folks, is to have the concentration of Northern Affairs staff in 
the North. So I can tell you very boldly today that we have 
about 85 per cent of our staff that are based in the North. We 
have various positions; we’re filling eight new jobs that’ll be 
based in the North. We have a assistant deputy minister that’ll 
be based in the North. And our deputy minister will be 
travelling north on a continual and consistent basis. 
 
So I think having the Northern Affairs DM placed here in 
Regina with a skeleton staff is certainly very important for us to 
be efficient while having the base of our operations in La Ronge 
and certainly based throughout the North. That’s probably a 
more effective way to get things done. 
 
So the clear answer to your question is, as a new minister, I felt 
having the deputy minister here in Regina to fully engage his 
colleague deputy minister only . . . will translate only to an 
efficient, effective new Department of Northern Affairs. 
 
Thanks. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
committees, I would appreciate the understanding of why they 
. . . the change needed to — from your perspective — needed to 
take place. And certainly we accept your explanation. 
 
Now one of the things you talked about in your preamble was 
the northern strategy. I wonder if you could break down the 
northern strategy for us even further, so that we have an 
understanding of what sectors, what specific sectors of northern 
Saskatchewan the northern strategy will actually be involved in 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

 

to promote growth in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I just want to point out again, just for 
the sake of those that may be listening, is that the Northern 
Development Agreement is a $20 million federal/provincial 
agreement that we are going to cost share over a five-year 
period. 
 
And the Northern Development Agreement is something that a 
lot of northern leaders have been involved with, but the general 
public have very little information on. And we’re in the process, 
through establishing our northern or northwest regional 
development councils, to explain to these councils what exactly 
the agreement is. We’re also in the process of explaining to a 
number of community leaders and groups what the agreement 
entails. And certainly we have an Interim Northern 
Development Board that is aware of what’s happening. 
 
But the general public is not fully aware and so we’re trying to 
undertake a communication effort to make sure that people out 
there are aware. And some of the vehicles that we’re using, of 
course, include the northern development council that we’re 
trying to establish. 
 
But there are five goals and objectives associated with that $20 
million, five-year agreement. And I said six, so I apologize, it’s 
actually five. And the first one is developing a stronger and 
more diversified northern economy, creating jobs and business 
opportunities. 
 
The second one is enhancing community and regional 
infrastructure that will assist economic development and 
improve northern living conditions. 
 
The third objective is strengthening education and training in 
the North, enabling northerners to pursue further academic 
goals and to better compete in the labour market, both in the 
North and beyond. 
 
The fourth one is increasing community self-reliance and 
enhancing northerners’ opportunities to participate in and 
provide leadership for northern institutions. 
 
And of course the fifth one is increasing northerners’ 
participation in the protection of the natural environment of the 
North. 
 
So those are the five goals that we have, the Northern 
Development Agreement. And these goals are certainly lofty 
and achievable goals, but certainly we also want to point out 
that they’re realistic goals as well. And there is room for 
flexibility so clearly we wanted to make sure we have 
northerners’ participation. We want to have innovation. We 
want to have excitement. 
 
And again when we often speak about developing Northern 
Affairs into a bigger and more exciting portfolio, it is in 
partnership with northerners. It’s in partnership with the federal 
government, and it certainly recognizes some of the challenges 
that the rest of the province has in terms of meeting some of the 
infrastructure, some of the training components that are 
necessary. 
 

So clearly it is an effort by northerners to build the North up 
and create jobs, and certainly that’s what the provincial vision 
is. And I’m really proud to say that our Saskatchewan does 
include the North and those activities will certainly continue in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, to the minister, we’ve talked about the northern 
strategy and the five points that you mentioned. You talked 
about a $20 million agreement that you’re working on trying to 
set up with the federal government. 
 
We’re kind of curious on this side of the House. It’s a $20 
million agreement. What share, what portion of that $20 million 
will actually be the responsibility of the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question again. 
Again I’ll point out that it’s $2 million a year for the province, 
and it’s over a five-year period for a total of $10 million. And 
that is being matched by the feds at the cost of $2 million per 
year for five years. So 10 from the feds and 10 from us certainly 
equals $20 million over five years. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. In this $2 
million a year, I believe you said, from the provincial 
government for five years — I was looking at your budget. 
Now where does this $2 million fit into the Northern Affairs 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things that we’ve been 
sitting down and negotiating with the federal government on in 
this whole northern development agreement is it does not come 
directly from Northern Affairs’ budget. We are negotiating with 
other departments to identify some of the priority areas and to 
identify where the money is coming from, from the, you know, 
from a variety of ministers. 
 
So that discussion and all the corresponding negotiations are 
underway. They’ve been completed and we’re on our way, as I 
mentioned, very quickly to finalizing this agreement and 
signing the agreement. So it does not come directly out of 
Northern Affairs; it comes out of a variety of different agencies. 
And we are going to work with the feds at finalizing those 
details. 
 
And again, we have come up with our portion of it and it’s an 
acceptable portion. And we’re very excited at this opportunity 
to go forward with the $20 million Northern Agreement. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, I noticed on your budget it talks about that there’s 
a line for the northern strategy. There’s been a cut in it for this 
year of $200,000. This budget line, $366,000, is that your 
portion of the $2 million to work toward this northern strategy 
in concurrence with other departments in the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things, I think, is very 
important that people across the North and certainly people 
across the province understand that this was certainly a tough 
budget. It was not an easy budget, as we look at what happened 
in BC, Alberta. There were cuts that were made that were very 
significant cuts and we can never lose sight of that argument. 
 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

So having the budget come forward as it did, certainly, I think, 
was a recognition of our Finance minister’s ability to make sure 
that we do have savings in place and that we are able to balance 
that budget for a ninth consecutive time. So I think having this 
kind of budget in place is certainly very promising for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But Northern Affairs, despite it being a smaller part of 
government, did have to do their share as well. So I point out 
that the $200,000 cut was not a cut that was going to form part 
of our contribution to the Northern Development Agreement, 
but rather it was a cut from the Interim Northern Development 
Board travel and costs of operating that board. So instead of 
spending $350,000 which was a desired budget amount, we 
have made sure that the costs were kept low and that that 
amount was 150,000. 
 
So the $200,000 cut that you see was cuts that were made to the 
Interim Northern Development Board travel costs. And these 
cuts were not part of our contribution to the agreement. This 
was above and beyond the agreement. So clearly we are on our 
way of making sure that we are able to live, you know, within 
our means. 
 
And certainly, Northern Affairs like all the other different 
portfolios around, I think, they appreciate that they have to be 
part of the government when they have an overall cut, and this 
was part of that process. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. To the minister, in your five-point introduction of 
the northern strategy the first item was the enhancement of the 
northern economy. And I’m wondering if we could get on this 
side of the House, a better understanding of what areas — and 
we would like all the areas of the northern economy — that 
you’re trying to promote in the northern strategy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well I wish I had a couple of hours 
here to speak to speak of some of the progress and some of the 
planning that we have undertaken. 
 
But very clearly I think a lot of people back home were at one 
time concerned of seeing a million dollar cut. But then after we 
explained to them that the cut is primarily made of lesser staff, 
lesser travel costs for the Interim Northern Board, and, you 
know, less significant costs, then they begin to realize that 
instead of losing a million dollars from Northern Affairs, 
Northern Affairs is aiming to achieve this $20 million Northern 
Development Accord and this agreement with the federal 
government. 
 
So after we work our way towards that project, and we are very 
close to getting it done, the way I would tell northern people is 
that instead of looking at this as losing a million dollars, we 
gain a significant amount in highways and housing and 
certainly through this Northern Development Agreement. 
 
So what do we do next? What areas do we identify to make sure 
that northerners have opportunity in the economic area? And I 
would point out that, as you probably are aware, there’s been 
some incredible work being done in forestry. Last week we 
heard for example the Economic Development minister talking 
about some of the investments and the 10,000 new jobs and 

close to $750 million of investment plus. 
 
These are some of the things that we are working towards to 
make sure that we position northerners to take advantage of 
some of the forestry opportunities. 
 
And some of the good examples that are out there: there’s 
Wapawekka Lumber working, where you see the Weyerhaeuser 
folks working hand in hand with the Peter Ballantyne Band. 
Look at Meadow Lake for example, the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council are now involved, you know, with the sawmill 
operations. You look at the northwest communities, they have 
partnerships with Tolko. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Of course forestry being the biggest sector that we’re looking at 
kind of expanding, that’s very important. As well as looking at 
the resource base overall, forestry being the beachhead, we’re 
also expanding our efforts to look at some of the ecotourism 
opportunities for the North. And some of the examples I’d use 
is Buffalo Narrows is one of the communities in the North that 
is a business leader. They had many local businesses that are 
really doing wonderfully well, and they’re preparing and 
they’re developing some of their strategic planning when it 
comes to tourism. 
 
And also the commercial fishing file. We can remember, being 
from the Northwest, that commercial fishing at one time was a 
very big activity, and again Buffalo Narrows being a centre at 
one time of three fish processing plants. 
 
So as you look at some of the opportunities, we’re trying to 
enhance and to liven up the economy of the Northwest. And so 
obviously you want to look at all the sectors, forestry, outfitting, 
commercial fishing, you know, look at ecotourism, and you 
know the service industry. And I understand there’s been a lot 
of work being done, different communities working hand in 
hand with the private sector to look at oil and gas. 
 
So what we’re trying to do with the northern development 
strategy and with Northern Affairs — and you talk about the 
economic opportunities — is we’re trying to make sure we 
position many of the northern communities and the business 
people to take advantage of some of the resource industries that 
traditionally have not been part of the northern people’s culture. 
 
And the reason we have not been part of it is many times we 
had large corporations and they would come in and they’d own 
the forestry rights. Well now it’s different now. Many northern 
communities, both the First Nations communities and the Métis 
communities, are now placed in an ownership aspect. And from 
ownership you’re able to control the profits, you’re able to 
control the jobs, decision making, and so on and so forth. 
 
So I think it’s very visionary that this government have decided 
that people of the North have said, welcome, share our land, but 
we want our fair share as well. And the resources that we have 
in the North should be shared by all people but certainly 
involving the northerners as well. 
 
So what we are undertaking to do is a very aggressive plan to 
not only look at the enhancement of the commercial fishing 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

 

industry but to work with the trappers, to work with the wild 
rice growers, to look at outfitting as an opportunity, to look at 
tourism as an opportunity, to look at forestry, to look at oil and 
gas, look at all the sectors that the northern lands offer people. 
This provincial government is doing that. 
 
So when we talk about a strategy, it is encompassing. It’s 
involving all aspects of the economy. And we’re encouraging 
people to take the lead of many companies and many Native 
leaders and Aboriginal groups in making sure that their 
communities and their business people are involved with this 
overall strategy. 
 
And I mention constantly — we always do this — is that a fine 
example of how we’re able to create jobs is of course in Buffalo 
Narrows. If you look at Buffalo Narrows, they’re now owners 
of NRT Trucking. If you look at Buffalo Narrows, it’s probably 
the centre and the hub of many northern Aboriginal business 
people that have taken over the economy. If you look at Buffalo 
Narrows, they are talking about a post-treatment plant and 
trying to work towards a post-treatment plant. If you look at 
Buffalo Narrows, you’re looking at cogeneration opportunities. 
If you look at Buffalo Narrows, they’re preparing for, you 
know, the encouragement of all this tourism — especially if you 
get a road connecting northern Alberta to, you know, to 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
If you look at all the different examples of some of the business 
communities that want to take advantage of some of this 
opportunity, they are simply saying to us, give us the process, 
give us the opportunity, and we will realize the jobs and we’ll 
realize the profit and we’ll realize the control that is necessary. 
And all this does not have any guarantees, of course. But we’re 
working our way to making sure that we give the people the 
opportunity for what they’ve asked for for many, many years. 
And of course that’s economic and social justice. 
 
So we position them well. Positioning does not guarantee 
success, but positioning allows them the opportunity. They say, 
we will drive that success. So today I can tell you that it’s all 
encompassing in terms of what our economic strategy is. It’s to 
give people the opportunity to take advantage of the resource 
industry in and around these northern communities in forestry, 
in commercial fishing and ecotourism, in sport fishing, in oil 
and gas, in the service sector, and so on and so forth. 
 
So it’s wide open, and we’re trying to ensure that every bit of 
support and dollars that we can get goes to realizing those 
opportunities in concert with the private sector. 
 
So again I wish I had a couple of hours to explain each 
individual business. But there’s this incredible opportunity out 
there and we want to make sure that we position the northerners 
well and certainly develop the economy and the jobs that go 
with that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I am looking 
at three news releases. The first one’s dated April 17, 2000. It 
says, more training jobs . . . more training for forestry jobs. The 
next one is July . . . June of last year, new training jobs for 
forestry workers. And then there was another news release in 
November of last year, northerners get forestry training. 
 

And it’s . . . between the two news releases that, you know, 
they’re talking of training at a minimum 500 northerners for . . . 
in the forestry industry. And I guess my question is: of those 
people that are . . . have been trained or are currently being 
trained in the forest industry, how many of those people would 
be First Nations people? And once these people have received 
their training, how many of those people are working for First 
Nations forestry companies and initiatives in the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
I would point out is that the training announcement that we 
have made certainly talks about a multi-party approach to 
training. I want to work with the forestry companies, with the 
communities, with the different colleges, you know, that are 
involved. So we believe that a multi-party and multi-training 
approach is very necessary. 
 
But as I mentioned in my opening comments, is that we are in 
the pre-operating phase of forestry. So one of the things that 
we’ve been told, in terms of trying to develop this opportunity 
in forestry, is you got to have access to the wood, which is 
being done. You have to have access to the capital, which is 
being done. Now you have to have access to the skilled 
labourers. 
 
So certainly in the initial start-up phases we don’t have those 
numbers for you to date. But we’ll certainly get them for you. 
 
But what I will point out is the agreements that you talk about 
talks about finding that final component of having skilled 
labour available for these forestry companies. And that work is 
ongoing, there is a number of parties involved. 
 
So I think if you look at the overall scheme of things it fulfils 
the three different requirements that are necessary to make sure 
that we have a successful forestry strategy that provides access 
for the northwest communities and for the Métis communities 
and for the treaty communities. 
 
It provides capital funding to develop these mills and certainly 
the training component — as you mentioned in the press 
releases — that talks about finding the skilled labourers or 
developing the skilled labourers necessary for this industry. 
 
So again, this is the start-up phase that is going on. We don’t 
have those exact figures with us, but we can find them for you 
and then get them to you. But clearly the intent here is to find 
that final piece which requires us to have skilled labourers 
available for the forestry sector in order for us to ensure — or to 
at least try and ensure — success when it comes to the forestry 
industry plans for the North as a whole. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned that there are a 
number of components required to move this forestry industry 
forward in the North, and of course availability of skilled labour 
is a key component to that whole equation. 
 
I guess my question would be, I’m assuming that a number of 
. . . quite a number of these people that are being trained would 
be First Nations people and, you know, it really isn’t important 
here for today’s purposes, but if you could at a later date 
perhaps provide me with some of those numbers it would be 
helpful. 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

But once these people are trained, who are they working . . . 
who are they going to work for? Are they working for the large 
Weyerhaeuser type operations? Or are there a number of First 
Nations forestry initiatives that are moving forward? 
 
As you’ve indicated, the . . . in order for a band to get involved 
in the forestry industry, they have to have access to logs. In fact, 
how many bands have access to logging rights in the North, Mr. 
Minister? I wonder if you could provide us with some 
information in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I would point out is that prior to this government getting 
involved heavily with forestry, certainly there’s a couple of 
giants that were involved with forestry rights in the province. 
And I can point out since the early ’90s, this government — and 
we certainly are continuing with that to this day — wants to 
make sure that the position the Métis communities, the First 
Nations communities in the North, right across the forestry 
fringe area to be able to be involved with forestry. 
 
We often talk about that, about trying to make sure we provide 
the tools to the Aboriginal community to make sure they make a 
difference in their own lives; provide an access to their 
resources and the training necessary to create those jobs. Well 
this is exactly what they’re trying to do here. 
 
So I can tell you today that any new FMA (forest management 
agreement) or a TSL (term supply licence) or any forestry 
agreements that we have undertaken, we’ve always insisted on 
three components: number one, that it be sustainable, because 
we don’t want to overcut our forests, and people have told us 
that from day one; number two, is that we make sure that we do 
as much of the value-added processes as we can. There’s no 
sense in sending out raw produce, you know, you’re able to add 
to it, let us undertake to do as much of the exhausted . . . 
exhaustive value-added processes to our products. And the third 
thing is that there be Aboriginal ownership. And that’s the most 
important key. 
 
And we have fulfilled those strategies. We have kept to our 
word because, as many Aboriginal people will tell you, whether 
it’s First Nations or Métis, we want a share of that land. We’ve 
all . . . we’ve often said let us share the resources in the land. So 
all they’ve been saying to us as a government is give us our fair 
share. So that’s exactly what we’re going to do to is ensure they 
have that opportunity. 
 
Now because they have that opportunity and because they have 
that positioning and because they have that access, it does not 
guarantee them wild success and a thousand jobs overnight. We 
got to train our folks. We got to invest. We got to nurture this 
industry, got to build it up. 
 
So the question that you had is how many First Nations and 
how many Aboriginal people in general are involved. I can tell 
you, right across the forestry fringe, every new FMA or TSL or 
forestry venture that we’ve undertaken on a large-scale basis 
has an Aboriginal ownership component to it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess one of the 
questions we would have on this side of the House is if you 
could explain what a TSL is. I think we understand an FMA, 

but we’re not quite familiar with that acronym TSL. 
 
Secondly, I had asked if there . . . if you could give us, give me 
some examples of some new initiatives that some of the bands 
in northern Saskatchewan have made in forestry. I understand 
that there are . . . that a number of bands would like to get 
involved, actively involved in an investment way and in a 
management way in forestry. And I’m wondering, is there . . . 
do you have examples of these, of bands actively involved in 
the forestry industry and new ventures in the last say three, four 
years, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things that I think . . . Well 
a TSL is a term supply license and a TSL is actually a 
prerequisite to a FMA. And of course, you know, before they 
do all this, they have to go through a land use planning process. 
 
And certainly, what that land use planning process does, it takes 
all the stakeholders and gets them in a room together and saying 
this is what’s being planned. And then, if things are moving 
along quite well in the business aspect of it, then they go to a 
TSL. And then eventually, they spend hundreds of thousands, if 
not millions of dollars, putting together . . . putting together an 
FMA so that we have forestry rights, you know, for a long time. 
And that’s kind of the process. 
 
And I’ll point out that the . . . Some of the examples we would 
use of forestry companies would be the Wapawekka sawmill 
just outside of Prince Albert. And I believe, and I could be 
corrected on this but, that’s a joint venture between the Peter 
Ballantyne band and the Weyerhaeuser folks. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Some of the more recent examples would be the OSB (oriented 
strand board) mill just being planned with Tolko. And that of 
course is being . . . this mill is being built near Green Lake. And 
that mill, of course, has some ownership components to it 
which include the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, which include 
the northwest communities. 
 
So really I think if you look at some of the examples, there’s 
smaller examples, but some of the larger successful examples 
we can see coming down the road and certainly some of the 
past examples are there as well. So there is very good planning 
being done. 
 
And the reason I don’t want to share specifics in terms of what 
exact projects are being undertaken is because when I said 
earlier that we’re trying to position the communities to make 
these choices on their own by simply providing them the tools, 
what I don’t want to do is I don’t want to pre-empt them. What 
I don’t want to do is I don’t want to direct them. What I don’t 
want to do is influence them. 
 
We give them the opportunity so they are working through a 
committee, through a board structure, to determine how they’re 
going to use their allocations to get the best value for their 
forestry strategies. 
 
So in saying that there’s some good opportunities, we know 
there are. We are privy to some of the examples and some of the 
ideas they’re working on, but we have a committee in place 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

 

made up of different communities and the different 
partnerships, and they are working on finalizing their plan. 
 
And of course as I mentioned earlier, we’re just in the process 
of unveiling this plan and they will certainly do that to show 
what kind of plans that they have developed on their own. And 
as minister, it gives me great pleasure to stand here today 
saying that there’s some very exciting plans that they are 
undertaking. 
 
And when the appropriate time comes they will certainly 
announce it to their shareholders and then they’ll announce it to 
the people. And what we want to do is certainly stand by and 
cheerlead that particular aspect of their role to develop this 
forestry initiative. So there is some good work been done in the 
past; there’s much more exciting work to come. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for those answers and 
that reply. I was just wondering, what role does the federal 
government play in this whole area? And I’m again speaking 
particularly about First Nations involvement in the forestry 
industry. 
 
Does the federal government have any funding for First Nations 
to actively get involved in the forest industries? You would 
think, you know, since First Nations are largely a responsibility 
of the federal government, I was wondering if perhaps they . . . 
you know, if there were some funds available through the 
federal government that First Nations could tap into for forestry 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well as you mentioned, they have been 
involved with the training aspect involving, you know, with the 
First Nations. I know that they do have some financial means in 
which they could assist First Nations in developing 
opportunities as well. I don’t have the details of that, but what I 
do know is I made a comment earlier about the Northern 
Development Agreement, and that the federal government is 
going to be tied with that. So we have $10 million coming from 
the feds and 10 million from the province, and I can almost 
assure you that a portion of that will go towards training — in 
addition to what we have in place already — training some of 
the forestry workers. So in a roundabout way, the federal 
government certainly is involved. 
 
But I want to put a feather in the cap of the provincial 
government as well, is it’s important to recognize that there is 
some federal support but it’s also important to note that the 
resources are controlled by the province. So before the feds are 
able to come in to contribute to a resource development 
opportunity, if it’s First Nations or Métis people, then the 
province has to make the initiative to make it happen. 
 
So not only do we transfer some of the resources to the northern 
communities, but we also say to the federal government, bring 
some of your money so we’re able to realize this opportunity 
quicker and get training quicker. Because many people in the 
North, as they drive south, you know, they drive by the 
Meadow Lake pulp mill, they drive by the Big River Sawmill, 
they drive by the Weyerhaeuser mill, and they say well these 
are great opportunities but we need opportunities back home. 
So as a provincial government, as most people know in the 
province, the province controls the resources and Ottawa 

doesn’t have that control. 
 
So when we put the resource opportunity in front of people and 
all we tell Ottawa is bring some money over, we need your 
financial support to make things happen in the North, I can tell 
you there are very few opportunities that they have come 
forward. But this Northern Development Accord is one of the 
opportunities that they have said yes, we will contribute. 
 
But I think the most important aspect, when we talk about the 
federal government’s role, is that the resources — whether it’s 
forestry, whether it’s commercial fishing or whether it’s 
outfitting or whether it’s tourism — that clearly the province 
has control of those resources. And we’re working with the 
Aboriginal community to make sure that they have 
opportunities associated with that and that the federal 
government can indeed help with some financial assistance for 
training, for investment, and certainly for developing 
infrastructure. So that’s a role that they can play. 
 
So often we hear federal politicians talk about having a resource 
industry or having access to our own land. Well the fact of the 
matter is Ottawa does not control the resources in the province, 
the province does. 
 
And I think the other very valuable point we’d point out is that 
as much money that we can get from the federal government — 
whether it’s to First Nations agreements or whether it’s to TLE 
(treaty land entitlement), whether it’s to economic 
opportunities, or whether it’s for training — it is not coming at 
the expense of the farm community, it’s not coming at the 
expense of the cities, it’s not coming at the expense of anybody 
in Saskatchewan. Every penny that we can get from Ottawa is 
going to help the economy of this province. 
 
So I think we need to get on board, all of us from across this 
province, and say: give us money in farm aid. No question 
about that — we certainly need it. Look at our huge trade bill. 
But give us money in forestry opportunity. Give us money in 
training opportunities. Give us money to enhance our economic 
well-being, and so on and so forth. 
 
So I think if the Sask Party were to get up and say, yes, Ottawa, 
it’s very important you recognize the First Nations, it’s very 
important you recognize TLE, it’s very important you recognize 
SaskEnergy expand to many First Nations land, it’s very 
important you recognize some of the forestry challenge, so, 
Ottawa, send us some money here so we’re able to develop the 
economy and make sure that the Aboriginal people, what 
they’ve always maintained from day one, want to be part of the 
solution. Not part of the problem, but they want to be part of the 
solution. 
 
So any money you get for TLE, any money you get for forestry 
expansion, for training, Ottawa, we need you to send more 
money to make sure things happen at a faster pace in 
Saskatchewan and that it does not come at the expense of 
anybody in the province. It comes at the expense of some other 
initiative in Eastern Canada. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan like that concept; they 
want to see that happen. And I think on the wide scheme of 
things, that if they’re able to make that happen sooner, quicker, 



1364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

and with more dollars, then everybody in the province will 
certainly support that. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I listened carefully to your 
comments, and I really didn’t find a whole lot that I could 
disagree with. In fact, I agree with most of what you said. 
Certainly it’s to all our advantage to access federal dollars, and 
particularly in the North for First Nations people. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that the federal government actually 
has some money on the table, and that the province hasn’t taken 
them up on it. I understand that there’s $15 million a year for 
the past three years that the federal government had on the table 
for First Nations forestry initiatives, and that the province didn’t 
bring the resources, and the province didn’t bring their share of 
the contributions required to trigger those dollars. 
 
And I’m wondering why the province didn’t access that . . . 
some $45 million a year for First Nations forestry. What’s the 
problem here? I mean, as I said, I agreed with everything you 
said. You said, it’s not Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollar as such. 
Certainly we do contribute to the federal treasury, but quite 
often we’re the net benefactors of federal dollars coming into 
the province. 
 
So why aren’t we accessing this $45 million a year, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well what I would point out is that, as 
much as I don’t want to harangue the opposition, I would point 
out that your facts are wrong on that front. It was the provincial 
government that put in that money. The feds have not put any 
money in towards investment into the forestry opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. So I would suggest to that member that you 
check your facts and make sure that you’re correct. 
 
But any investment into forestry opportunities in this province, 
not only has this government given the resources and certainly 
shared the resources with the Aboriginal people, but they have 
put their money where their mouth is. And we have not one red 
cent yet from the federal government to help us realize those 
forestry opportunities. 
 
And secondly, I point out to that member that it’s from day one 
that this province has always put their money where their mouth 
is when it comes to northern development agreements. 
 
La Loche Hospital, which is a fine facility — 12 to $14 million 
cost overall. It was the provincial government that put every red 
cent into that facility. 
 
So I can clearly point out today, when it comes to forestry, this 
province puts their resources up in concert and in co-operation 
and on a sharing basis with the northern people. But are also, 
through CIC, allowed investment into the forestry opportunities 
for the Northwest and certainly for the Northeast in the forestry 
fringe. And we have certainly put every cent into this forestry 
project, into this forestry initiative as possible. 
 
So in closing, I would point out, on this forestry file, that this 
province has put the money . . . put their money where their 
mouth is when it comes to forestry development and we’ll 
continue doing that to make sure that northerners have that 

opportunity. And this is exactly what I mean when we say as a 
province, we stand up, we’re going to build up the North. And 
Northern Affairs is a very effective vehicle to do that, but we’ve 
got grandeur and bigger things yet to come. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I understand that the federal 
economic development fund, some $175 million, allocated $45 
million to Saskatchewan for forestry initiatives in Saskatchewan 
and the province hasn’t triggered one dollar, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask 
that member to provide that information to us. And I don’t 
know where he is getting his information from, but it’s 
obviously wrong. 
 
I would point out again, we have sat here and we have said to 
the northern people — and they’ve been saying it to us for a 
year, for years — is there’s good opportunity, good resource 
base in the province. We need your co-operation to help us 
develop those economies 
 
And to date, we have provided the resources, we have provided 
the time, we have provided the commitment, and we’ve 
provided the dollars for investment to this date with nothing 
coming from the federal government. And, of course, we want 
to encourage that, we want to encourage that. We want to 
encourage training dollars, we want to encourage investment 
dollars, we want that money to come, as I mentioned. So I 
would point out that we are clearly on target and on track, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and things will work out. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee now 
report progress on Northern Affairs, and then following the 
supper recess, proceed to Finance estimates on the Department 
of Labour, and that we now call it 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


