















































Hansard: March 26, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 277 
 March 26, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition again today regarding children who are being exploited 
through the sex trade: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the shortcomings of the tobacco 
legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Star City, Tisdale, Ridgedale, Melfort, Prince 
Albert, and even one from Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
condition of Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition for citizens who have strong concerns about STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) and its future. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to urge the government to resist 
the call of some groups in Saskatchewan to eliminate both 
the passenger and express services of STC, leaving parts of 
rural Saskatchewan completely without these vital 
commercial and economic lifelines. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from residents of Saskatoon, Regina and 
Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present on behalf of my constituents. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Stockholm, Melville, Churchbridge, Bredenbury and 
Langenburg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of constituents in the Indian 
Head-Milestone area. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of lives and to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed from people from a lot of different 
communities, including the community of Estevan, Griffin, 
Regina, Creelman, Francis, Indian Head, and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the 
tobacco control legislation in the province. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of this petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current and the communities of Gull Lake and Blumenhof, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about certain 
inadequacies in the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; furthermore, anyone found guilty of 
such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more than 
$100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Carrot River, 
Nipawin, Tisdale, Red Earth, and Arborfield. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents who are concerned about the 
huge increase in costs that farmers will be incurring this year 
due to the changes in crop insurance. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 
provincial government to halt its plan to take money out of 
the crop insurance program and hike farmers’ crop 
insurance premium rates while reducing coverage, in order 
to pay off the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of the communities of 
Southey and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition from the good 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, Mildred, Belbutte, Rabbit Lake, and North 

Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby received. 
 

A petition concerning crop insurance premiums and 
coverage; as well as 
 
Addendums to petitions previously received in this House 
as sessional papers no. 7, 8, 16, and 17. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister in charge of Energy and Mines: how much 
money was spent in total researching the greenprint for 
ethanol production plan; and further to that, how much 
money was spent on travel researching the ethanol plan in 
total? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — . . . Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: has your department 
ever custom-sprayed or paid for spraying services on land 
owned or leased by Ducks Unlimited in the calendar year 
2001, and if so, what was the total amount spent? 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: in the fiscal year of 
1998-1999, how much money did the Department of Social 
Services spend on dental and optical benefits and 
ambulance costs for social services recipients? 
 
I have a similar question for the years 1999-2000, 
2000-2001. 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: how much money was 
spent in the calendar year 2001 for training firefighters in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 14 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Information Service 
Corporation regarding the land project in Saskatoon: (1) 
has the government hired a company or individual to do 
public relations work among lawyers and others 
surrounding the implementation of the land project in 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

 

Saskatoon; (2) who are the principals of the company 
engaged to do the public relations work for the land project; 
(3) how much will the company in question receive for the 
public relations work; and (4) when will automated 
registration be introduced into the Saskatoon Land Titles 
Office? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure, 
Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
my colleagues here seated in your gallery some very 
distinguished people with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities. They may not be able to see me, but I 
know they’re there, and I know that we work confidently with 
one another. David Marit, Mr. Speaker, Nick Postnikoff, Don 
Taylor, Jim Reiter, and Debbie Gronning. I would ask everyone 
to please welcome them to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members a 
number of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) rural leaders that are here today very interested 
in what’s about to take place in the House today and tomorrow. 
We have Deb Gronning, a director for Marengo; Jim Reiter, 
he’s president of the Rural Administrators Association from 
Rosetown; Don Taylor, a director from Bredenbury and, by the 
way, is also my local reeve; Nick Postnikoff is a director from 
Blaine Lake, and Dave Marit, a director from Fife Lake. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings today, and stay tuned, there’s 
going to be a lot of things happening. Welcome to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my privilege to introduce to you and to this House, 26 
students from Winston Knoll Collegiate. They are here with 
their teacher, Susan Evaschesen. And this is a really wonderful 
school up in the northwest corner of our city. Fine teachers, and 
I hope that the students who are here today from that school 
will enjoy the team sport that we call question period and that 
you’ll be enlightened by the procedures that you observe here 
today. I look forward to visiting with you later. Please join me 
in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
introduce, to you and through you, to the members of the House 
the delegation from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), in particular my friend Nick Postnikoff, who is 
the SARM director for district no. five. He and his wife, Judy, 
live near Blaine Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce some very special people that 

are in your gallery today watching the Assembly for the first 
time together since 1995. 
 
I’d like to introduce my wife, Beckie, she’s the second one from 
the right. And I’ve got three other daughters that are with her. 
The one on the left is Taylor, she’s the queen of Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
and next to her is Michelle . . . (inaudible) . . . and next to her 
mother is Kellie. And both of my older girls are on the 
Indigenous volleyball team and they will be travelling to 
Winnipeg this summer to participate. And I want to thank them 
for being behind me all these years and welcome them to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — I would also, through you, Mr. Speaker, like to 
introduce the director for district six who happens to be my 
director in my constituency. So, Debra Gronning, I wish to 
welcome you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Kenaston Blizzards Senior D Hockey 
Provincial Champions 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, last Sunday night the Kenaston 
Blizzards defeated Hodgeville to become the provincial 
champions of the Senior D Saskatchewan Hockey League. This 
event marked the first time that Kenaston has gone to the top of 
the provincial playoff finals. 
 
The best of three series began in Kenaston on Friday night with 
Kenaston defeating Hodgeville by the score of 7 to 4. On 
Sunday, in Hodgeville, the home team was humbled by 
Kenaston by a score of 9 to 3. This victory capped a winning 
playoff round for Kenaston, which included victories over 
Hanley, Craik, Dinsmore, and finally Hodgeville. 
 
(13:45) 
 
In this final series Kenaston has proudly represented the north 
division of the league against Hodgeville in the south. Indeed, 
senior hockey has been a great community sport in Kenaston 
for decades. As a hockey player myself, although some players 
and coaches may wish to debate that fact, I still enjoy watching 
the excitement of provincial hockey and the high level of talent 
that it produces. Saskatchewan should be proud of its history of 
turning out NHL-calibre players, many of who have gone on to 
become great professional players in the National Hockey 
League, such as Cory Sarich from Bladworth. 
 
I would like to personally congratulate the Kenaston Blizzards 
on the provincial championship. I would also like to thank 
general manager Don George, along with coach Barry Firby 
and coach Brent McVeigh, for their hard work and commitment 
to these talented hockey players. It is with this true community 
spirit that the managers, coaches, and players across 
Saskatchewan provide an entertaining and high-calibre game of 
hockey for people to enjoy all winter long. I would ask that 
members join me in congratulating the Kenaston Blizzards in 
becoming the 2002 Saskatchewan Senior D championships. 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

Best of luck for next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shirley Douglas Visits Weyburn 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I bring you a good, 
recent story from the fine city of Weyburn — a story that I’m 
surprised our current MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from Weyburn neglected to bring to the attention of 
this place. Allow me to help her out. 
 
Last Wednesday, a famous daughter and a famous father were 
reunited. Weyburn-born Shirley Douglas joined her father 
Tommy Douglas on the Soo Line Historical Society’s “Wall of 
Fame” at the Soo Line Museum. The members opposite, of 
course, know him as Tommy the commie. 
 
This wall recognizes Weyburn people who have made 
significant contributions to public life. And this award is fitting 
in more than one way, Mr. Speaker. First of course, Shirley 
Douglas is one of Canada’s leading actors with significant roles 
on stage, screen, TV, and radio on both sides of the border. 
Most recently, she starred in the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) television series Wind at My Back. For this 
distinguished career alone, she deserves our recognition. But 
also, Mr. Speaker, Shirley Douglas was in Weyburn on 
Wednesday to talk to students at the high school and to citizens 
at a public meeting about the state of medicare in Canada. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, in speaking out in support of publicly 
funded, publicly administered, one-tiered medicine, she joined 
her father in spirit and in purpose, as well as in the public’s 
recognition. Mr. Speaker, like her father, Shirley Douglas is a 
remarkable person. Like her parents and all those pioneers who 
gave us the gift of our public institution like medicare, she 
deserves our heartfelt thanks and appreciation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1A 6-Man Provincial Football Finals 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
congratulations are in order for some young, hard-working 
athletes in my constituency. Last November 10, the town of 
Kelliher hosted the 1A 6-Man provincial football finals. Not 
only did the provincials take place in my constituency, but this 
year both teams who made it to the provincials hailed from my 
constituency. 
 
The Kelliher Cobras and the Raymore Rebels came face to face 
once again for an exciting and intense season finale. This past 
season the Kelliher Cobras remain undefeated. However, their 
competition, the Raymore Rebels, were not far behind, holding 
a record of 8 and 1. 
 
The competition was fierce and at the end of day the Raymore 
Rebels came out on top with a 42 to 34 victory. Congratulations 
are in order for this year’s champs. Hard work and dedication 
are the prerequisites for this kind of success in competition, and 
both teams should be very proud of their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to add that it is an honour to represent 

a constituency whose youth has such drive to succeed and 
excel, whose youth are committed to working together as a 
team and who are determined to reach their goals. 
 
I would like to thank the coaches, the teachers, the parents, and 
the fans who stand behind our young people and encourage 
them to be the best that they can be. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

John Rependa Legacy 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to the Assembly’s 
attention a very generous legacy by the late Mr. John Rependa 
of Outlook, Saskatchewan. 
 
Before Mr. Rependa lost his battle with cancer last year, he 
received much of his care at Saskatoon City Hospital. Last 
month the Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation very gratefully 
announced a cash donation of $2 million from Mr. Rependa’s 
estate, the largest single gift in the foundation’s 19-year history. 
 
What’s that line from Shakespeare, Mr. Speaker? 
 

The evil that men do lives after them; 
The good is oft interred with their bones. 

 
In this case, Mr. Rependa’s gift will live long after him. 
 
His gift will be used to complete the Rependa Memorial 
Education Resource Centre in the hospital, a fitting memory to 
the good works of one individual. 
 
The Education Resource Centre will be used by the hospital’s 
medical personnel to host visitors and speakers. It will house a 
lecture theatre, meeting rooms, and the hospital library. 
 
Future plans involve the installation of telehealth and 
telemedicine equipment to provide and receive broadcasts on 
new medical techniques from around the world. The centre will 
be operational by the fall of 2003. 
 
According to his friends, Mr. Rependa was known for his 
independence, his intelligence, and his insatiable curiosity. He 
was known for these qualities. He will be remembered for his 
incredible generosity. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current’s Recent Sports Accomplishments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to inform the members of the Assembly of the 
recent accomplishments back in my home community of Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Swift Current Batco TNT Eliminators are once 
again the provincial champions of bantam tier 2 hockey in 
Saskatchewan. The Eliminators recently went undefeated in a 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

 

16-round-robin tournament and defeated Weyburn to capture 
the provincial title and they are now competing in the league 
final against the Battlefords. 
 
Congratulations and best of luck in the league final to Coach 
Dale Slusar and the provincial champion Swift Current Batco 
TNT Eliminators. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Swift Current is home to the provincial 
champion under-14 girls soccer team. The Swift Current Home 
Hardware United girls team had an overall record of 18 wins, 3 
losses, and 2 ties this season. They went undefeated in the 
provincial championships held in Saskatoon recently beating 
Prince Albert in the gold medal game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, soccer is one of the fastest growing sports in my 
home community and the under-14 girls team is proof of the 
high calibre of players that Swift Current is able to produce. 
 
Congratulations to coach Dale Perry and Anita Evans, and the 
players of the gold medal champion Swift Current under-14 
girls soccer team. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mayor Predicts Huge Year for Humboldt 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
have more good news for the province of Saskatchewan. During 
the Saskatchewan Winter Games I had the opportunity to meet 
with some of the people directly in touch with the mood of the 
province and what did they have to say, Mr. Speaker? Well they 
said, Saskatchewan is hopping. 
 
At the Winter Games I had the opportunity to meet with Dennis 
Korte, the mayor of Humboldt. He was enthusiastic about the 
things occurring in our newest city, Humboldt. In an interview 
with the Humboldt Journal, Mayor Korte predicts a huge year 
for Humboldt. Becoming a city gives increased influence on a 
provincial level, the construction of St. Elizabeth’s Hospital, a 
new ice field, 65 building permits with an increased value of 
over $3.5 million, and the city will have a balanced budget and 
even perhaps a slight surplus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this enthusiasm is a refreshing change from the 
attitudes expressed in this House by others. But to put a fine 
point on it I will close with the mayor’s own words: “our area 
and district are strong and (we) are growing.” 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Eston Girls Hockey Team 
Wins Provincial B Championship 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening in Tisdale the Eston Hurricane Bantam B females 
defeated the Tisdale girls team 5-4 in the final game to win the 
provincial B championship for girls hockey. The Leader of the 
Official Opposition will be happy to learn, Mr. Speaker, that the 

overtime winning goal for Eston was scored by his niece, 
Amanda Howe, of Eston. 
 
The Eston Hurricanes have treated the people of Eston to a 
winter of excellent female hockey and I would like to ask all 
members of the legislature to join with me in congratulating the 
Eston Hurricane Bantam B female team on winning the 
provincial championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Innovation Place — High-Tech Hot Spot 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In a recent article of 
TIME magazine’s Canadian edition, entitled “Canada’s 
High-tech Hot Spots,” Saskatoon’s Innovation Place was 
identified as one of the world’s foremost centres for agricultural 
biotechnology and as a home to companies that have amassed a 
long list of important breakthroughs. Innovation Place has also 
diversified into information technology and pharmaceutical 
sectors and has attracted many private international companies 
from Germany, France, and United States to also set up offices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Innovation park is a development of this 
government — and just to connect the dots for those confused 
— to attract and enhance job creation in our province by 
supporting the growth of advanced technologies locally. These 
investments are done to ensure that we remain competitive and 
have a stable revenue stream. 
 
It is gratifying to see an international magazine of TIME’s 
stature recognize Innovation Place. The article reinforces this 
government’s decision to establish it. 
 
Innovation Place, the elder of our two research parks, is a 
shining tribute to the vision of this and previous NDP (New 
Democratic Party) governments. I’m proud that this successful 
public investment is in my hometown and in my constituency. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Reorganization 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s flat out crisis 
management on that side of the House. Last year at this time, 
the Premier was telling us that we needed bigger government 
and more departments so he hired nearly 600 more civil 
servants and he grew the government. Today he’s done a 
complete flip-flop. He’s merging departments and he’s firing 
civil servants — exactly the opposite of what he did a year ago. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s complete chaos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party supports smaller and 
more efficient government if it’s part of a plan to grow 
Saskatchewan. But this government has no plan. They have no 
vision. They just lurch around from crisis to crisis while 
Saskatchewan people pay the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP have no plan to grow 
Saskatchewan? 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Speaking to the specific restructuring of 
government that has been announced this morning, the member 
of the opposition . . . Leader of the Opposition will know that in 
terms of the reductions in the civil service announced today, 
those reductions will be focused on areas that serve the 
administration of government — areas of communications, 
policy, information technology, those services which serve the 
administration of government. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition well knows that a year ago . . . a 
year ago when we brought new people into the Saskatchewan 
public service we did so to provide front line service to the 
people of Saskatchewan: new workers in the child care field, as 
the member from Humboldt has called upon us to do; new 
members to rebuild the . . . new public servants to build the 
highways in Saskatchewan, as their whole caucus has called 
upon us to do; new individuals to fight forests . . . forest fires, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are meeting the public needs in Saskatchewan. We are 
looking at the internal structures of government to find the 
administrative savings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
had the Premier and his government been good managers, they 
would have reallocated, they would trimmed in some areas to 
expand in the areas of need. But they just thought making a 
bigger government, spending a lot more money would be all 
right, and today we’re paying the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that now his government is better 
and he got rid of two cabinet ministers to do that. Well perhaps 
our government would be even better yet if he got rid of all of 
his cabinet members, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Why, Mr. Speaker? Because this 
government has no direction. Last year they were hiring people; 
this year they’re firing people. Last year they were creating new 
departments; this year they’re eliminating departments. Last 
year he appointed new ministers; this year he got rid of those 
ministers. He doesn’t seem to know whether he’s coming or 
going, Mr. Speaker. It is complete chaos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government and our Premier has no 
vision, they have no plan. Why are they letting things fall apart? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that members 
opposite will not likely accept what I will say. But I know 
they’re very much in the habit of accepting wisdom from 
outside the province, particularly from their friends in Alberta. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me here today a report 
from the recent Alberta budget. I ask, I ask members opposite to 
listen to this. Last year the Government of Alberta — listen, 
listen to this, member from Rosthern — last year the 
Government of Alberta boosted . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order please. I would just ask for a little less 
background noise please so we can hear the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this report from Alberta 
indicates that last year the Government of Alberta boosted 
spending by 22 per cent and hired more than 1,000 staff based 
on projected energy revenues. Now it’s all right . . . They’ll 
stand here and criticize us for adding, for adding to the public 
service of Saskatchewan but they will not criticize their friends 
outside of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this very day, this very day I received — it 
was made public yesterday . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Once again I ask all 
members just to kind of tone it down a bit so we can hear the 
questions and hear the responses. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, just, just yesterday 
. . . Another source that this party likes to quote is the Fraser 
Institute. Here is the report yesterday from the Fraser Institute. 
 

Over the course of the last decade, Saskatchewan 
(Saskatchewan) was the only Prairie province that cut real 
government expenditures, reducing spending by 9.9 percent 
. . . Comparatively, real spending in Canada as a whole 
increased (by) 10.3 percent while real spending in Alberta 
increased (by) 6.4 percent. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Of course the Premier . . . Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Of course the Premier sees that there’s no relationship 
to Saskatchewan going backward in that regard. Along with the 
fact that we’re going backwards in jobs and we’re going 
backwards in population, we’re going backwards in economic 
investment. Saskatchewan under the NDP is not moving 
forward, it’s moving backwards . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The request works both ways, 
members. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
Saskatchewan know there are internal problems with the NDP. 
But they don’t care nearly as much about that as they do the fact 
that the NDP is killing jobs; the NDP is driving people out of 
the province; the NDP are making hospital waiting lists longer 
instead of shorter, Mr. Speaker. Now we find out that the NDP 
is driving up crop insurance premiums by as much as 200 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what is the NDP government doing to counteract this? 
They’re playing musical chairs in the cabinet room, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not helping the people of Saskatchewan. Why 
does this NDP government and their Premier not deal with the 
real problems facing Saskatchewan — the problem of no 
growth? When will he come up with a plan to grow the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m amazed and impressed 
that the Leader of the Opposition wants to debate plans, because 
we’ve talked about his plan. And we know their plan — cut the 
taxes, sell off the Crowns, and decimate the public service. 
That’s the plan that’s supposed to grow Saskatchewan reported 
in The Wilkie Press . . . is a plan that would gut Saskatchewan. 
That’s what the rural editors are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition today asks some 
questions about the downsizing of government. Well I have 
before me what the Leader of the Opposition was saying just 
prior to the last provincial election about the public service of 
Saskatchewan, and his plan, and his caucus’s plans about the 
civil service in this province. 
 
Here is what the Leader of the Opposition said just prior the last 
provincial election. He said: 
 

Before I agreed to run for the leadership I ask the MLAs 
(over there), do you know who the deadwood are? Do you 
know who the skunks are? 

 
They assured me they know who these people are. Civil 
servants can be very powerful. Look what they did to the 
Devine government. 

 
That’s the attitude of that party, and that leader, to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan communities and RMs (rural municipality) are 
among the biggest . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Once again, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan communities and RMs are among the 
biggest losers in today’s NDP government reorganization 
disaster. Thanks to the Premier’s stamp of confusion, 
municipalities are being left to wade through an enormous new 
government bureaucracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wondering about municipal revenue sharing? Go 
see the new Department of Government Relations. Need 
information on municipal policing? Go see the Justice 
department. Looking for municipal library information? Go see 
the new Department of Learning. Want municipal housing 
information? Go see the old Department of Social Services. 
Urban parks? Go see the Environment department. Municipal 
heritage sites? Go see the Department of Youth, Culture and 
Recreation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier’s idea of smarter, more 
efficient government? A giant bureaucracy for Saskatchewan 
communities and total confusion for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Today, Mr. Speaker, we have merged the 
functions of 10 departments and agencies of government. We 
have four fewer departments of government this afternoon — 
four fewer departments of government, Mr. Speaker. 

We have a one-stop approach to government for economic 
development. We have a one-stop approach for learning in this 
province. And we have created to deal with our colleagues at 
other levels of government a Department of Government 
Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, respecting the partnership 
between levels of government in this province and in this 
nation. 
 
Now he wants to talk about bureaucracy. He should just turn 
around and talk to his colleagues that sit just behind him. Here’s 
their idea of how you deal with the public service, the civil 
service, and the bureaucracy. I quote here, not now the Leader 
of the Opposition, but the member from Wood River, who just 
before, just before the last, the last provincial election said, 
quote: 
 

The whole bureaucracy, the whole civil service has to be 
cleaned out. I can wield (he says. I can wield) a pretty 
good-sized broom. And you know what I would do with the 
broom in there. 

 
We don’t need men with brooms in the government benches, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d have asked my questions to the Minister of 
Municipal Government but I wasn’t sure which one of the six or 
seven or eight ministers would have answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the NDP thinks that playing musical chairs 
with government employees and government programs is a 
good way to grow Saskatchewan, but most Saskatchewan 
taxpayers are going to see it as another way of growing 
government bureaucracy. Certainly that’s what most 
community mayors and councillors and RMs are going to think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for emergency municipal services, see the NDP’s 
new Department of Public Safety. For community 
infrastructure, see the NDP’s new Department of Government 
Relations. For municipal library services, see the NDP’s new 
Department of Learning; and for municipal housing questions, 
see the new Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes are insulting and degrading to 
municipal leaders. Will the Premier explain why he has once 
again abandoned municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is, I guess, it is understandable that a 
political party in this House who says we can cut all the taxes 
and raise all the expenditures and balance the books, it is 
understandable that such a party could say — we have reduced 
by $40 million the expenditures in the administration of 
government, we have reduced by four departments the size of 
government — can stand in the House in the same day and say 
we’ve grown government. Only that party could do as much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of establishing a Department of 
Government Relations, I repeat, this is to respect the 
relationship between levels of government within this province 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

and outside of this province. Too long, Mr. Speaker, have we 
and others viewed this as hierarchical, paternalistic, where we 
don’t work as partners but we work above and below. That is 
changing, that is changing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally before I take my place, I am not finished the 
restructuring. I am not finished the downsizing to grow 
Saskatchewan, to make this province better, because I have a 
plan now, Mr. Speaker, to downsize a little further. It is my plan 
to downsize the number of Sask Party MLAs in this House . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plans for Saskatchewan’s Economic Growth 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan 
want is a plan to grow the economy. Mr. Speaker, we may have 
a new cabinet but nothing else is changed. The NDP has no plan 
to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
The population of Saskatchewan has fallen to 979,000 people 
— that’s the lowest number in over 20 years. There was nothing 
in today’s announcement that actually talked about growing the 
province of Saskatchewan. There was nothing that’s going to 
address the fact that we’re going to lose 38,000 students in the 
next eight years with your lack of plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier can shuffle all the deck chairs he 
wants to, but unless he has a plan, there is nothing for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was there nothing in the announcement today 
that talked about growing Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . contained in the Throne Speech we 
have just completed debate on is a plan to build this into the 
province of opportunity in Canada — seizing on our economic 
opportunities, seizing on our human potential, building on our 
infrastructure. But what do we get? The typical, the typical 
negativism from the members opposite, in spite of . . . in spite 
of all of the evidence to the contrary, of all the optimism of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I can share over and over again with members opposite, 
headlines that are coming out of the press in our province today. 
Let’s go to the Melville Advance: headline, “Economic 
development picture encouraging.” Let us go to the World 
Spectator in Moosomin: “Rocanville booming,” Mr. Speaker. 
Let us go to the Northwest Herald: “2002 promising year 
economic for Unity.” It goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again this government — this government — Mr. Speaker, will 
not be deterred in its optimism and enthusiasm for the future of 
this province by the negativism of the nabobs opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, today’s announcement by the 
Premier is a feeble attempt to deflect from his own failing 
record, and it isn’t working. 
 

In the last election, the NDP promised to create 30,000 new 
jobs. The reality is Saskatchewan has lost over 30,000 jobs 
since the NDP made that promise. But is there anything in 
today’s announcement to create jobs? No. 
 
The NDP promised 10,000 new jobs in the forestry industry 
alone. Did they keep that promise? No. Is there anything in 
today’s announcement to create those jobs? No. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the NDP is lurching from one crisis to 
another, Saskatchewan is losing people, jobs, and opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why is there nothing in today’s 
announcement to create new jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
members opposite and to the people of Saskatchewan, we have 
made promises. We made a commitment to cutting taxes, and 
we’ve introduced the largest tax cut in the history of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We made a promise to fix the 
highways and we’re spending $300 million a year to do just 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We made a commitment to 
increasing health care funding and we’re doing just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We made a commitment to 
increasing education and we’re doing just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier just made 
a commitment to reducing the size of the opposition. And we’re 
going to do just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say we’re 
going to do it without the kind of commitments that that 
opposition group have made — a $650 million commitment to 
further decreases in taxation which isn’t sustainable, gut the 
civil service, Mr. Speaker, and sell off the Crowns. Those are 
commitments you won’t get from this side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plans for Crown Corporations 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 
of Economic Development is right. The opposition after the 
next election will be much smaller, but it will be made up of 
those members over there. 
 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Crown Investments. If there’s any area of this government that 
needs some help, that the NDP need to get a handle on, it’s the 
Crowns. But is there one word in today’s announcement about 
reining in the Crowns? No. Does the NDP plan to stop 
competing with Saskatchewan businesses with the Crown 
corporations? No. Does the NDP plan to stop gambling 
taxpayers’ money in places like Australia, Mexico, and 
Georgia? No. Nothing has changed. 
 
In fact we still have the same minister, Mr. Speaker, the same 
minister who proudly announced that losing $28 million in the 
potato industry was a success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did today’s big announcement contain no 
plan to rein in the Crown corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that member 
thinks providing service in rural Saskatchewan to almost every 
community in rural Saskatchewan, we should rein that in, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t agree. 
 
If that member thinks, Mr. Speaker, that we should not spend 
nearly $2 billion on goods and services partnering with over 
12,000 businesses in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I disagree, 
Mr. Speaker, if he thinks we should rein them in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to support our Crowns and our 
Crowns will continue to provide good service right across this 
great province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Effects of Government Reorganization on Health Care 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in the lead-up to the Premier’s 
announcement this morning there were high expectations of 
meaningful change to this government and the direction the 
NDP was taking. But unfortunately, we were again bitterly 
disappointed. 
 
Specifically in the area of health care delivery in this province 
there appears to be no change at all. The minister’s the same, 
the department is the same, and the NDP will continue to 
deliver mediocre health care services in the same old way. 
Morale is going to continue to decrease; the number of health 
care professionals that leave this province will continue to carry 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this reorganization of government, what is 
going to change to deliver quality health care in this province; 
what is going to improve morale; and what is going to stop the 
exodus of health care professionals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this legislature we met 
the people of Saskatchewan. In dialogue with the people of 
Saskatchewan we built the action plan for health in 

Saskatchewan; an action plan that is going to sustain health care 
for the future of our people well into the future — publicly 
funded, universally accessible. 
 
It is time, Mr. Speaker, it is time for that party to stand up in 
this House and outside this House and tell us what is your plan 
for health. They wouldn’t, Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t, they 
wouldn’t say a word at the Romanow Commission. The critic 
sat right there — wouldn’t say a word. What is your plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the Premier also to direct his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What is their plan for private hospitals? 
What is their stance on privatization of medicare? What is their 
stand on user fees? What is their stand on premiums? 
 
What we hear is silence from them on health care. It’s time they 
stood up and were counted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance Program 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. In the last few days, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 
of Agriculture has confirmed that Saskatchewan farm families 
will be hit with an enormous increase in their crop insurance 
premiums. 
 
He confirmed that they will pay more for a reduced program. 
He confirmed that the new crop and forage rainfall program is 
nothing more than a ridiculous game of chance. And we’ve 
learned that because the minister borrowed against the allocated 
federal agriculture funding to pay programs last year, farmers 
will pay more this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers were hoping to see the 
Minister of Agriculture reorganized today, but sadly there 
doesn’t seem to be a change. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how 
will the Premier’s reorganization announcement today improve 
services and program delivery for the farm families of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, there isn’t any doubt that 
there are challenging times in the agricultural sector right now, 
Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, we are here to support our 
farmers. We’re here to support them, Mr. Speaker. Many, many 
of the producers are very, very supportive of the changes that 
have been made, Mr. Speaker. I talked to the livestock sector, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re supportive of the changes in spot loss 
hail, Mr. Speaker. I talked to the livestock producers who are 
also supportive of the changes in the forage section within the 
crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The places that we can’t get support from, Mr. Speaker, is from 
the federal government who have not bellied up, Mr. Speaker, 
and from those folks over there. That’s where we’ve not got 
support, Mr. Speaker. 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plans for Saskatchewan’s Future 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
heard the answers from the old team over the last week. We 
never got a single sensible answer, not a single indication that 
they were ready to move in a new direction. 
 
Today we’ve heard from the new team, Mr. Speaker. Again not 
one single answer, not one single indication that this 
government is going to launch out in a new direction to turn this 
province around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do they have a plan to deal with municipal 
government? No. Do they have a plan to deal with VLT (video 
lottery terminal) addiction? No. Do they have a plan to address 
hospital waiting lists? No. Do they have a plan to create jobs? 
Do they have a plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP only knows how to make government 
bigger. They don’t know how to make it smaller and make it 
work. Mr. Speaker, they hire ministers, they fire ministers. 
They hire civil servants and they fire civil servants. Mr. 
Speaker, there is no plan to address the real problems facing 
Saskatchewan. Why is the NDP and this government out of 
touch with the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this House last week this 
government introduced and is implementing the leadership plan 
for the development of ethanol fuel for Canada. Last week in 
this House the government of this province showed leadership 
in taking on those who would sexually exploit our children on 
the streets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he talks about a plan. I agree. I agree. He has a 
plan. There is no doubt about that. And what’s his plan? He 
goes to Calgary and says he’s going to cut all the taxes. How 
much? $1 billion worth — $1 billion worth of tax cuts, he tells 
the people in Calgary. 
 
He’s got his MLAs standing up day after day, Mr. Speaker, 
saying we need more — more for crop insurance, more for 
snowmobile trails, more for municipal government, more for 
education, more for property tax, more for health. That’s what 
he’s got his MLAs saying every day, Mr. Speaker. And then 
they say, we know how we’re going to pay for it. We’re going 
to pay for it by privatizing, selling off the assets of a Crown 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have a plan and it’s a plan I reject, we reject, 
and the people of Saskatchewan reject. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Before orders of the day . . . 
(inaudible) . . . introduce a motion . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

to introduce a motion before orders of the day. Would the 
leader of the House, would he please advance the idea of the 
motion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With respect of sitting hours, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(4) of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly that when this Assembly 
adjourns on Thursday, March 28, 2002, it do stand 
adjourned until Tuesday, April 2, at 1:30 p.m. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to . . . Asking for 
leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature four people who are sitting in your gallery; Lynn 
Greaves, who is from the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco 
Reduction; Carson Benallack, who is a university student who’s 
accompanying her; Lisa Williams from the Heart and Stroke 
Foundation; and Colby Williams who’s from the Canadian 
Cancer Society. And I’d like to welcome all of them here today. 
Thank you 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melfort on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Leave to welcome guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to take this opportunity to join with the minister in 
welcoming those people in the gallery that are particularly 
concerned with the tobacco legislation and the whole issue of 
smoking in the workplace. 
 
I thank them very much for their input and counsel over the 
period of time and look forward to making sure that we do 
everything we can in this province to discourage young people 
from starting to smoke. And I thank them for their diligence and 
determination to make the Saskatchewan public safer because 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

 

of their efforts. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 7 converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand up on behalf of an open and accountable government and 
table a response to question no. 8. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to no. 8 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
once again to stand on behalf of an open and accountable 
government and table a response to question no. 9. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to no. 9 is tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
Passenger and Freight Services 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
move today: 
 

That this Assembly encourage the government to maintain 
STC passenger and freight services, resisting the call of 
some to eliminate this crucial economic and social lifeline 
to rural Saskatchewan communities. 

 
Now at the outset of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
dedicate my comments to my father. Now I dedicate the 
comments to my father because my father was a 35-year gas 
serviceman with SaskPower. 
 
Now in the middle of the 1980s he became an employee of 
SaskEnergy, after the 1986 election in which privatization was 
a low-ball issue, according to the government of the day. They 
dabbled around the edges of privatization but they didn’t come 
out and really say to the public, you know, you vote for us; 
we’re going to divide SaskPower into the gas and electric 
components and we’re going to put energy onto the chopping 
block. 
 
Now when we were kids, when we were young kids in the 
McCall household, we didn’t really realize the kind of turmoil 
that was going on with my mother, my father around the fact 
that with a stroke of an ideological pen, the government of the 
day was throwing my father’s livelihood — and by the 
extension, the well-being of our family — into severe doubt. 
What was going to become of us? 
 
Now I dedicate it to my father because he recognized what had 
happened in his workplace and it confirmed in him the political 

beliefs that he passed along to his children. Now he made a 
good wage and was able to get us . . . to provide us kids with 
access to post-secondary education and, you know, we were 
able to live a good standard of living. We had a good quality of 
life. And a lot of that had to do with the fact that my father was 
a gas serviceman with SaskPower. 
 
Now in 1986, the election was about a number of things: we 
had Allan Blakeney versus Grant Devine and it’s similar in 
some ways to what’s going on today — the outcome of that 
election. You know the government of the day, they lowballed 
everything they had to say about privatization, and the real 
agenda came afterwards. 
 
Now in the past couple of years around the Sask Party’s 
position on privatization and on Crown corporations, we’ve 
seen a similar positioning, a similar amount of lowballing, 
obfuscation — it seems like they’re hiding something. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1999 campaign, in the election platform of 
the Saskatchewan Party, their document, The Way Up, they said 
. . . Some called it the way out, and they wouldn’t be far off. 
 

Saskatchewan people are the shareholders of our Crown 
corporations. They must be consulted directly through 
provincial referendum on any specific proposal to sell any 
Crown utility. 
 

Now in the 2001 policy resolution handbook of the same 
Saskatchewan Party, the policy has changed. It has gone on to 
say: 
 

Privatization will be considered if it is demonstrated that 
continued government ownership is no longer in the best 
interest of the taxpayers. 

 
(14:30) 
 
Now that’s a very interesting statement, Mr. Speaker. It 
certainly retreats from the openness to a public debate that a 
referendum would imply. But, you know, I think they hedged 
their position, Mr. Speaker, because they realize that in poll 
after poll after poll, the Crowns are very well supported by the 
people of this province. 
 
So how do you fight that public support? How do you go 
counter that demonstrated public opinion? Well at least in a 
referendum, the other side, the side that supports public 
enterprise, that supports the jobs and the revenue and the 
positive impact that the Crowns have on our economy and on 
our society, at least they would have a chance to air their case. 
 
Under this new, this new and unimproved Sask Party policy, 
we’ve got a situation where privatization will be considered if it 
is demonstrated that continued government ownership is no 
longer in the best interest of taxpayers. 
 
Now we saw something of this, Mr. Speaker, in the 80s. We 
saw something of this when they operated the Crowns like a 
tent peg they were trying to drive into the ground. And, you 
know, in terms of stripping equity, in terms of mismanagement, 
in terms of things like, you know, today, we’re talking about 
STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company). I’m sure this 
wasn’t the policy of the government of the day, but one has to 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

think back to the scandal around the Eagle buses, the kind of 
mismanagement that that entailed. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what are they trying to do with our Crowns? 
What would they do if they came to power? And, you know, 
given the kind of waffling that they are doing in their official 
party positioning, one has to judge what they say . . . one would 
have to take into serious account what they have to say when 
it’s off the cuff, when they don’t have to worry about fronting 
or trying to square their position against all this public support 
for the Crown. You’d have to go back to the leadership for 
some of the comments. You’d have to go back to their 
comments off the cuff to the press. You’d have to go back to 
some of the things they say in this place. 
 
Now, the Leader of the Opposition on April 4, 1998 said the 
following: 
 

I definitely support the sale of STC. It’s been a money loser 
for the province. And I think when it comes to major 
Crowns like (Tel and Power), we need to consult the 
people. (But obviously that’s not the case with STC). 

 
So what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? I imagine it means open 
for business, time to sell off the bus company. 
 
Now, in the same edition of The Leader-Post, we add more 
information from another member from that side, the member 
from Melfort-Tisdale. Where he said: 
 

. . . he has to be convinced that a government agency can 
do anything more efficiently than a properly regulated, 
properly accountable private agency. He would privatize 
the Saskatchewan Transportation Company and SaskTel. 

 
So two of their big players over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we go to a comment by their House Leader, from Hansard 
in 1996. Now I’m sure you’ll have no problem in me measuring 
the comments that he’s made in his place, because he’s a very 
thoughtful person, and he puts forward generally what he 
means. 
 
And in 1996, June 19, the member from Cannington stated: 
 

. . . privatize it and let them compete. 
 

. . . I believe that way is to privatize it. If that’s what they 
want to do, if they want to get in and compete against the 
commercial interests that are already there. 

 
. . . I think it needs to be privatized. 

 
So last night we had the member from Swift Current, the 
current critic for Crown corporations from the side opposite, 
waxing almost poetic on the reasonability of his party’s 
platform, and how they were completely separate from anything 
that went before in this province over the past 60 years. 
 
He talked about, you know, the socialist CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation), and by extension, the socialist 
Thatcher government. And then of course, that socialist NDP 
Allan Blakeney government that they like to rail against. But 

then there was also that big government interventionist Grant 
Devine government. 
 
Now while I would accord the member opposite a certain 
credibility in his observations given that he was deeply involved 
in the workings of that government, so he was well situated to 
take the stock of what they were up to, I’d have to disagree with 
him on his analysis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was . . . In 1982 they fought this whole election on this idea 
of there’s so much more you can be, we’ve just got to get 
government out of the way and let the private sector work its 
magic — work its magic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we had a similar election like that back in 1960 and 1964, 
where Ross Thatcher framed it in terms of free enterprise versus 
socialism. Now these are the same people . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . 60 years of socialism. 
 
Mr. McCall: — The 60 years of socialism my colleague from 
Regina South says. And, you know, he was as amazed as I was 
last night, to find out about this 60 years of unrelenting, 
unremitting socialism in this province. It was very interesting, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, if the Sask Party doesn’t have the guts to come clean 
on their policy, and just state straight out . . . you know, it 
would be nice if they would state straight out what they’re 
going to privatize, and what they’re going to hide behind, you 
know, a commission . . . you know this idea that they’re going 
to assess the Crowns on an individual manner. Who are they 
going to get to assess the Crowns, you know? Grant Devine? 
 
You know, what . . . what good is trusting that particular policy, 
Mr. Speaker? So if they’re going to be about privatizing the 
Crowns, why don’t they just come right out and say it — say it. 
You know, everything must go, we’re open for business, it’s on 
the auction block, and let ’er rip. And we can fight you on that 
and we’ll win with the people of this province. But if you want 
to hide behind . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just remind the member 
to direct all of his remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker . . . for that. I’d just 
like to touch on some of the, the details of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company, Mr. Speaker, and the service that it 
provides the people of our province. 
 
STC travels about 3 million miles a year, serving some 276 
communities in Saskatchewan. You know, does Greyhound do 
that? Do the big private concerns that they’re such fans of, do 
they do that? No. But do we do it to the exclusion of private 
concerns? We don’t. We operate 28 different routes with a fleet 
of 39 coaches and vans, varying in size from 55 seats to 15 
seats. We have 206 agents operating in rural Saskatchewan and 
maintaining passenger and express depots in Regina, Saskatoon, 
and Prince Albert. 
 
At the end of the year 2000, there was a staff of 234 full- and 
part-time employees made up of 209 in-scope workers and 25 
out-of-scope workers. As well, that year, the annual payroll was 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

 

$8.2 million; the assets at the end of the year 2000 were $18.2 
million. And you know, Mr. Speaker, the numbers involved in 
that don’t really convey the situation. 
 
At the start of this, I dedicated my remarks in this debate to my 
father. Now there is a fellow who lives in my constituency, who 
drives bus for the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. He’s 
got a lovely wife, two small young boys, and he provides a 
good living for that family as he provides a good service for his 
clients, the people that he drives to Yorkton and back to Regina. 
 
And, you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . I think I know what goes 
through his head when he must open his paper to read that the 
Sask Party is calling for an end to the merry-go-round that is the 
money-losing STC, you know. Only to be brought to task . . . 
You know, it was interesting that SARM was here today. In 
1998 when Herman . . . when the — pardon me, Mr. Speaker — 
when the Leader of the Opposition was talking about putting an 
end to the merry-go-round of money-losing that was the STC, 
that, that the then president of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, he called them to task and he said, you 
know, I think he’s all wet. I think that the people of rural 
Saskatchewan do value the service provided by STC. And I 
think that he ought to rethink his position. So that’s where we 
get into this business of where they try to obfuscate their 
position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now over the past three years the subsidy on the dollar that the 
. . . the subsidy per mile that Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company has been receiving — in 1998 they received a subsidy 
of 82 cents on the mile. Now in 1999 that subsidy reduced by 
. . . to 77 cents. And again in the year 2000 it reduced to 72 
cents. Over the past three years, Mr. Speaker, they’ve cut 
discretionary spending by over 20 per cent. 
 
They’re doing a good job of running the service; they’re getting 
the kids to Carrot River . . . or the carrots to Carrot River and 
the kids to Edam. And they’re providing a valued service for 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand strongly in support of this motion and I 
would cede the floor to my seconder at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member read the motion into the 
record, please? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With thanks to the bellower opposite: 
 

That this Assembly encourage the government to maintain 
STC passenger and freight services, resisting the call of 
some to eliminate this crucial economic and social lifeline 
to rural Saskatchewan communities. 

 
So moved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is there a seconder for the motion? Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m happy to second the motion of the member from 
Regina Elphinstone because I believe that this is an important 
issue for members to debate and is certainly of significant 
interest to the voters and the people of Saskatchewan to know 

where members of this House stand on this issue. So I think it’s 
a timely debate and it’s an important debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently the Crown Corporations Committee, of 
which I am a member, reviewed the annual reports of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company for the reporting years 
of 1998, ’99, and 2000, and we had an opportunity at that time 
to have a look at the very good work that the Saskatchewan 
Transportation corporation has brought forward to that 
committee. 
 
I know that the member from Elphinstone had stated some of 
these statistics but I think it’s important now that it’s a bit 
quieter in here to state them again. And that is that the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company travels 3 million miles 
a year, serves some 276 communities in Saskatchewan, operate 
on 28 different routes with a fleet of 39 coaches and vans 
varying in size from 55 seats down to 15 seats. They have 206 
agents operating in rural Saskatchewan and maintain passenger 
and express depots in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. At 
the end of 2000 they had a staff of 234 full- and part-time 
employees made up of 209 in-scope workers and 25 
out-of-scope workers with, Mr. Speaker, an annual payroll of 
about $8.2 million. 
 
In my opinion, and I believe in the opinion of most people in 
this province, a payroll from any company that contributes $8.2 
million to the economy of this province is certainly a 
well-accepted enterprise anywhere. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move and say a little bit about the fact 
that many, many people in this province enjoy having the 
services of a bus, a public transportation system, available to all 
in many communities both large and small. And I certainly 
came from a border town and many times during university 
took the bus back and forth to Alsask. My sister still very 
frequently comes in to Saskatoon from Alsask in order to attend 
doctor’s appointments and tend to other medical needs. My 
mother in her final years used that bus very often to come and 
visit me and to obtain services that she required in Saskatoon. 
And after my dad had passed away, she certainly had no other 
way of getting there other than to employ perhaps somebody 
from home care or another organization that might bring her in, 
which would I think have cost a lot more money than a simple 
bus ticket. 
 
When my children were going to school and were able to go out 
and visit their grandparents and their aunts and uncles, it was 
very safe and easy to put them on a bus and have them go and 
spend some quality vacation time with other relatives. 
 
So I think that I certainly have enjoyed the services of the 
transportation company and I think that many other people in 
this province are in the same position. 
 
In addition to the passenger service, Mr. Speaker, the 
transportation company also operates a charter service and a 
freight service and those particular services have great potential 
to improve the revenue stream coming back to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

And if we go to the demographics, Mr. Speaker, you’ll find, and 
not you necessarily but I think all people will find that we are 
experiencing population increases in the transportation 
company’s three main customer groups which are seniors, 
Aboriginal and First Nations people, and young people. And 
certainly I think that the young and the old have already been 
spoken to by myself in my comments up and to this time. 
 
I want now, Mr. Speaker, to go back to the notion that this is a 
very timely issue for us to be speaking to and reiterate some of 
the previous comments that were made in terms of where does 
the opposition stand on this issue. I think people have a right to 
know, the voters of this province are certainly anxious to know 
what their position is. 
 
And in support of some of my arguments, I’d like to refer to a 
newspaper article which comes from April 21 of 1998, the 
Leader-Star News, wherein the Leader of the Opposition says: 
 

During the leadership contest, I said we need to talk about 
privatization with the people of Saskatchewan. I said I 
think that there are some areas where they are probably 
ready to move fairly quickly. STC for example. I don’t 
think you’d have to talk very long with the people of 
Saskatchewan to get them to sell STC. 

 
So that was in 1998, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And again in 1998, in April of the same year, we have another 
quote from the Leader of the Opposition. He says: 
 

I definitely support the sale of STC. It’s been a money loser 
for the province. And I think when it comes to major 
Crowns . . . (this has been a money loser for the province). 

 
Mr. — no, can’t say that — the member from Melfort-Tisdale 
says that he has to be convinced that a government agency can 
do anything more efficiently than a properly regulated, properly 
accountable private agency. He would privatize the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company and SaskTel, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. He’s really on a roll. That’s for sure. 
 
Now yesterday we heard the member from Swift Current 
referring to “the ever-intrusive family of Crown corporations.” 
So I think it’s fairly clear what his opinion is on the Crown 
corporations, and certainly I’ve had an opportunity to discuss 
the pros and cons of Crown corporations with the member from 
Swift Current quite regularly in another format. 
 
But we have a conflicting view from the member from Wood 
River who in that Crown Corporations meeting that I was 
referring to earlier, asked the officials who were presenting to 
us, to revisit their decision to cut the service to Willow Bunch. 
 
Now that was made in 1993, mind you. But I would ask if you 
can imagine, or if anyone in this House can imagine asking a 
private corporation to revisit their decision to cut service to 
anywhere. 
 
So I just don’t believe that that type of service would be 
extended if it were not done by Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company. 
 

I believe that the response . . . I know that the response to the 
member from Wood River was yes, we will have another look 
at that. So certainly that would not happen with a private 
corporation, but it does fit in very nicely in with the mandate of 
the corporation and that is to provide good service to the people 
of Saskatchewan at the most reasonable rates possible. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my time is running short. This seems 
to go very quickly, but I do want to outline some facts about 
what would happen if the Crowns were privatized, and in 
particular the STC. 
 
There is certainly no guarantee that private companies would 
maintain existing service levels. When maximum profit is the 
only objective, privatized companies would not keep their head 
offices in Saskatchewan, maintain staff in rural offices, provide 
bus services to people. 
 
And so I simply, Mr. Speaker, want to close by saying that the 
opposition owes it to the people of Saskatchewan to let us know 
where they stand because they’re all over the map. 
 
I’m happy to second the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to enter this debate on the motion put forward by my colleague, 
the member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just at the outset, if I can 
comment a little bit on the last few remarks by the member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. I think the corporate head offices and the 
excellent staff at the head offices of both PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) and Cameco, I think they’ll 
be interested to discover that she doesn’t really count them in 
terms of her own hometown as head office staff and as head 
offices of companies that were formerly in the public sector but 
that are in the private sector. 
 
And while we’re on the topic of head offices, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, let me just point out for those members that the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . well, the Economic Development 
minister just asked the question, he said, where is Saskoil? 
 
And here is the answer. When Saskoil was privatized by a 
previous government, the government retained, the government 
retained as they retain today with Cameco and PCS, they 
retained something called the golden chair legislation. And the 
golden chair legislation ensures that notwithstanding the 
ownership structure of that former Crown, the head office 
would stay. 
 
So the only way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those head office 
jobs to leave for Calgary is if the government of the day 
amended that legislation or the regulations. And guess who was 
the government of the day? The NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s who 
let Saskoil go, that’s who bowed to their wishes in terms of that 
piece of legislation. And today a lot of those jobs are in 
Calgary. And that’s who you have to thank, right over there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, the 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

 

Economic Development minister said, do you believe this guy? 
And I can assure him, and the member for Elphinstone is 
shaking his head, I can assure them they can believe us because 
that’s exactly the case. That’s exactly the case. 
 
There had to be some changes for Saskoil to leave. There had to 
be some. And they have been the only party in power for 10 
years. 
 
So the Minister of Economic Development wants to change the 
subject. I understand that he wants to talk about the bus 
company. So we’d be happy to talk about the bus company. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the spirit . . . I think — I don’t 
want to put words in the member for Elphinstone’s mouth — 
but I think the spirit of his motion is something that we agree 
with. He wants to ensure that their so sort of transportation 
services, passenger and freight to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we would make the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he is 
probably . . . this motion that he’s forwarded to the Assembly 
today visits a little bit of disrespect to the many, many private 
sector operators across the province today that are doing this 
kind of service already. 
 
You see, the members opposite would have us believe that STC 
is the only company out there providing passenger and freight 
service to rural Saskatchewan, when the truth, when the truth of 
the matter is, is that STC has abandoned many routes under 
their government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Under the NDP, they 
have abandoned many routes in the province, and those routes 
are being picked up by the private sector. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they have a doubt of it, if they 
have a doubt of it, I want to refer them to the annual report for 
STC in 1997. Maybe they’d be interested to hear the remarks of 
the then chairman of the board, a fellow by the name of Dwain 
Lingenfelter. Dwain Lingenfelter who was that member’s 
predecessor in Regina Elphinstone, in fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
At the time, he was in the cabinet of the NDP but he was also 
chairman of the Board of STC. And here’s what his statement 
from the 1997 annual report, that the chairman of the Board, 
Dwain Lingenfelter, says as follows, and I quote: 
 

Expenditure problems had been addressed (speaking of 
years previous) had been addressed by eliminating bus 
service, by eliminating bus service on the least 
cost-effective routes. 

 
So here we have one of the patron saints of the Crown 
corporations, the former deputy premier, the former NDP 
minister for the Crowns, and the former chairman of the Board 
of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
saying that profit is king. And because some routes to rural 
Saskatchewan were unprofitable, STC would yank those routes. 
They would walk away from those routes. And that’s what 
happened. 
 
In fact, you know, before the member from Elphinstone drafted 
this little motion, he may have wanted to do a little research and 
discover that it is the NDP government, his own party, that has 

dropped 700,000 miles from some of its routes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, on that government’s watch — on the NDP 
government’s watch. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly support the notion that we 
need to have this kind of service out to rural Saskatchewan and 
across the province. But we are not ideologically hidebound as 
members opposite are, believing, believing only that the 
government can supply the service. That’s what they believe, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — that the only agency that can deliver 
this sort of service is the government, is the state. That’s what 
they believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The reality is where the state has let down rural Saskatchewan, 
where the state has abandoned rural routes, it’s the private 
sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s picked those routes up and is 
operating quite successfully. The one closest to home for me, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a route from Leader to Swift Current. 
And I think the Crown corporation, STC, dropped that 
particular route I think about 20 years ago, I’m not sure of the 
date. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? A couple of people 
in that community of Leader got together and said, I think we 
can do this, and maybe where STC couldn’t make any money, 
maybe we could and still provide the service. And my 
understanding is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 20 years later, six 
days a week, a 14-passenger, comfortable van goes down 
Highway 32 pulling a freight trailer and offering service to the 
people of Leader and Highway 32 all along the way. Six days a 
week to Swift Current and back, taking people to their medical 
appointments, taking parts to the different agriculture 
implements, hauling freight between those communities. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know what? 
That service used to be provided by their family of Crown 
corporations — by STC. But STC apparently abandoned that 
route, walked away from it, and the private sector filled the 
holes. 
 
So what we have said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we need to 
take a look at this whole corporation. And where there are other 
ways to deliver this service, where there are businesses and 
communities, or maybe community-based organizations that 
want to get involved in providing this service and operating this 
business, we need to be open to that. We need to do that (a) to 
provide service; and (b) to save the taxpayers money, frankly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we need a government that is open to those sorts of 
suggestions, wanting to provide the service in rural 
Saskatchewan, but in . . . but stating unequivocally that it 
doesn’t believe that government is the only way to do that. 
Because it’s folly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not happening right 
now in the province of Saskatchewan and it needn’t happen in 
the future. 
 
Fuller Bus Lines runs a bus from Alida to Regina three times a 
week. That route was probably once serviced by a Crown 
corporation or by a large company. They walked away, they 
walked away from that route, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
private sector filled the spot — the evil private sector that the 
government decries, the government seems to oppose at every 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

turn. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And they’re looking to do more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, probably 
very wary of the thought they . . . of the notion they may be 
competing with their own government through STC. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have an amendment to the motion. 
And the amendment we don’t believe guts the spirit of the 
member’s motion at all. We believe it rather strengthens it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Enhances it. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Right. We believe it enhances it. Because, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it leaves this whole question open to the fact 
that small-business men and women, communities across the 
province, can also provide this service and provide it very 
effectively. They’re very proud of the service they provide on 
the Fuller Bus Lines, and on the bus between Leader and Swift 
Current, and there’s countless ones across the province. There’s 
one in the Outlook area that we got a call from who are upset 
that this government seemed to be writing off their ability to 
provide service as well as anyone else. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would . . . I would move the 
following motion, seconded by my colleague, the member for 
Lloydminster: 
 

That all the words after government be deleted and the 
following substituted therefore: 

 
to establish the economic and regulatory environment to 
ensure passenger and freight services are maintained for 
rural and urban Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It indeed 
was a pleasure to second that particular amendment because I 
really believe — as the member from Swift Current has pointed 
out — that the service that is provided in this province up to this 
time by STC primarily, but the service that is provided and can 
be provided in this province, can be done so most adequately 
and efficiently if you put the conditions and the standards in 
place that will allow people to take advantage of this 
opportunity. 
 
Now at one time STC fulfilled a role in this province that 
wasn’t being filled, and I think it has over the years served that 
purpose pretty well. It has delivered passenger service to rural 
communities that was not on major lines. It has offered parcel 
service, express service, freight service. It was in fact a bit of a 
lifeline to many rural areas that didn’t have access to any other 
public form of transportation. 
 
But that service, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has come at quite a cost. 
When I looked at the annual reports over the last period of time, 
that cost is fairly significant. It can range anywhere up to 3 — 
maybe up to $5 million. There is a expense-over-revenue 
differential of nearly $3 million in operating, and very often a 

grant of $2 million is presented to that corporation in order to 
keep it operating. 
 
That cost is pretty significant, and that cost has to be weighed 
against the benefits that, in fact, was the services that were 
supplied to that different region throughout the province. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the province is changing, the 
demographics are changing. We’re losing people from the rural 
into the urban communities; we’re losing people from the 
province, generally out of the provincial boundaries. 
 
So the shrinking routes that my colleague talked about is a fact 
of a changing demographics in this province. 
 
In the 1995 annual report, way back then, they talked about 
reducing the over-road travel by about 300,000 miles annually. 
So to come to grips with that, the requirement for STC, or the 
bussing in this province has changed. Now that service that was 
almost a monopoly at one time, can be replaced, and I believe 
should be replaced. There is a role for the government, and the 
role of the government should be to put those conditions that I 
talked about, put the regulations in place. But those conditions 
and regulations should apply to all. They should apply to 
anyone who wants to take advantage of that particular 
opportunity so that they can get into that business. 
 
The role of government should not be picking the winners, 
should not be picking the losers in this case. They should be 
allowing full competition, including the STC operation if they 
can fulfill the mandate in those particular conditions. 
 
What we want to encourage . . . We want to encourage 
economic development. We want to encourage private 
investment because it is the investment that is the lifeblood of 
any business in Saskatchewan. And we want to encourage that 
investment. We want to keep that activity in this province 
growing. And without investment, and I’m talking about private 
investment, not investment from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
so that they can compete against it, I’m talking about outside 
investment that is going to drive the business that will create 
these opportunities. And these opportunities will be for 
opportunities in the public bussing that we still require in this 
province. 
 
If those right conditions are in place and the right signal is 
there, maybe, just maybe, we can attract those kind of . . . that 
kind of investment and attract independent bus lines to come 
into this province. We have some examples already that are 
operating in the province and they’re supplying passenger 
service, they’re supplying express service — courier service 
even. 
 
Maybe we can attract kinds of business, and maybe we can look 
at STC in a different way too. Not only independent bus lines, 
but maybe we need — besides the private investment — maybe 
we need to look at employee ownership, maybe we need to look 
at community commitment through partnerships. 
 
So what does the government ownership of the STC as 
provided was a central service, but I think as I mentioned, we 
can provide these services in other ways. 
 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

 

If there were private investment in the bussing service, and 
including all of the ways of doing it, including the STC system, 
we would have the same services, we would have the same 
employment opportunities that my colleagues have talked 
about, and I think more. We would still have the same benefits. 
We’d still have the same services. But in addition, we would 
have the regional benefits and we’d have local benefits; we’d 
have additional employment, and we’d have both private and 
corporate taxpayers contributing to this province. And that is 
pretty significant in terms of economic development and 
growth. 
 
What we . . . the current system of business with the STC as the 
main government player, I don’t believe, is providing the 
scheduling and service in a significant way without a cost. That 
cost, in my view, has to be looked at. This cost of subsidizing 
the . . . by taxpayers’ money . . . and it’s not the government 
money, it’s taxpayers’ money. Very often the government 
forgets that little fact. 
 
Are we getting the best return on that investment for 3 to $5 
million? That investment is an annual investment. 
 
Are these . . . is there other ways that we might be able to utilize 
that investment to create something that’s even better than we 
have now? Maybe we should be able . . . we should be 
considering things like tax incentives put in place for anybody 
that wants to take advantage of this opportunity. Maybe we 
should be talking about tax credits for development in the 
transportation system. Maybe should be short-term loan 
guarantees for viable operators. Maybe that’s the way that we 
should be contributing from a government point of view to 
making a better system than we have operating now. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this investment is the key 
to the economic growth and the key to entrepreneurial success 
and we have to do whatever we can, whatever it takes, to attract 
this growth and opportunity. We cannot afford to chase it away. 
 
So what we need to do is to re-evaluate the dollars that we’re 
spending right now on the STC and the monopoly bussing. We 
should try to attract anyone who might want to take advantage 
of this opportunity and this opportunity should be open to all — 
not just a winner picked by this particular government. 
 
We have to keep in sight the objective of what we want to 
achieve in this bussing system. We want to be able to deliver 
the best system that we can with the best service that we can to 
the people that need it the most. We have to present it in the 
most efficient way that we need to deliver that service to all of 
our regions. It should be a benefit — an economic benefit — to 
both rural and urban, and it should be vital, and it should be 
growing. 
 
That’s the direction that we need to go with our policy, not only 
on this particular Crown, but certainly on SPC (Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation) in particular. We have to make sure that the 
engine that’s driving the economy behind this particular 
function is in fact driven by opportunity for all to put the proper 
incentives in place, not to become the owner and the person . . . 
or the entity that picks the winner and loser. Open it up. Leave 
the opportunity there for everyone, including a changed STC, 
and I believe that we have a much better system, and that’s why 

I second and support the amendment to that motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well to 
quote a phrase: well, well, well, well, well. We have a 
resolution that was put before the Assembly where we were 
urging the government to maintain STC passenger and freight 
services resisting the call to some to eliminate this crucial 
economic and social lifeline to rural Saskatchewan 
communities. And what do the members of the opposition put 
on the public record? 
 
No reference to STC. No reference to the social lifeline to rural 
communities. What they want to do is establish an economic 
and regulatory environment to ensure passenger and freight 
services are maintained for rural and urban Saskatchewan. What 
they want to do, Mr. Speaker, is eliminate — eliminate the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
 
And I can assure all members that the 200-plus workers at STC 
will be most interested to know that the members of the 
opposition party who want to be the next government in 
Saskatchewan, I’m sure that all of the people, the over 300,000 
people that use Saskatchewan Transportation Company to get to 
and from services in this province, particularly rural 
Saskatchewan, will want to know that the members opposite 
want to get rid of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
And I’m sure that every farmer in this province and every 
small-business person in this province will be interested to 
know that the members opposite want to get rid of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
 
Now the members opposite say I’m out of touch. I just want to 
say this. I have been all over Saskatchewan for the last 16 years 
and have I heard anybody other than the members of the 
opposition call for the privatization or the elimination of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company? I can tell you, I can 
count on my one little finger and I got lots left over to tell them 
that I haven’t had anybody say that we should get rid of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. So those members are 
out of touch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say this about the members of the opposition. 
They like to think that they’re the government-in-waiting. They 
like to tell us that they believe in public ownership; that they’re 
not going to do anything to Saskatchewan’s Crown 
corporations. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Well let me say this, the cat is out of the bag. We sat in Crown 
Corporations Committee in January when we talked about the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. And we put on the 
record that this Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
wanted to continue its support for STC in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And what did the member from Swift Current 
do? He moved an amendment because he didn’t want to be 
ideological; that he thought that not only would we have the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company but we would have 
private enterprise in the province of Saskatchewan. But he 
didn’t want to put on the record that the standing committee 
would continue to support STC, so he moved an amendment but 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

he didn’t want to be ideological. 
 
When we moved an amendment . . . I think the people of the 
province need to know where that member and every member 
of the opposition stands on this important public service that 
provides services to people living in rural Saskatchewan — 
senior citizens, young people, and students — as well as others. 
People need to know. 
 
And what did that member do? He didn’t want to support STC. 
Well now today we know. They have a motion, an amendment 
to the motion, and there is absolutely no reference to the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company — not one reference. 
 
What they want to do is set up a regulatory environment. Now, 
let’s talk about a regulatory environment à la Saskatchewan 
Party style. 
 
This is the government that says we will get rid of STC and we 
will put in place regulations to ensure that there is private 
business that’s going to provide this kind of service. But this is 
the government . . . If you look at what they had to say last year 
when our party, our coalition government, put in place — put in 
place regulatory officials in the Department of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) to 
deal with water, into the Department of Health to deal with the 
provincial lab and water; when we put good social workers into 
the Department of Social Services, when we put highways 
workers onto the roads and byways of Saskatchewan, what did 
they have to say? Get rid of those 571 front line workers that 
provide important public services to the province of 
Saskatchewan. They said get rid of it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . well, Mr. Speaker, the gig is up. They 
don’t support STC. No one is calling for its privatization. The 
only group of citizens in this province that are calling for 
privatization of STC are the members opposite. And we intend 
to tell the people of Saskatchewan very clearly where they stand 
on growing this province. 
 
Where they stand is cutting taxes, cutting civil servants, but 
they want to regulate, and getting rid of our Crown 
corporations. And somehow this miracle plan is going to grow 
Saskatchewan. Well I think the only thing that needs to be cut is 
the number of Saskatchewan Party members at the legislature, 
that sit in this legislature. 
 
They don’t represent the people or they would not be moving 
this amendment. If they represented the people they would not 
be moving an amendment that deletes any reference to the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company. What they want to do 
is set up a regulatory environment. And we know very well that 
it’s their intention to cut the number of civil servants in this 
province, and there will be no regulation in the province — 
none whatsoever. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do they say STC is part of that 
regulatory thing? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — They don’t say that. They don’t say STC is 
going to be part of the regulatory environment. The member 

from Swift Current, in Crown Corporations Committee, 
indicated to us that he thought that the roads of Saskatchewan 
should be joint running rights. He basically proposed that 
perhaps STC could run up and down the road between Swift 
Current and Regina. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not interested in STC becoming . . . 
not interested in becoming the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway) 
or the CNR (Canadian National Railways) of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I just want to remind the members opposite that currently 
STC operates 28 routes in our province, and they say too many. 
Well let’s think about that. Too many. Which routes do you 
want to get rid of? Because I’m sure your rural citizens will 
want to hear about that. Those 38 coaches range in size from 15 
seats to 55 seats. It travels over 3 million miles, serving 275 
communities. 
 
The other thing that we need to understand is that STC . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I understand 
private members’ days are fairly boisterous, but I am having 
difficulty hearing the member for Saskatoon Nutana. So please 
come to order. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now the member from Wood River, the 
member who likes to call the members on this side of the House 
commies and socialists and reds — every red-baiting name that 
you can use . . . and I would say to the member opposite, get out 
of the 1950s. Most of us were born later than that. 
 
What I would say is this, that STC has partnerships with 13 
private operators; they’re either passenger or freight service and 
in some cases they’re both. And you know what? STC serves, 
in co-operation with those 13 private operators, over 400 
communities in the province. 
 
Now those members opposite say, let’s get rid of those lines. 
And I say to the members opposite, which lines do you want to 
get rid of? Those members opposite say they don’t like the idea 
that the people of the province subsidize, provide a grant, to 
STC in the amount of $4 million to support passenger services. 
 
But I would say to the members opposite that if you live in 
urban Saskatchewan, municipalities subsidize public 
transportation. And I believe that people living outside of our 
major centres in rural Saskatchewan need to have access to 
public transportation. Those members don’t. 
 
And I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 
have put it on the record they want to regulate bus services 
outside of the major centres and they want to privatize STC. 
And we won’t let them do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be able to stand and enter into the debate on STC. 
And as the constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, STC and bus 
line service in my constituency is very, very important to 
people, and as the member for Saskatoon Nutana said, 
especially to the farming community. 
 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

 

I would also, I would also like comment to the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, in her comments, and state that why is that 
member so against private enterprise? Why is that side so 
against private enterprise? Why does everything have to be 
unionized, government controlled? 
 
The best part of Saskatchewan is rural Saskatchewan, and they 
do things different. They do things privately — private 
business. Why is government always got to be in the face of 
these people? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to STC, our bus service, 30 
years ago we had a gentleman that owned a bus service. His 
name was Albert Bouchard. He owned a service called 
Crossland Coachways. He delivered a service from Chitek Lake 
down through Spiritwood, through Shellbrook and into Prince 
Albert. And members, I would like to say that this man was so 
efficient you could set his clock by his timing of his bus service. 
That’s how efficient he . . . efficiency he was as a private 
enterpriser in this province of Saskatchewan. After 30 years of 
being in this business, he turned this business over to his son, 
Dennis Bouchard. 
 
Dennis Bouchard wanted to expand his business a little bit so he 
moved to Meadow Lake, and I know the member from Meadow 
Lake across from me knows of this situation. Now Mr. 
Bouchard runs a service now from Meadow Lake down through 
Glaslyn, Spiritwood, Shellbrook, into Prince Albert, then on to 
Saskatoon. He does that three times a week. He runs the other 
side . . . or the other route which is Meadow Lake, Green Lake, 
Big River, Debden, Canwood, Shellbrook, P.A. (Prince Albert), 
and into Shellbrook. Private enterpriser, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
private enterpriser. 
 
The reason he does well: he does it more efficiency; he does it 
cheaper. And the problem is now, is STC is giving him the 
boot. They don’t want him in the business of being in bus 
service. They don’t want him to give service to the rural area of 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. The reason they don’t 
want him in there is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because he is 
private. And the member from Saskatoon Nutana stood up and 
said, we don’t need private enterprise. We want it government 
controlled. 
 
Well that’s what’s wrong with Saskatchewan. We’ve got so 
much government control, there’s no room left for people to be 
free enterprisers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member, 
Dennis Bouchard, who operates this bus service, of late has 
been kicked out of . . . (inaudible) . . . service and operating out 
of the bus depot at Prince Albert. He’s been also kicked out of 
Saskatoon. Why? He cannot use that bus service to interline. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know this for a fact because as a member 
of Shellbrook-Spiritwood and a businessman . . . And I hesitate 
to say it to all the members on that side: how many members on 
that side have ever been in business for yourself? Exactly. One 
hand goes up — one hand goes up. On this side here, 
everybody’s in private business. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, this gentleman is kicked out of Saskatoon and 
P.A. They’re saying the reason he is kicked out is because he 
owes STC money. Well that’s a good example to kick a person 
out. The problem is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, STC owe him a tonne 
of money — a whole lot more than what he owes STC, but he’s 
still kicked out. He’s totally on his own. 
 
As a individual and a businessman, if I order a part from 
Saskatoon, or let’s say Regina, or anywhere, and I want it 
shipped bus — because to me as a businessman in the town of 
Spiritwood I relied on the bus service — that part came to 
Prince Albert and that’s where it stops. Because Mr. Bouchard 
could not interline with Prince Albert to get that part to me. 
 
So do you know what I had to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I had to 
go and pick it up myself. And STC give a great service, but not 
to the people of Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Crossland . . . or Mr. Bouchard, who owns Crossland 
Coachways, gives us service, but STC will not interline with 
him. That’s the problem. The reason he won’t interline — 
because he is private. And in your way of doing business there 
is no room for private enterprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood the 
farmers depend on the bus service. But how do they get the 
parts there? So what they’ve had to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
depending on other services which cost them two or three times 
more. It’s always a cost to the farmers or the people in this 
constituency. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, why is he so against 
the member from Meadow Lake . . . or the, pardon me, not the 
member, the person from Meadow Lake who owns Crossland 
Coachways? Why is he so against him and stopping him from 
interlining to give the service to my constituency? That’s the 
only question I’m asking and he’s asking. And do you know 
what kind of answers he’s getting — absolutely none. And we 
the citizens of the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency have to 
put up with this crap. And it’s like this in other centres all over 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And then they stand up and they say, we want to get rid of STC. 
No we don’t want to get rid of STC. We want it to change so it 
gives better service to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I rise on a point of order, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a guide of 
conduct for members engaging in debate in the House that is 
intended to keep debate at a certain level that would be 
consistent, I think, with civility and reasonable and respectful 
comment. 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

And I notice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in his debate the hon. 
member uses the word crap, which I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
falls in the category of words that are not permissible in 
parliamentary debate. 
 
And I would ask that you would ask the hon. member to 
withdraw the remark and apologize to the House and then 
continue his debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I invite the hon. member to withdraw 
the remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will 
scrap crap and I will use the word garbage then. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I don’t think that quite 
qualifies as a withdraw and apologize. So I recognize the 
member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood to withdraw and apologize. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I will withdraw the comments using the 
word crap, and apologize. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I just want to bring closing remarks in 
regard to a member from Meadow . . . a person from Meadow 
Lake who runs a private service in the province of 
Saskatchewan and goes through my constituency, but 
something has to be changed to allow this person to give better 
service to my constituency, who solely depends upon the bus 
service. 
 
And that’s why I moved their . . . my . . . that’s why we moved 
an amendment and I support that amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is there further speakers that wanted 
to address the motion? Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a couple of 
questions for the member from Swift Current. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. We are still in the debate 
portion and there is 40 seconds left. The 10-minute Q & A 
(question and answer) will begin in about 36 seconds. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
this afternoon to enter into this debate. And the question that I 
put before the House in speculation, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve had 
this discussion once in other forums, Mr. Speaker, with the 
members opposite, and we put forward a motion asking them to 
support the continued operation of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company in rural Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they wouldn’t vote on that motion. 
 
Now the motion passed, Mr. Speaker, because the government 
members voted in favour of it, but the members in opposition 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
expired. We will now enter the 10-minute Q & A portion. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one question 
for the member from Regina Elphinstone. Do you know in the 

last 10 years . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. All the comments to the 
Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Question is to the Speaker, through the Speaker 
to the member of Regina Elphinstone. How many kilometres in 
the last 10 years have STC abandoned and how many routes? If 
you could answer that. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve got a company 
here that’s striving for efficiency and we’ve got an opposition 
here that likes to bellow away . . . You know, they ask a 
question, but they don’t want to wait for the answer. It’s just, 
you know, bellow, bellow, bellow. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company has in fact abandoned 
quite a fair amount of kilometres in terms of routes that they 
serve. 
 
But I ask you this: it’s not a question so much of how many 
routes would STC abandon — because they maintain a good 
balance between value for service and getting out to as many 
communities as they can — and at the same time they have to 
put up with the bellowing from the member from Wood River 
about how they lose $3 million a year, Mr. Speaker. Now 
they’ve been bringing that figure down. They’ve been doing a 
good job of managing but it’s still a money-losing proposition 
to service those communities. 
 
So the question isn’t so much how many have been abandoned. 
It’s, you know, how much would they abandon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you to the 
member from Swift Current, I’d like to ask the member, are 
there any legislative provisions preventing any bus company 
from operating any route in the province of Saskatchewan? And 
if there isn’t, could he explain to me why today there aren’t 
private operators taking up those areas that may have at one 
time had other private operators or perhaps service by STC? 
And are those operators, when they want to pick up a route, are 
they not in fact asking for subsidy from the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. member should 
know and members of the House should know that there are a 
number of private operators operating in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what I focused on in my remarks. 
 
And why are they operating in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because that government, that NDP 
government abandoned rural routes. They walked away from 
rural routes over the last 10 years. We quoted to them from their 
own former deputy premier, Mr. Lingenfelter, who quite clearly 
said, as chairman of the board, that STC was abandoning routes. 
 
Yes, private sector operators are providing that service in those 
areas, and we ought to respect them and we ought to create the 
kind of environment that would allow that sort of thing to 
continue to happen. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the hon. 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. Mr. Speaker, I take it that the 
bus routes that they abandoned lost money from the last 
question that I asked. 
 
And one of the routes was Outlook. But there is a private 
entrepreneur that picked that up — I think it’s called Larson and 
Company. What I want to know is by the move of the motion 
that will they reinstate some of these lines that were abandoned 
due because they were losing money? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think what the 
motion says is that we want to encourage the government to 
maintain STC passenger and freight services, resisting the call 
of some to eliminate this crucial economic and social lifeline to 
rural Saskatchewan communities. 
 
The point I want to make is that STC has a number of depots in 
the province that private operators have access to. They can . . . 
and the other point I wanted to make is that STC has linkages 
with private operators in order to transport passengers and 
freight in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think the member is trying to indicate that there are routes 
that are being abandoned. And, Mr. Speaker, the officials 
clearly said that STC is looking at those lines where they aren’t 
able to legitimately continue to operate and there’s huge public 
subsidies. That will continue. But that doesn’t mean we get rid 
of STC. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I have a question for the members. I have 
a question to the member from Lloydminster. And he indicated 
that there are people that are interested in seeing STC privatized 
in the province of Saskatchewan and that government would 
simply go to a regulatory environment. I indicated in my 16 
years in the House, I’ve never heard of anyone call for the 
privatization of STC except for the members opposite. 
 
Can you tell me how many people . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. All comments to the Chair and 
through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — . . . tell me how many members . . . how 
many people in his constituency have called for the 
privatization of STC and government to move in as a regulator? 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my remarks, I tried 
to focus on what we needed to do in order to attract a growing 
economy and a growing interest in bus systems. What I said 
was that STC was part of the solution but it has to be looked at 
under the same regulations as we have to look at other 
opportunities, and that is to put the right conditions and the 
right signals in place and have them apply to all, not just pick a 
winner of STC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the member from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why won’t the bus stations of Prince 
Albert and Saskatoon not interline with Crossland Coachways 
of Meadow Lake? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things about this 
situation is that we’re trying to come to a mutually beneficial 
arrangement and to date — to date, Mr. Speaker — we’ve 
already got a situation where you know if it was STC by itself 
they’d be serving 275 communities. By partnering, partnering 
with the private sector — you know something that we support, 
that we think is great — by partnering with the private sector 
they’re . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’m unable to hear the 
member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — By partnering with the private sector, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re able to serve a grand total of 400 communities. 
Now that’s tremendous co-operation, Mr. Speaker, and I guess 
where we differ from them is that our situation, our view has 
room in it for private and public; theirs has room for no STC 
whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through you to 
the member for Regina Elphinstone. Will that member indicate 
to the Assembly, please, if the NDP — the NDP, this 
government — promises, pledges by the spirit of their motion, 
to never abandon another rural route of STC as long as they’re 
in office. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to page through 
here to get the mission statement of the corporation here which 
I think is quite instructive, and sadly I am not able to find it at 
this moment. 
 
Okay, Mr. Speaker, I think the mission statement of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company says it very well when 
it states: 
 

STC will continue to provide the widest possible level of 
passenger bus service in the province of Saskatchewan. In 
doing so, it will take whatever steps are necessary to 
contain expenditures, such that the subsidy required from 
its stakeholders can be held to a minimum. 

 
And judging by the bellowing from the member of Wood River, 
Mr. Speaker, I think they would agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you, to the 
member from Swift Current, I would like to ask the member 
opposite if the members of Saskatchewan Party will support the 
continued operation of the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll tell the 
member through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the 
Saskatchewan Party will support . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Sorry, the member’s time has expired 
and the . . . 
 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The seventy-five 
minute debate has expired. Order. Would the House please 
come to order? Thank you. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Reaction to September 11, 2001 
Terrorist Attacks 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I was 
enjoying the debate from the last motion. But this motion that 
we put forward on private members’ day has a more serious 
tone and I think is certainly an issue that should be discussed 
here in the legislature because this is the first time, Mr. Speaker, 
that this House has come together since the terrible terrorist 
attack on September 11 of last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world has not been the same since September 
11 of last year, and I think each of us can recall how we heard 
the shocking and terrible news of the two attacks on the World 
Trade towers in the United States, plus the other two incidents 
which took so many thousands of innocent lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember the morning very well. I happened to 
be at home — it was one of those rare mornings when I was at 
home — and I was actually waiting for a call from a reporter 
from The Leader-Post. Colleen Silverthorn was to call me at 9 
o’clock. And, Mr. Speaker, the phone didn’t ring and I was, I 
believe, getting my e-mail and so I switched over to the news 
and saw the headlines that indicated that this terrible attack had 
occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a few times in life when you recognize 
that an incident has happened, a world event has occurred that 
will never leave us exactly the same as we were prior to that 
event occurring. September 11 was definitely one of those 
events, even though we’re many thousands of miles away from 
where the horrific events took place in the United States. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the outpouring of sympathy around the 
world was one that in spite of the horror . . . horrific actions that 
occurred caused one to have hope and some confidence that 
people still sense the need for justice, the need for right and 
wrong — to recognize what is right and wrong — the need to 
help our fellow man and woman when they are in trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even countries and even people with cool relations 
towards the United States recognized the horrificness of this 
activity and condemned the actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course those of us in this country who share 
many common principles with United States were certainly 
horrified at the terrible event that occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people rallied in a very positive 
way. People offered to help; money was raised. People offered 
to go to New York City to help clean up the mess. People, 
people responded with moral support. I believe people with 
religious faith responded in prayer. And, Mr. Speaker, there was 
an outpouring of goodwill towards those who were wronged by 
the actions of a few terrorists back on September 11. 

Mr. Speaker, I was very fortunate to be able to attend the 
special service in Saskatoon, along with mayor of Saskatoon, 
some of my colleagues here from the legislature, leaders in the 
city of Saskatoon. The condolence book that the province 
provided was there for Saskatchewan citizens to sign. And I felt 
it a real privilege to join with hundreds of other people that 
morning in Saskatoon and sign a book that would express our 
deep sympathy and concern for the victims of that, of that 
action back on September 11. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the government for making those 
books available. But I also want to thank my colleagues, my 
fellow MLAs in the opposition, for also making condolence 
books available at a riding level. And we wondered, you know, 
how many people would be interested in signing these 
condolence books, but the response was an outpouring of 
concern and interest that surprised even me. And I know . . . 
and I have great, great belief in the responsible reaction of 
Saskatchewan people in circumstances like these. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think of the books that I was able to provide in 
the Rosetown-Biggar constituency. First of all, I was prepared 
to provide them, and we had funeral homes providing the books 
saying can we provide you with the books that would be passed 
through the community so these signatures could be received. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these books were being signed at 
volleyball tournaments. They were being signed Sunday 
morning in worship services amongst people of many different 
faiths. Mr. Speaker, seniors’ groups were asking for these 
condolence books. And I believe at last . . . the final tally was 
about 1,500 people from the ridings represented by 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs had signed the condolence books. 
 
It was more than just signatures though, Mr. Speaker. There 
were many comments in the books, comments of support, and a 
lot of artwork, particularly by children in this province. 
 
And I talked in my opening comments about the fact that this 
event we knew would change our world forever, much of it in a 
negative way. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there was also some positive responses. We 
saw the artwork of children with pictures of themselves 
reaching out to the children of victims who had lost parents in 
the World Trade tower, expressions of respect for that loss, 
expressions of sympathy, offering of prayers and best wishes, 
and offers of practical help to the bereaved who had lost loved 
ones. 
 
I noticed from the children particularly, a concern about other 
children who had lost their parents. And that was extremely 
touching and certainly bodes well for the future of our province 
— knowing that we have children that actually care and 
understand the hurt and tragedy that surrounds actions of 
violence, such as occurred on September 11, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the struggle continues against terrorism but the 
response must be measured and must be effective. I think of the 
different way that people responded. I talked about the way that 
children responded. I talked about the way the provincial 
government responded; the way the official opposition 
responded. 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

 

I have to also relay to my colleagues in the legislature the way 
one of our staff people at the caucus office here in the 
legislature responded. As he looked out at the front of the 
legislature after a couple of days and realizing that there was no 
American flag hanging outside in the way that we usually 
would show respect or recognition in such a circumstance. He 
was able to go and find an old American flag that I guess he 
had, or knew where it was. And he came in here one evening 
and he hung it out a window on the north side just to show that 
we in Saskatchewan cared. And a lot of positive comments 
from . . . I imagine from many of my colleagues here in the 
room. And many of the staff here at the legislature expressed 
appreciation for that. 
 
And he thought after two or three days, well you know, really I 
just sort of hung it out there; I probably should go and bring the 
flag back in. As he came in here one evening and the . . . one of 
the commissionaires was saying, you know, what brings you to 
the legislature this late at night? And he said, oh I was just 
thinking I should probably retrieve that flag. And the 
commissionaire said, you know, why don’t you just leave it a 
little bit longer? I think it’s very appropriate that that flag is 
hanging outside the window of the legislature to show that we 
do care. 
 
I mean, we certainly . . . we are Canada and they are the United 
States, and we have our agreements . . . and we have 
agreements and we have our disagreements. But these kinds of 
incidents transcend beyond those types of concerns. And that 
expression was appreciated by many, many people. 
 
That being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the motion that we are 
presenting this afternoon in recognition of that horrific event 
commits to our continued struggle against terrorism in all of its 
ugly forms. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it states our support for the 
United States and its allies in its fight against terrorism. And it 
particularly supports Canadian troops who are involved in the 
actions against terrorism here in North America and also the 
efforts that are occurring over in Afghanistan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was looking at the commitment that 
Canada has made, and since that fateful day in September when 
we were able to harbour planes that had to make emergency 
landings, we have gone on to increase our commitment to 
actually sending some of our troops to try to restore law and 
order and good government to the land of Afghanistan. 
 
And I understand that the third battalion, Princess Patricia’s 
Canadian Light Infantry battle group, has sent a task force built 
around the US (United States) Army’s 187th brigade combat 
team. We have also sent a Canadian naval task group on station 
in the Arabian Sea. We also have a strategic airlift attachment 
comprising of one CC-150 Polaris long-range transport aircraft 
which is based in Germany. We have a long-range patrol 
detachment comprising of two CP-140 Aurora maritime patrol 
surveillance aircraft operating in the Arabian Gulf region. And 
we have a tactical airlift detachment comprising of three CC130 
Hercules transport aircraft. 
 
And while, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not familiar with all the 
equipment and don’t know all the capabilities that we have over 
there, I certainly do recognize that there are a number of 
committed Canadian men and women in the Armed Forces who 

did not shrink for a second from their responsibility to help 
restore peace and order out of the chaos that occurred from the 
results of the September 11 terrorist attack on the United States. 
 
I know all members of this House, regardless of our differences, 
will come together in support for the Canadian troops that are 
doing their duty, doing it well, doing it with honour, and doing 
it, quite frankly, on our behalf. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, September 11 taught us all a 
lesson. Even though we’re out here in Saskatchewan, far away 
from where we think the turmoil of the world occurs, I think we 
all recognized, when we turned our television on and saw those 
horrible sights, how vulnerable we all are. 
 
Yes, the buildings in Saskatchewan were safe, but there were 
many connections between Saskatchewan people and those who 
lost loved ones or perhaps actually lost their lives in New York 
City particularly and now impacted by our involvement in 
trying to restore order and good government to the land of 
Afghanistan. 
 
The world is a small community when you begin to look at it in 
the light of events like September 11. And we recognize how 
we all need to be diligent in upholding democracy, upholding a 
standard that requires that we expect our people to be living in a 
safe environment, free from the terror that was so evident at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, terrorism is unacceptable. It’s unacceptable, 
period. It doesn’t matter whether the terrorist attack was 
inflicted on the United States or whether it was inflicted on 
some European country, Asian, African country, some island 
somewhere. Terrorism is an unacceptable form of violence. It 
accomplishes nothing. It does huge damage and hurts innocent 
people. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a great honour for 
me to present to the Assembly a motion which I am prepared to 
move, seconded by the hon. member from Wood River, and I 
would ask that all members join in supporting this motion 
which says: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its condolences to all families 
of the victims of September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the 
United States, condemns all terrorist assaults, fully supports 
the military actions of the Unites States and its allies 
against terrorism, and unreservedly supports our Canadian 
troops engaged in this war. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased and honoured to be able to second the motion put 
forward by the Leader of the Official Opposition. 
 
I also would like to express on behalf of our party, I’m sure all 
of the legislature, and people of Saskatchewan and even that of 
Canada, in expressing our sorrow and condolences to the 
families and victims of September 11th terrorist attack. The 
attack on the Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the aircraft that 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

crashed in the fields in Pennsylvania, there’s a lot of victims 
and a lot of families that suffered because of this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I consider terrorism to be one of the most 
cowardly acts there is in the world. But along with cowards, 
there are heroes. And I applaud the many heroes that come to 
the forefront as a result of these dastardly attacks. We look at 
the fire department of New York City, the police department of 
New York City, the hundreds and hundreds of these people that 
put their lives on the line to protect innocent men, women, and 
children — the people in the Pentagon that put their lives on the 
line, hauling people out of the burning building, helping others, 
again, from this dastardly attack. 
 
I also look at the heroes that we don’t know or don’t hear about. 
The heroes that were on the aircraft. We don’t know how the 
people on the aircraft responded to the terrorists on board. I 
have a pretty strong feeling about how some of the people 
responded. We did hear of some phone calls that were made 
from the airplane where people were saying they were going to 
attack the terrorists. And I very much applaud these people 
because we’ll never know for sure. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I also applaud the pilots of these aircraft. Again, we don’t 
know, but I have a very strong internal feeling that the aircraft 
that went down in Pennsylvania was probably directed by the 
pilot, rather than fly back to Washington, DC (District of 
Columbia) and attack the Capitol building or the White House. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to express my 
condolences to the victims and families of those who have lost 
their lives, or had families that lost their lives in previous 
terrorist attacks. Again, as I said before, I consider this a true 
act of cowardice. 
 
But I’d also like to talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about how we got 
into this sorry mess. In 1989, in the height of the Cold War, or 
as the Cold War was basically at its height before that but 
starting to wind down, the wall came down. And as soon as the 
wall came down, signalled an end to the Cold War. 
 
When the end of the Cold War came, there was a general 
feeling throughout the world that the world is at peace. We no 
longer have to support our defensive structures in our country 
or in other countries. And history will explain that. 
 
We all, and I won’t use myself as the example because I spoke 
about the evils of terrorism and what should be done about 
terrorism for the last 20 years, but when I use the “we,” it’s 
people in general in North America wanted to cash in on the 
peace dividend. By cashing in on the peace dividend we could 
deplete our military resources; the money that we spend on the 
military could be cut; we could put it into other programs. 
 
And as we did this, we saw during the time that cuts were 
coming into military defensive forces, at the exact same time, 
there was an increase in hostilities throughout the world. There 
was tens of thousands of terrorists being trained. The wars in 
the world were actually escalating. 
 
In 1978 . . . or 1987, sorry, I attended a military college in 

Virginia and at that time the Cold War was still strong. There 
was 37 active wars in the world. When the wall came down and 
the peace dividend broke out, terrorism had a breeding ground 
because we all figured with the peace dividend that the world 
was a safer place. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 1989 until present the number 
of wars in this world has increased from 37 to 80. The terrorist 
activity, as we are now aware of, has gone exponentially 
upwards. At the same time, military forces in the free world 
have been depleted. 
 
Canada followed suit, no doubt supported by members party 
from . . . members opposite, their party in the federal level. And 
now the world is in a massive turmoil because of the depletion 
of military resources. And I say that with a bit of an explanation 
because people will debate with me that we don’t need as many 
airplanes, tanks, guns; we’re a safe place in North America. 
That myth has been shattered as of September 11. 
 
But what really happened that brought us to this position was, 
when we depleted the military resources, part of that depletion 
was in the intelligence community. And I’ll give you an 
example as quoted by Mr. Tom Clancy, who is a well known 
author, who spoke and said, “Right now we have (and I’ll use 
the word spooks because that was his quote) we have 200 
spooks in the CIA.” 
 
And to explain what spooks are, they’re people that actually 
infiltrate terrorist organizations, and that’s where the 
intelligence gets fed back to governments — 200. 
 
And I say again, we have 200 active wars, not counting the 
terrorist activities. 
 
Mr. Clancy stated that in order to provide good intelligence 
service to the United States they would need 2,000. 
 
So we in Canada have done the same thing. We have shrunk our 
intelligence community to the point where we do not get 
updated and accurate intelligence. 
 
My belief, my strong belief is, the September 11 catastrophe 
could have been avoided had our intelligent resources . . . 
intelligence resources would not have been depleted. And I’m 
not talking only of Canada. I’m talking about the free world. 
But as a result of depleting our intelligence resources, this 
allowed terrorist activities to grab a foothold. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, terrorist activities put the world at fear and 
even in Saskatchewan, after the attack on September 11, in my 
constituency I had people phoning me. I had people talking to 
me that were actually afraid to visit the United States 20 miles 
across the border. They were afraid. Terrorism worked. It put 
the fear into everybody in this country and other countries 
around the world. 
 
So how do we feel about responding to the terrorist activities? I 
fully support Canada’s involvement in sending our troops to 
Afghanistan. In fact, I fully support our troops going anywhere 
in the world to stop terrorism. And I really do not want to make 
this political but I do have to give you a quote about how other 
parties feel about supporting the actions in Afghanistan: 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

 

NDP Leader Alexa McDonough expressed strong 
opposition to the bombing in Afghanistan and condemned 
Chrétien’s decision to commit the Canadian forces without 
taking it to the Commons first. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know what the plan would 
be from their perspective, or her perspective. If you do not want 
to partake in curtailing this terrorist activity, what are the 
options? Letting terrorists run rampant around the world. I do 
not condone that and will not condone that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I consider our military forces . . . or, Mr. 
Speaker, I consider our military forces to be amongst the best in 
the world, not because I was there but because I’ve seen how 
they operate with other forces and what they can do. Their 
biggest impediment is political apathy and underfunding. I 
know in my own heart that our troops will show themselves 
extremely well in Afghanistan and wherever they may go in the 
world following Afghanistan if in fact there is another exercise. 
 
I fully support our leader’s motion and I’m very proud to 
second it and I fully support our military endeavours in 
combating terrorism. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — I am extremely pleased to enter into this debate 
this afternoon. Like the members opposite, I will remember 
forever the time at which I learned of the attack on New York. 
 
There are a few times in our lives where we will remember the 
exact details of what you’re doing when you find out or hear of 
some information. And for me this is one of those few times, as 
it is for most Canadians and for in fact most people around the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that day was a horrific day for the people of New 
York, the people of Washington, DC, and in fact for the people 
of the entire world. This was not an attack simply on the people 
of New York; it was an attack on the people of the world. There 
were people from more than 90 nations lost their lives in that 
day, in that attack — people from countries that may not 
normally be involved in American issues, Mr. Speaker. There 
were Canadians; there were people from China, Japan, and 
several other nations around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue about the heroes as well of New 
York. We all saw and can remember the vivid images on 
television of firemen going into the buildings, people trying to 
rescue people trapped above the flaming floors, people trapped 
below the flames. We saw the pictures of fire trucks, 
ambulances, police cars, as rescue workers and emergency 
personnel tried to save those people that were trapped in the 
World Trade Center. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those images will live forever in our lives. 
And we need to share the pain and the sympathy and the 
emotion of those people who lost loved ones that day in New 
York. And, Mr. Speaker, we can all feel that pain because I 
don’t think there was a single person that I spoke to after that 
day that didn’t understand the pain that those people were 
feeling. 
 

It wasn’t an attack against simply the people of New York. 
People felt that pain as if it were their own family, their own 
friends, people that they knew and loved. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
many, many Canadians lost their lives that day. Eighteen men 
and six women aged 29 to 70 lost their lives in the World Trade 
Center. They were born in cities and towns from all across 
Canada. Most of them now lived in New York, were born and 
raised in Canada, and/or worked or were visiting the World 
Trade Center at the time of the attack. Two were passengers in 
the aircraft that hit the buildings; they were killed with 2,890 
other people who died in the attacks on the twin towers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And who were those Canadians? Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take 
a few minutes to talk about who those Canadians were, so 
people understand just who those Canadians were. 
 
Michael Arczynski, a 45-year-old senior vice-president of Aon 
Corporation’s Manhattan office. He lived in New York for nine 
years. He was a well-travelled man who said that he had three 
homes — Montreal, London, and Australia — with his principal 
home and his family being in Montreal, Canada. He and his 
wife Lori had three children. They were expecting their fourth 
child in February. 
 
He’s only one of the many, many victims that lost their lives in 
New York. Who were some of the others? 
 
Garnet Bailey, a 53-year-old director of pro scouting for the LA 
(Los Angeles) Kings; a native of Lloydminster, Saskatchewan. 
He was aboard United Airlines Flight 175 when it crashed into 
the World Trade Center. He was a professional hockey player; 
played for many teams including the Edmonton Oilers where he 
played with Wayne Gretzky. He was a Canadian that many had 
heard of his name and many had seen play hockey. He lost his 
life that day. 
 
David Barkway was a 34-year-old executive of the Bank of 
Montreal Nesbitt Burns in Toronto who was visiting a client 
atop the World Trade Center’s north tower when the first plane 
hit. He sent an electronic message to his office in Toronto 
asking for help. He left behind a pregnant wife . . . a 
two-year-old child when he died that day. 
 
Ken Basnicki, 47-year-old father of two was in the north tower 
where he worked. The Toronto native was last heard from at 
8:55 a.m. in a cellphone call to his mother from an office on the 
106th floor. He was notifying his mother that the place was full 
of smoke and he didn’t think he’d find a way out. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Jane Beatty, age 53. Worked at Marsh & McLennan Cos. Inc. 
She was originally from Britain and lived in Ontario for 20 
years before moving to the United States. She was on the 96th 
floor of the north tower when the terrorists attacked. She had 
survived five years with breast cancer. She had celebrated the 
occasion that day. She died in the north tower. 
 
Cynthia Connolly, age 40. She worked at Aon Corporation. She 
was transferred from the Montreal office to New York in 1999. 
She was married to Donald Poissant, whom she wed in 
Montreal a year before she left for the United States. 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

Arron Dack. The 39-year-old father of two was attending a 
conference in the north tower of the World Trade Center when 
the first plane hit. He called his office just after the impact to 
say he was alive. Two minutes later, at 8:47, he called his wife, 
Abigail. He was a senior executive with Encompys. He is 
survived by his wife and two children, Olivia and Carter. 
 
Michael Egan, age 51, worked at Aon Corp. He worked on the 
105th floor and had his older sister visiting for a couple of 
weeks. Some colleagues of his said that his sister, who also died 
in the terrorist attack, visited his office so she could gaze over 
the city from his office. They both lost their lives that day. 
 
Christine Egan was a 55-year-old Health Canada nurse 
epidemiologist from Winnipeg, visiting her younger brother I 
spoke of just minutes ago. 
 
Albert William Elmarry. The 30-year-old moved from Toronto 
to the United States in 1999 to work in the computer support for 
Cantor Fitzgerald. He met his wife, Irenie, on a visit to his 
native Egypt. They were expecting their first child at the end of 
March. He had worked for IBM (International Business 
Machines) Canada Ltd., when in Toronto. He was on the 103rd 
floor when the terrorists attacked. 
 
Meredith Ewart and Peter Feidelberg, ages 29 and 34, 
respectively. The Montreal couple worked in the office of the 
World Trade Center’s top floors. They worked as consultants 
for an insurance firm, Aon International. They both got their 
jobs at Aon International at the same time. They had been 
married for 18 months. 
 
Alexander Filipov, age 70. Born in Regina and lived in 
Concord, Massachusetts. Was on airlines flight 11 when it hit 
the World Trade Center. He was an electrical engineer, grew up 
in Windsor, and graduated from Queen’s University in 
Kingston, Ontario. He was hoping to get home on time for his 
44th anniversary in Massachusetts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ralph Gerhardt, the 34-year-old vice-president 
with Cantor Fitzgerald, a bond trading firm, called his parents 
in Toronto just after the first plane hit the north tower. He tried 
to console his parents during the call, telling them not to worry. 
He also informed them that he was going to find his girlfriend 
who worked in the floor below. He was not been heard of since. 
 
Stuart Lee. He had worked only a day before the attacks . . . 
from his Korean homeland where he had taken his wife, Lynn 
Udbjorg, to show off his roots. He was on the 103rd floor of 1 
World Trade Center when the tragedy took place. Lee, who 
would have turned 31 on Wednesday, was vice-president of 
integrated services at DataSynapse. He spent the last hour of his 
life e-mailing his company, trying to figure how to get out of 
the building. 
 
Mark Ludvigsen, age 32, worked at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods. 
He left his native New Brunswick for the US with his parents 
when he was seven. He worked on the 89th floor of the south 
tower of the World Trade Center. He proposed to his wife on a 
surprise visit to Ireland. He called his parents a few minutes 
after the attack on the north tower to console them that he was 
all right. He told them that they had nothing to worry about 
since he was on the other wing. He has not been heard of since. 

Bernard Mascarenhas, age 54 of Newmarket, Ontario, worked 
for Marsh Incorporated, who had offices at the World Trade 
Center. He was the chief information officer for the insurance 
brokerage firm. He was in New York on a five-day visit to the 
technology department of his parent company. Marsh had 1,900 
employees in the trade center, of which 295 were killed. He is 
survived by his wife, Raynette, and a son and daughter, Jaclyn 
and Sven. 
 
Colin McArthur, age 52. Colin worked as a deputy managing 
director of Aon Corp. He immigrated to Canada in 1977. He is 
originally from Glasgow, Scotland. He married his wife, who 
also works at Aon Corp., after moving to Montreal. He has been 
working with the company for over 15 years. 
 
Michel Pelletier. The 36-year-old commodities broker from 
TradeSpark, a division of a trading firm, Cantor Fitzgerald, was 
on the 105th floor of 1 World Trade Center. He called his wife, 
Sophie and calmly told her that he was trapped in the building 
and that he loved her. She was dropping her two-year-old 
daughter off at her first day of school. He is survived by a 
three-month-old son and their two-year-old daughter. 
 
Donald Robson, age 52, raised in Toronto, was a partner of a 
bond broker for Cantor Fitzgerald on the 103rd floor of the 
north tower of the World Trade Center. He had spent the last 
two decades in New York. He was also present in the 1993 
tower bombing, according to his wife. He is survived by his two 
sons, Geoff and Scott. 
 
Rufino Santos, age 37, worked at Guy Carpenter as a computer 
consultant. He was leaving the company to work for Accenture 
a week later. He is a native of Manila and moved to British 
Columbia in the 1980s. He later moved to New York five years 
ago. 
 
Vladimir Tomasevic, age 36, Toronto, vice-president of 
software development for Optus e-biz solutions. Was attending 
a conference on 106th floor of the World Trade Center’s north 
tower. Originally from Yugoslavia, he immigrated to Canada in 
1994. “He was my best friend and a part of him will always be 
with me,” commented his wife in Maclean’s magazine. 
 
Chantal Vincelli, age 38. She was a marketing assistant to 
DataSynapse Inc. Her biggest dream in life was to be a New 
Yorker. “She loved the hustle and bustle, the atmosphere, (and) 
the go-getters,” said her brother. She has been working in New 
York for five years. On the day of the attacks, Vincelli was 
setting up a kiosk at a trade show. 
 
Deborah Lynn Williams, age 35. Information not released at the 
request of her family. 
 
And Frank Doyle. Foreign Affairs has listed a 25th victim 
because of his deep Canadian roots. Thirty-nine-year-old Frank 
Joseph Doyle was married to Kimmie Chedel of St. Sauveur, 
Quebec. He also leaves two children. All of his relatives live in 
the Ottawa Valley. Doyle was executive vice-president of 
Keefe, Bruyette & Woods; had a home in Ste. Adele, Quebec. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the individuals that were 
Canadians that lost their lives in the attacks on the World Trade 
Center. 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a day that every Canadian will remember. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did we do about this as a province? I want to 
just quote for a few minutes from a number of press releases 
and speaking notes from the Premier primarily. These are 
speaking notes of Premier Calvert at the ceremony we held on 
the steps of the legislature on September 14, 2001, where many 
members of the Assembly were present, as well as members 
from the general public, from the emergency services from 
Regina area. And at that service, Mr. Speaker, these were the 
words of the Premier: 
 

Earlier this week, tragedy struck our American friends and 
neighbours. 
 
This tragedy has also struck Canadians and touched the 
homes and hearts of our province. 
 
These acts were an act on all humanity. 
 
Even in these days after the catastrophic events, we have 
only begun to understand the impact and consequences and 
the magnitude of our common loss. 
 
Today, we gather for one reason: to pay the respects of our 
province and our people to the many thousands of men, 
women and children who have lost their lives, lost their 
loved ones, lost their friends and co-workers. 
 
From our homes, from our work places, here from the steps 
of our Legislature, our thoughts and our prayers extend to 
these our friends and neighbours in the United States, here 
at home and across the world. 
 
On behalf of the people and the province of Saskatchewan, 
I extend to the people of America our deepest compassion 
and respect. 
 
God bless us all. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to speak from a number of 
documents. These quotes are from the address of Rt. Hon. 
Prime Minister of Canada, Jean Chrétien: 
 

There are those rare occasions when time seems to stand 
still. When a singular event transfixes the world. There are 
also those terrible occasions when the dark side of human 
nature escapes civilized restraint and shows its ugly face to 
a stunned world. 
 
Tuesday, September 11, 2001 will forever be etched in 
memory as a day when time stood still. 
 
When I saw the scenes of devastation my first thoughts and 
words were for all the victims and the American people. 
But there are no words, in any language, whose force or 
eloquence could equal the quiet testimony last Friday of 
100,000 Canadians gathered just a few yards from here for 
our National Day of Mourning. 
 
I was proud to be one of them. And I was equally proud of 
the Canadians who gathered in ceremonies right across the 
country. 

I have been saddened by the fact that the terror of last 
Tuesday has provoked demonstrations against Muslim 
Canadians and other minority groups in Canada. This is 
completely unacceptable. The terrorists win when they 
export their hatred. The evil perpetrators of this horror 
represent no community or religion. They stand for evil. 
Nothing else! 
 
As I have said, this is a struggle against terrorism. Not 
against any one community or faith. Today, more than ever, 
we must reaffirm the fundamental values of our Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms: the equality of every race, every 
colour, every religion, and every ethnic origin. 
 
But let our actions be guided by a spirit of wisdom and 
perseverance. By our values and our way of life. 
 
And, as we go on with the struggle, let us never, ever, 
forget who we are. And what we stand for. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Canadians across this country are showing their 
remorse, their feelings, and their need to express themselves 
after the events of September 11. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk specifically about some of the 
actions that our province and the members on both sides of the 
House supported. Flags were lowered to recognize the 
American tragedy in our province. 
 

The flags at all 1,000 . . . (government) office buildings 
across Saskatchewan have been lowered to half-mast out of 
respect for victims and their families of today’s attacks 
across the United States. 
 
“Our hearts go out to the victims, their families, to 
emergency crews, rescue workers, and the thousands of 
people grievously affected by the attack this morning on 
the United States,” Premier Lorne Calvert said. “I am 
shocked and saddened by this very tragic news and the 
cowardly terrorist acts . . . 
 
It is highly unusual to lower the flags in this situation. Flags 
are normally lowered when members of the Royal Family, 
the Governor General, or the Lieutenant Governor passes 
away. 

 
But in this case, Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly 
felt it was important to lower the flags. 
 

“I would say it reminds us how precious is some of the 
security we know in Saskatchewan — we can never take it 
for granted,” Calvert said. “We extend our very, very 
heartfelt sympathy to the people of the United States and 
I’m sure the many Canadians who likely have family there 
(feel the same way).” 

 
I want to talk for a second about the book of condolences, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan residents across this province had the 
opportunity to sign books of condolence to be sent to the United 
States and the people of New York, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatchewan residents can sign books of condolence in 
support of victims and their families of the terror attacks in 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

the United States . . . 
 

“Our hearts go out to the people of the United States in this 
dark hour of history,” Premier Calvert said. “The books of 
condolence give the people of Saskatchewan an 
opportunity to show their support and sympathy for the 
American people — and to put into words the deep sense of 
sadness and anger many of us feel towards the brutal acts 
of cowardly terrorists.” 
 
The books were forwarded to the United States embassy in 
Ottawa (Mr. Speaker). 

 
I’d like to share with the members of the Assembly the words 
of the Premier as he arrived back in Saskatchewan after that 
horrific event. As many of you would know, the Premier was on 
his way to New York and had it been one day further on in the 
calendar, Mr. Speaker, the Premier would have been in New 
York. He was meeting that morning with the Prime Minister 
and learned of the tragic event with the Prime Minister, as the 
news was brought in to the Prime Minister. 
 

Premier Calvert took the time this morning before he left 
Ottawa (on behalf of all Saskatchewan citizens) to stop at 
the US embassy and sign the book of condolence there for 
victims and their families of the attack on America . . . and 
placed flowers and a card near the embassy gates. The card 
had a simple message — “May God Bless” signed: Premier 
Lorne Calvert and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
I think these actions show very clearly how the people of this 
province feel about the tragedy that faced the American people. 
 
I just want to talk for a second about the Premier’s visit to 
Ground Zero. On behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, 
Premier Calvert visited the . . . 
 
(16:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Just to remind the member . . . I know 
his intentions are very honourable, but to remember to 
distinguish between a quotation and not a quotation when he’s 
referring to other members. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I am referring to a press release, Mr. Speaker, 
not a quotation. 
 

Following the meetings with the investment bankers in 
New York, Premier Lorne Calvert took a moment to stop 
and pay his respects at ground zero. 

 
So actually this is a quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 

“To actually set foot on the ground where this tragedy 
happened is a surreal and humbling experience,” Calvert 
said. “It makes one think of how precious the gift of life 
truly is and what we should be thankful for.” 
 
Calvert was especially moved by the sheer vastness of 
ground zero (Mr. Speaker). The crater extends for about 
three blocks in each direction, leaving a huge gap in the 
heart of New York’s (City) financial district. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier, on our behalf visited Ground Zero, 
showing our respects for the American people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes to talk about 
the events of September 11 and their effect on the people of 
Saskatchewan, the impacts on Canada as a country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the attacks on the World Trade Center have 
fundamentally forever changed our country. That day, 
September 11, I got home about 4 o’clock in the afternoon and 
my daughter, who is in her third year of university, asked me a 
question: what does this mean? What does the attack on the 
World Trade Center mean? And my answer to her was this, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is probably the most significant event in her 
lifetime that will shape the future of the world as it is. 
 
The world is shaped by events that occur that are usually 
beyond our control that change the world that we live in. And I 
don’t think that anybody can argue that September 11 
significantly changed the world, Mr. Speaker. Today, we feel 
the after-effects of the September 11 attacks that we’ve had a 
downturn in the world economy. Not the Canadian economy, 
not the American economy, but the entire world economy took 
a downturn after September 11. 
 
It’s unbelievable in most people’s minds that a single act could 
in fact change the world economy, could actually have the 
impact that it had on the people — not just in America, not just 
in North America, but in fact the entire world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The impact of September 11 has changed many, many other 
things. It has changed how people look at their families, how 
they view the idea of travelling outside their own communities, 
outside their own provinces, outside their own country, Mr. 
Speaker. September 11 has had impacts that people never 
imagined in our communities. 
 
I’d like to talk for a minute about some of the feelings that I 
have, and others have, about September 11. In a time of great 
grief, Mr. Speaker, people often have difficulty dealing with the 
situation that faces them. But we saw a city in New York draw 
together. We saw heroes every single day for weeks and weeks 
after September 11, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw firefighters working extraordinary hours, beyond what 
they normally, humanly, would be able to do, Mr. Speaker, to 
try to rescue, on the sheer chance that one single person may be 
alive beneath the rubble. Mr. Speaker, we saw stories of 
firemen not wanting to go home after 15, 18, 20 hours on the 
job. 
 
We saw many, many people across Canada throw out their arms 
and their hearts, their efforts, their money, to try to help the 
people of New York. We had many Canadians travel to New 
York to help, Mr. Speaker. We saw many, many other 
Canadians donate blood, give money, goods, take in various 
planes as they needed places to land during the unstable days 
right after September 11. 
 
Canadians put out their hands to help the American people. Mr. 
Speaker, during times of tragedy that’s what we do in Canada. 
We are a country and a people, quite frankly, that always extend 
ourselves to our fellow human beings. We try to help when help 



March 26, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

 

is most needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, September 11 has come, and to some degree 
has passed, but the effects will remain forever. Members of this 
Assembly, the people of Canada, the people of Saskatchewan, 
will never forget that day, Mr. Speaker. We will remember 
forever the vision of those planes hitting the World Trade 
Center, Mr. Speaker. We’ll forever remember the vision of the 
World Trade Center crumbling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But out of difficult times also comes resolve, Mr. Speaker. We 
as a Canadian people will continue to resolve to have a world 
that is more peaceful — where people can live in safety and 
security without fear of terrorist attacks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to say without doubt, without doubt, 
that every single member of this Assembly expresses his 
condolences to all the families of the victims of the September 
11 attacks. And, Mr. Speaker, there are many people who 
through distant connections, relations, friends, who are going to 
know of some member who was affected by the terrorist attacks 
of September 11. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that all members of this 
Assembly will condemn all forms of terrorism — that no 
member of this Assembly would believe that fear, terrorist 
attacks, armed conflicts against others, is a way to settle or 
solve any dispute. And, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt at all 
that members of this Assembly support Canadian troops in their 
endeavours. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is without doubt the fact that Canadian 
troops have served their country well over the various centuries. 
Mr. Speaker, Canadians have always done themselves proud in 
whatever they’ve tried to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, today we stand talking about emotion, 
dealing with the hardships that the families of those people who 
were killed in the terrorist attacks of September 11. And again, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to briefly speak about the 18 men and 
6 women who lost their lives. 
 
They were innocent victims, Mr. Speaker. They had not shown 
any aggression towards anybody. They were simply doing their 
jobs, going about New York, living their lives; some were at 
work, some were visiting. None of them raised any arm of 
aggression against anybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these men and women were neighbours, friends, 
and families of people. They went to work that morning 
expecting it to be another day like any other day. They didn’t 
expect what they experienced that day. Their families are still 
living with the fallout of that day, as many children are now 
growing up with a single parent. Many families are growing up 
with the fear and anxiety of what happened to their parent, and 
the uncertainty of the world in which they’re now growing up in 
without that support, love, stability of that family member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to condemn those types of attacks on any 
citizens of the world. Nobody wants to live in fear; nobody 
should have to live in fear, Mr. Speaker. We should all live in a 
world where the safety and security is assured by the peace that 
we want and that is a common goal in our society, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, September 11 was one of only hundreds of 
terrorist activities that happen each year around the world, but 
we have never had a terrorist activity strike so close to home. 
We in Canada take for granted the safety and security that many 
people around the world have never had the opportunity to 
experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all people from around the world should have the 
opportunity to feel safe and secure in their communities. 
Children should have the opportunity to grow up, go to school, 
and be educated in a society where they don’t have to fear 
armed conflicts each day. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
around the world many, many citizens face those situations on a 
daily basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member from Rosetown 
for making the motion. I think that this is an issue that all 
Canadians share their sympathy, their concern, and their 
condolence for the families, friends, and co-workers of those 
who lost their lives in the twin towers on September 11. 
 
People from around the world experienced loss. This was not an 
American loss; this was a world loss. People of the United 
States suffered the most horrendous effects because it was their 
community, their home that came under attack, Mr. Speaker. 
But citizens from every province of Canada, from many states 
in the United States and, in fact, from over 90 countries around 
the world lost individuals that day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious issue that we should all take 
very, very seriously as we debate in future issues concerning 
safety and security in our communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to at this time talk for just a couple 
of minutes about some of the other effects of the September 11 
tragedy. The tragedy on September 11 has made it less secure 
for Canadians to travel, people are less certain of their 
willingness to travel outside our home country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canada has never experienced the terrorist activity and, Mr. 
Speaker, I hope we never do. But our heartfelt warmth and 
sympathy and condolence goes out to the people of the United 
States and, in fact, all people around the world who have 
experienced terrorism as part of their lives. 
 
The members opposite should be commended for bringing this 
forward, for talking about the issue of September 11 and for, in 
fact, moving us into this debate. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, seeing the hour, I would like at this time . . . 
Because this is a very, very serious issue which I feel a 
significant number of members would like to have an 
opportunity to discuss, this cannot be just put aside lightly. This 
is a serious issue facing all Canadians. I move, at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:45. 
 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2002 

 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 202 of Hansard No. 7A Friday, March 22, 2002, the 
line reading: 
 
. . . and I can confirm Don’s good taste and judgment of 
character. 
 
should read: 
 
. . . and I can confirm Dawn’s good taste and judgment of 
character. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 


	1A 6˚Man Provincial Football Finals
	1A 6˚Man Provincial Football Finals

