















































Hansard: April 15, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 715 
 April 15, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I would request that the 
committee now report out on Industry and Resources and move 
to Social Services. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Social Services to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the members of 
the committee I’d like to introduce officials who will be 
assisting me in estimates in the Department of Social Services. 
 
Seated to my right is the deputy minister, Bonnie Durnford. To 
her right is assistant deputy minister, Shelley Hoover; and 
assistant deputy minister, Bob Wihlidal, is behind me. Assistant 
deputy minister for Sask Housing is Darrell Jones, to my left; 
and behind Mr. Wihlidal is Don Allen, executive director of 
financial management. Behind the bar, Mr. Chair, are other 
officials: Larry Chaykowski, executive director of housing 
financial operations; Phil Walsh, executive director of income 
support; Deborah Bryck, director of child care; Richard Hazel, 
executive director of family services; Larry Moffatt, executive 
director of community living; and career and employment 
services, executive director, Barb MacLean. 
 
Those are the officials that will be assisting me, Mr. Chair, and 
I look forward to questions from the opposition critic and 
proceed with business. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Actually I was just waiting 
for the Chair just to call the vote. But we couldn’t do that right 
now could we? That just wouldn’t be appropriate to take a vote 
immediately before we’ve had a chance to really give the 
minister — the new Minister of Social Services, since the last 
time we met — an opportunity to give us a vision of what he 
sees the department doing as it reaches out to the needs of the 
people in Saskatchewan, especially those who may find 
themselves in a situation where they may be lacking some of 
the resources to provide for themselves and thus end up on the 
doorsteps of the Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, I remember a day when you were on this side of 
the Assembly. First of all, I’d like to welcome you, Mr. 
Minister, and your staff who are here with you this evening, as 
we begin the discussion on the expenditures of the Department 
of Social Services, and how the money is spent, and the 
programming and the vision you may have for your department. 
 
But as I was saying a moment ago, Mr. Minister, I remember a 

time in this Assembly when you sat on this side of the House. 
And I’m not exactly sure, Mr. Minister, if I can have that kind 
of growly voice you used to have when you sat on this side of 
the House and debated Social Services. For some reason you 
always seemed to have a view that not enough was being done 
to look after people on assistance while there were moves to try 
and help people move from assistance into the workplace. 
 
And what I find very interesting, Mr. Minister, is how things 
change. And the philosophy of the party you represent seem to 
be more on the basis of helping people on assistance and almost 
assisting people onto assistance versus finding ways in which 
we could move people off assistance. 
 
Well what I would have to add, as I’ve been going through 
some of the last number of annual reports . . . We’d certainly 
like to getting to some significant questions, but I think most 
recently you talked about the number of caseloads in the 
department and how it has gradually decreased over the past 
few years and the reasons for those decreases. 
 
And yet on the one hand while we seem to see the caseloads 
have decreased — the number of individuals on assistance has 
gone down from, I think it was around 60,000 in ’91-92, to just 
around 56 or in that area; the caseloads has dropped to about 
30,000 caseloads — and yet we see agencies such as the Souls 
Harbor Mission in downtown Regina, we see the food bank 
always calling out to agencies, groups, companies, businesses, 
looking for their support because they find themselves in a 
position of being short on the staples that they like to have 
available when some people come to them seeking assistance, 
especially if they find themselves in a position where they just 
don’t have the resources to meet the needs of their families. 
 
And that is somewhat troubling because you would think if 
we’re actually reducing the caseload . . . and I think there was a 
period in time when we looked at other provinces and their 
reductions and the increase in this province and well, because 
we had a better system, people would come here because they 
were being forced off assistance in other provinces. 
 
One would have to ask has it really changed in this province. 
Are we forcing people off or are we really making a legitimate 
effort to assist people in moving from when they actually have 
to seek the assistance of the Social Services department and 
finding ways of actually really working with them to assist 
them back into some full-time job opportunities where they can 
actually provide for themselves and for their families and just 
increase their level of confidence and self-worth? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think I’m looking forward to the debate. 
I’m looking forward to your vision for your department, and 
maybe that’s where we’ll start tonight, Mr. Minister. Seeing as 
you’re fairly new in this portfolio, maybe you could give us a 
bit of an idea of where you see your department going with you 
at the helm. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question and I’m very happy to respond to it. His question took 
a bit of time and I suspect that the answer will take a bit of time 
as well, and that will come as no great surprise to the hon. 
member. 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

Well he refers, Mr. Chair, to the experience of Social Services 
here in the province of Saskatchewan which is one about which 
I think we all have much reason to feel very proud about the 
support that is provided for people who are vulnerable, and 
particularly he refers to the sector of our population that lives in 
poverty. 
 
It is true, Mr. Chair, that this government made a very 
conscious and clear policy decision — a priority decision — 
some years ago, and then in 1997 and in full operation in 1998 
introduced the building independence program which is really 
the item that the hon. member is referring to without 
specifically naming it by name. 
 
And I think when we look at the results at the end of the day — 
that’s what counts is results — we can do that with a sense of 
satisfaction that the resources provided by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan have been used well in the best interests of 
people who are vulnerable in our society. 
 
That’s not to say that there’s nothing yet to do. Of course there 
is. There’s much yet to be done. 
 
But it’s also quite clear that when we look at the track record of 
what has happened since the introduction of building 
independence here in Saskatchewan that the results have 
attracted positive acclaim from within the nation and beyond. 
And I think there is much to be learned. 
 
And as we look forward, the hon. member asks, what is my 
vision for the department. In many ways I would say it’s fair to 
summarize to say it is my vision for the department that we will 
build on our strengths. 
 
Now when I look at the building independence program, I say 
so then and now where are we at? Bottom line is this, Mr. 
Chair: since that time the number of families receiving 
assistance has dropped by some 4,600. And perhaps even more 
importantly, a more important statistic than that is to look 
within those families. Because, Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter 
is this that within those families there are today more than 
10,000 fewer kids who are growing up in families on assistance 
than there were four years ago when building independence 
became introduced and active. 
 
Building independence had a number of components to it. The 
building independence is in many ways not a series of programs 
but a philosophy and a philosophy that says that if you really 
want to do something about child poverty, which is our 
objective . . . And it is in that context, Mr. Speaker, I remind the 
House that when I introduced the second reading debate on the 
Bill 2 last week and we talked about some of the root causes 
that affect the lives of kids, that we must focus on what we’re 
doing about poverty and as it affects kids. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Chair, that the kids don’t grow up in poverty; 
kids grow up in homes in which the parents live in poverty — 
that’s the reality. And so if you want to do something to reduce 
child poverty in your province, then what you have to do is look 
at those things that you do that provide supports to enable 
low-income families to enable themselves to achieve the most 
desirable form of income security, which is a job. Clearly that is 
the stated objective of those who come into the social services. 

They’re seeking income security. 
 
And we consider it, Mr. Chair, not only valuable to help people 
move from assistance to independence to building through the 
building independence program, but we also consider it a 
legitimate objective to enable lower-income families to avoid 
coming into social assistance. And so therefore some of the 
criteria, some of the programs in building independence 
program — the employment supplement, the family health 
benefit, the child benefit — are available not just to those who 
are on assistance but to Saskatchewan families, Mr. Chair, 
including those who are not receiving assistance. 
 
Now we’ve reduced the numbers. And I point out, Mr. Chair, 
with some satisfaction that unlike some other jurisdictions in 
this nation, this has been an objective which has been achieved 
to the degree I’ve described without resorting to the policy 
being to provide one-way bus tickets out of the province, as 
some other provinces have done. That’s not been our way. Our 
way has been to understand the realities of poverty and 
opportunity and to help people make that connection. 
 
And I know one of the hon. member’s colleagues will recognize 
that. I remember a conversation we had within the last couple of 
weeks in which one of his colleagues, who shall go unnamed, 
said to me, he said we know we can’t find your numbers here; 
your welfare numbers are going down. Where are you hiding 
them? And I said to them we’re hiding them in jobs because 
that is, as a matter of fact — the hon. member smiles as he 
recognizes the conversation — we’re hiding them in jobs, Mr. 
Chair. All the hon. members are recognizing the reality and the 
truth of what I say. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, it is that connection to employment that is 
being activated increasingly in this budget year that’s under 
debate right now through the expansion across the province of 
the jobs first form of registration of people on social assistance. 
And also the introduction of the first step program for those 
who are applying for assistance — that is enabling social 
workers to become more proactive, and to enable their clients 
that they’re seeing to become more independent in their lives. 
That’s what it’s all about. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, it is, I think when I put it into context and I ask 
myself what is it that we should ought to be doing here in this 
first decade of the new millennium, and when I look around, 
Mr. Chair, and I see the environment in Saskatchewan and 
across the nation being this, that largely because of the 
retirement of the baby boomers but other things, there is a 
tightening of the labour market that is peaking and then, in fact, 
Mr. Chair, we predict in about 2008 that labour market peak 
will begin to decline. 
 
And what that says to me, along with the challenge that we have 
in our province and other provinces in the nation to meet our 
employment needs in the economy, there is for those of us in 
the world of Social Services an opportunity that is different 
from any other time that I’ve known in my professional 
lifetime. And that’s this, Mr. Chair: I’m finding that for the first 
time in a long time, employers are willing to look at different 
kinds of relationships, including looking at opportunities to 
employ in their workplaces, people who have traditionally lived 
outside the mainstream of employment. And a good number of 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

 

those people we recognize will be those that we see as clients, 
as constituents, in the world of Social Services. 
 
So our job, simply put, Mr. Chair, is to recognize there’s an 
opportunity. Our province has a growing need and there is an 
opportunity in support of those who lived outside the 
mainstream to become part of the solution, to meet the 
Saskatchewan labour market needs, and at the same time, to 
build their own independence and their ability to shape their 
lives for themselves and their families. And so that’s a high 
priority — that’s a high priority for me in many ways in the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
And it’s in that context, Mr. Chair — just a couple of things 
before I take my place — to make some reference to the recent 
reorganization, as the hon. member is well aware. As different 
from the estimates last year, the Department of Social Services 
now has the housing services and the career and employment 
services, which have come to the Department of Social 
Services. And these are specifically intended, Mr. Chair, to 
enable us to find other synergies. 
 
The career and employment services offices — the hon. 
member asks, what we’re referring to: they were formerly 
located in the Department of Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training — and the career and employment services 
offices become significant places in the job first activity to 
enable people who are seeking assistance to, in fact, make that 
connection to the more desirable form of income security which 
is employment. An extremely valuable tool. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Career and employment services offices, I would add, Mr. 
Chair, are state of the art in Canada, best in the nation, and 
serve people well. And together with the housing services 
coming into the department, I anticipate that we’ll be 
continuing to work hard to find synergies, to take the tools that 
are provided to us by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to work in 
support of those who are least secure in their financial means 
and to enable them to increasingly find themselves attached to 
the labour market instead of the welfare rolls. 
 
And finally, Mr. Chair, to make my point, I remind the House 
of a fact that maybe we’ve not heard often enough. Just in case 
we think this is a passing phase or that we’ve been lucky for a 
month or two, I want to advise the House, Mr. Chair, that at this 
point in time for the last 87 consecutive months — let me toss 
out the number here, 87, and ask members to reflect on the 
number 87 — Mr. Chair, for the last 87 consecutive months, 
month after month after month after month without fail, never 
once has there been an exception for the last 87 months, that the 
number of cases on social assistance compared month over 
month, January over the previous January, for 87 consecutive 
months, the numbers have been going down without fail. 
 
Now I don’t know how much longer that can go on, Mr. Chair, 
but at some point in time, do you reach the point beyond which 
it is impossible to continue that trend. But when you stop and 
think about it, it is a phenomenal trend. Mr. Chair, for over 
seven years — for over seven years — month after month after 
month after month the number of caseloads on the social 
assistance has been dropping in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And I think, Mr. Chair, that as the members of this committee 
look at the spending of this department and whether the 
resources provided by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are being 
well used, I make the case that they have been well used, they 
will continue to be well used, and I stand proud of the track 
record of Social Services department and pledge to continue to 
work just as hard into the future in support of people who are 
vulnerable in our province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m looking 
forward to further debate because, I think, just listening to your 
comments that you’ve just given and your vision for this 
department, I don’t think is much different than what many of 
colleagues on this side of the Assembly certainly believe in and 
areas that . . . And so I would trust that following the next 
election when you happen to be sitting on this side, Mr. 
Minister, you’ll be agreeing with us when we talk again about 
how we can actually assist people into the job opportunities and 
job programs. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made a comment about . . . I think you 
mentioned something like 4,600 people actually employed and 
that decrease in the number of people on assistance in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Yet interestingly enough, we’ve 
seen the employment or the job numbers in this province have 
actually gone done. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, when we talk about 
employment opportunities and whether or not your department 
tracks these jobs or tracks individuals just to see exactly what 
you have accomplished and what the department has 
accomplished and actually people . . . finding and assisting 
people into full-time employment, the type of jobs that they 
may be entering into . . . I know a number of years ago — 
actually, before you moved into building lives and your 
building jobs and opportunity program — talking with the 
former minister, the then . . . the current Premier as minister of 
Social Services for a while there, and one of the concerns that 
was raised at that time, and I think still may be out there 
although we basically have eliminated a lot of that because of 
the employment supplement program, one of the major 
concerns that came to my . . . was brought to my colleagues and 
I was the fact that if people did leave assistance and in many 
cases ended up basically starting in at a minimum wage level, 
when they factored in all their employment and their costs and 
rent and what have you, on many cases, the view at that time 
was, well, we really can’t make it; we may as well stay on 
assistance because we’re actually receiving less. 
 
And out of that discussion and debate, we actually moved into 
an employment supplement program to somewhat assist people 
as they began that road from assistance to providing for 
themselves and fully employable to the point where they 
weren’t looking to anyone else for any further assistance 
because they had achieved it. They had arrived at that place in 
their life where they were really on their own, and they didn’t 
need the other services. 
 
I note, Mr. Minister, while we talk about a reduction in the 
number of caseloads, certainly over the past number of years, if 
I’m not mistaken, just from some of the annual reports that we 
have available to us, there’s been an increase in the number of 
people on the employment supplement program. 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

And, Mr. Minister, maybe you could just enlighten us a little bit 
as to where that program is going. Where do you see it going in 
the future? Do you see it continuing to build, or do you see it 
finally plateauing and levelling out? And also coming back to 
another question that I’d alluded to earlier — as people work 
their way from assistance into a fully employable situation, 
what type of job entry programs do they end up in? Are they 
basically at the low-income level, or do we end up . . . do we 
find many people on assistance actually move into job creation 
programs, job training programs, so that they can actually 
elevate their skills level and arrive at a higher-paying job when 
they enter the workforce? 
 
And as well, Mr. Minister, how many people would actually go 
into some further extended educational programs, like a 
post-secondary educational program or that type of program? 
And what level of job entry program or job entry opportunity 
does that provide for those individuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for the 
detailed question. And I note with interest as well his preamble 
to the question, and I think he would be sadly disappointed if I 
didn’t also respond to the preamble. 
 
I would remind the hon. member, Mr. Chair, that just before he 
starts calling the moving vans to start moving his office to the 
other side, he may just want to stay put for a while. He has . . . 
Mr. Chair, the hon. member from Moosomin has been a 
distinguished member of the opposition for . . . it would be in 
excess of 10 years now. I think going on 11 years he has been a 
distinguished member of the opposition. And, Mr. Chair, I think 
he’s a mighty fine opposition member and I think he has a 
career — I’m not sure how long it is, Mr. Chair — but I think 
he has a distinguished career as an opposition member ahead of 
him as well. And I would encourage him to enjoy the fact that 
he does a good job in opposition and to count his blessings and 
to take professional pride in what he does. And to celebrate the 
fact that he has potential to be doing it for quite some time. 
 
But just on that regard, Mr. Chair, when he talks about the 
potential for switching sides after the next election. I would say 
to the hon. members opposite, Mr. Chair, that they should ought 
to be careful what they wish for. They should ought to be 
careful what they wish for. The day will come . . . there will 
come a day plenty soon — plenty soon, Mr. Chair — in which 
the people of Saskatchewan will have an opportunity to express 
judgment. 
 
And the hon. member may want to, in these estimates, make 
comment as to whether he stands with his leader or not in his 
view of Social Services and the funding of Social Services. 
Because he will be well aware that in October of last year in the 
Leader-Post, his leader was quoted as saying that if he formed 
government that he would reduce the Department of Social 
Services’ budget by up to $50 million — 50, 5-0 — $50 million 
dollars, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now his leader said in making that comment that he had some 
notion that they would be converting the welfare program to a 
job search program, something to that affect. Well as we’ve just 
been discussing, Mr. Chair, we have a program that has been in 
effect for some years now. Hello to the Leader of the 
Opposition. Welcome to the real world. 

Mr. Chair, the Department of Social Services has been helping 
connect low-income people to the world of employment for 
some years now, and that’s why I remind the hon. member that 
the number of caseloads are down by 4,600. The number of kids 
in those families are down by over 10,000. And, Mr. Chair, for 
87 consecutive months the caseloads have been dropping — 87 
consecutive months the numbers have been dropping. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I think the people of Saskatchewan would 
relish understanding just how it is that his leader, in response to 
the needs of the most vulnerable of Saskatchewan, would 
achieve those with a $50 million reduction in the budget of 
Social Services. And I’ll look forward to hearing whether the 
hon. member for Moosomin stands with his leader on that 
count. That would be very interesting to know, Mr. Chair. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, he asked about the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement projections and acknowledges, Mr. Chair, that we 
have had in place since 1998, here in Saskatchewan, the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement program, which puts 
into place, Mr. Chair, funds that are available to low-income 
families — whether they are receiving assistance or not 
receiving assistance — but families with children, who are 
working which gives them supplementary income to enable 
them to attach themselves to the labour market and be 
independent. That was part of the building independence 
program, Mr. Chair, which has been in place now since 1998. 
 
So although this may be brand new to his leader, I do recognize 
the hon. member opposite is well aware that the program has 
been in place for some time now. 
 
So he will also be aware that in last year’s budget there were 
some enhancements to the employment supplement that enabled 
more families to benefit from the employment supplement. And 
just to understand the trend — because that’s the question that 
he asked, Mr. Chair — in 1998 and ’99 there were 5,100 
families here in Saskatchewan that made use of the employment 
supplement. In 2002 that number has now risen to 8,200 
low-income families, Mr. Chair, which are making use of the 
employment supplement. 
 
I also would add, Mr. Chair, that in understanding that, that’s to 
supplement income that comes by way of employment or 
maintenance. And in that regard, and this budget is before us 
right now, there is some $200,000 that’s allocated to support 
legal aid and to support the maintenance enforcement office to 
assist . . . both specifically to assist single parents — virtually 
always, Mr. Chair — who are eligible for maintenance 
payments but are not receiving them, so to assist in increasing 
their own family income through that means. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, when we look at the employment supplement, he 
asks whether we have been tracking the kind of employment 
that people are leaving to and at this point in time we don’t have 
that track. We will know if people are receiving benefits, of 
course, but there is no obligation to report when they become 
unattached to receiving financial assistance in any form, as to 
what they’re doing in order to do that. So we just don’t have 
hard, fast numbers that we’re able to attach that. 
 
(19:30) 
 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

 

But we do know very clearly, Mr. Chair, that the numbers 
continue to go down and we’re much encouraged by that and 
look forward to seeing that continue. We do know as well that 
the current employment services . . . about 60 to 70 per cent of 
the use of the current employment services, at this point in time 
we estimate to be made by individuals in the province who are 
social assistance recipients. 
 
We do plan a long-term evaluation and that’s something that is 
in the future. We haven’t done that yet. And I will look forward 
to seeing the results of the evaluation when it’s done so that we 
can assess what we’re doing and how we can do that even 
better. 
 
Thanks, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, based 
on your first comment, I would guess that the only reason 
you’re suggesting we shouldn’t think of packing up and moving 
yet is because your coalition government is trying to keep itself 
together for the long term. And rather than a short . . . the 
normal four year that I hear your colleague the Premier talking 
of, my guess is it might be 2004. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I want to assure you that if we have to, we can 
wait until 2004. But based on the most recent polls, if all you’ve 
got left is Regina and maybe one in Moose Jaw — maybe one 
in Moose Jaw — you may not want to call an election today. 
But we invite you to call an election today if indeed you’re as 
confident as you’ve led us to believe just a moment ago. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, and when you talked about the Leader of the 
Opposition and the reductions in Social Services as far as 
expenditures, Mr. Minister, you’ve been bragging so much 
about the number of caseloads that have dropped in the 
Department of Social Services. And I had a bit of discussion 
last year with the former minister, and he bragged about the fact 
that the caseloads were dropping; but on the other hand, last 
year the former minister actually put more money and hired 
more staff within the department. 
 
And one would have to ask, if we’re actually reducing the 
caseloads, then one would think that there would normally be 
some reductions in the costs in the department, if indeed we 
should see the costs escalating, as we will get into in a moment, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
However my colleague, the member from Carrot River Valley, 
has a quick comment he’d like to make. So I’m going to just 
step aside for a minute and give him an opportunity and then 
we’ll get back into the debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, before going to the hon. 
member for Carrot River Valley, I think we cannot pass by 
completely the remarks of the hon. member from Moosomin. 
And I know that he would be sadly disappointed if we did. And 
just once again, I caution the hon. member not to . . . I wouldn’t 
start calling the moving vans just yet. 
 
It would seem to me, Mr. Chair, as I get around the province of 
Saskatchewan — and we do make a point of doing that — that I 
think the people of Saskatchewan would generally be of the 
view that when they look at the track record of this coalition 

government, that this coalition government is producing the 
kind of leadership in this province that says not only do they 
hope that this is a government that stays in place for a good 
time, but for a long time and for and many years to come. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I would just caution the hon. member to try to 
get used to his surroundings. He’s doing a good job, and he 
should ought to take professional pride in what he’s doing and 
not to be too anxious about a change, Mr. Chair, because he 
should be careful what he wishes for. 
 
Now he says that last year that there were more staff members 
in Social Services — and Mr. Chair, he’s right. In last year’s 
budget, there more staff who came to the Department of Social 
Services, despite the objections of the hon. members opposite 
who not only spoke against it but voted against. Voted against 
what, Mr. Chair? Voted against the addition of 54 youth and 
family workers — 54 youth and family workers and 6 
community living workers in the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
And I find it kind of more than just passing strange, Mr. Chair, 
that we will see calls from the other side on occasion that all too 
frequently, Mr. Chair, reflect that hard, cold edge of the 
right-wing rhetoric — the hard, cold edge of the right-wing 
rhetoric that causes the people of Saskatchewan to become a tad 
bit nervous when it comes to the social conscience of the 
honourable members opposite. 
 
And one of the things that causes people to be a tad obvious, 
Mr. Chair, is when they listen to the rhetoric of the hon. 
members opposite and then they look at their reality and see 
that they stand opposed to the introduction in last year’s budget 
of 54 community, and youth and family workers and 6 
community living workers. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, that’s the record. Those were changes that were 
made. Those were front-line service workers — as different, 
Mr. Chair, from the employment positions in this budget that 
were reduced in the Department of Social Services, which came 
almost entirely, Mr. Chair, from the administrative levels of 
operations of Social Services. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair — and I’m a bit disappointed, but not 
surprised, to hear that kind of observation coming with . . . 
along with the cold, hard-edged rhetoric of the right wing. 
 
And I will now look forward to the insight and the question for 
the hon. member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the 
minister. The minister and I actually share a common 
professional background, Mr. Chair. We both, at one point in 
our careers, provided residential vocational employment 
services to people with disabilities. 
 
And I know that the minister moved on quite a number of years 
ago, and it’s only previous to the last election that I took a leave 
of absence from my position as general manager of the 
Porcupine Opportunities Program. But I think the minister will 
agree with me that probably in his entire tenure with the 
organization in Moose Jaw and his involvement with 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, there were 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

a number of issues and challenges that I think we all met with a 
certain degree of enthusiasm and conviction. 
 
But there was always one deep, abiding, burning question, Mr. 
Chair, that none of us seem able to answer. And I guess, Mr. 
Minister, given that we now have this opportunity . . . I thought 
that with respect to an opportunity to get the question on the 
record, I would probably ask that one single question that has 
been at the heart of the curiosity of every vocational, residential, 
and employment service provider in the province for well over 
the last 25 years, Mr. Minister — when is Larry Moffatt going 
to retire? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, when I was listening to 
the preamble of the hon. member for Carrot River Valley, I 
thought he was going to ask about the meaning of life or 
something of that level, and he’s very close. 
 
He’s very close when he comes to wanting to know about the 
contribution that Mr. Moffatt has made to community living 
services in the province of Saskatchewan. I think it’s fair to say 
that there would be very few in that sector here in the province 
today who would not recognize that Mr. Moffatt has been a 
professional in the best sense of the word, and it will come as a 
great disappointment to many, I’m sure, that Mr. Moffatt is one 
of those baby boomers that is not far from retirement. 
 
So the short answer to the hon. member’s question, Mr. Chair, 
is in the not-too-distant future, but way too soon from my point 
of view. At whatever point the Department of Social Services 
loses the expertise of Mr. Moffatt, it will be something that will 
be sadly missed. 
 
Now I’m just . . . I received a note and I’m told that this is not 
in fact an early retirement, that Mr. Moffatt is approaching 
retirement age, which speaks well to how he presents himself 
because I never, for the life of me, thought that he was 
approaching the usual age of retirement. But I thank the hon. 
member for his observation about the professional contribution 
that Mr. Moffatt has made to community living services here in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I would have to agree 
with the member from Carrot River Valley. And just by my 
observances of Mr. Moffatt and the covering he still has on his 
head versus you and I, it’s probably a little longer than you and 
I can expect yet. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we talk about . . . you talked about cutting, 
cutting the . . . actually you talked about the fact that my 
colleagues and I voted against last year’s budget, about . . . 
voted against 54 youth and family workers, 6 caseworkers. And 
yet, Mr. Minister . . . And we just saw it in the most recent 
budget. 
 
Here again we talk about prior to the budget being delivered, 
your Finance minister, your Premier, no doubt each one of you 
as cabinet ministers, we’re talking about the fact that this was a 
difficult budget for you to deliver this year; that you were going 
to have to make some difficult and tough choices; that you 
would have to actually cut some jobs in the public sector. And I 
think at one time you were talking it could be as high as about 
500. If I’m not mistaken the budget document talked about 350 

and of that some 170 were actually job vacancies that were 
open. So it really wasn’t . . . there weren’t actual people being 
removed in those situations; you just wouldn’t fill the jobs. 
 
And yet yesterday — or was it early late last week — we see an 
article in the paper where it talks about the job-hiring freeze has 
been lifted. And now you talk about the fact that we’ve voted 
against 54 workers and at the same time you brag about the fact 
that we’ve actually reduced the caseload in social assistance. 
Now something isn’t quite adding up. 
 
If you are actually reducing the number of people on assistance 
by the number you’ve reduced, and I look at your budget over 
the past number of years and we see 527 million in ’97-98; up 
to 569, ’98-99; ’99-2000, 577; 2000-2001, 578,631. And you 
have to ask yourself, if we’re actually decreasing this, how 
come on one hand while we’re decreasing the caseloads, on the 
other hand we’re actually increasing expenditures? 
 
And then as you indicated, Mr. Minister, we’re hiring more 
people when one would think that if you can reduce and 
actually move people into a fully employable situation, why 
would we be increasing the number of personnel working 
within the department — even as you call them the front-line 
workers — if there’s supposedly a lesser demand for these 
workers because of the decrease in the number of people on 
assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
question. And I must say, first of all, to put the hiring practices 
of the department into a context, and I know the hon. member 
will recognize the practical realities here. 
 
In this year’s budget there was a reduction of 23 positions from 
Social Services. Those 23 positions were from the areas of 
management, communications, human resources, financial, and 
administration and one community development position. Now 
some of those were vacancies and when one is making an 
organizational restructuring, Mr. Chair, whether there is a real, 
live breathing person actually filling the position at this point in 
time or not, to reduce the number of positions is to reduce the 
expenditure and therefore that amount of work. So I simply 
don’t accept as legitimate that when you’re reducing the 
employment component of the department that there is 
something qualitatively different about eliminating a vacant 
position or a position that is actually filled. 
 
Now of the . . . in the department the hon. member will see 
from the budget estimates that in the department there are 
2,128.5, I think, full-time equivalents. What that means in the 
real world, Mr. Chair, is that the number of people who are 
actually working in the Department of Social Services — and I 
don’t include in this the number of community-based 
organization employees; that’s a number above and beyond this 
— that there will be something in the neighbourhood of about 
2,500, 2,500-plus real live people that are working for the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
So you don’t have to, as Don Cherry would say, Mr. Chair, you 
don’t have to be a rocket surgeon to figure out that when you 
have a department with some 2,500 people, people come, 
people go, and there will be vacancies that will occur for just a 
myriad of reasons and, Mr. Chair, those need to be filled. So it’s 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

 

not an unusual thing. 
 
As was pointed out in his comments, I believe, that there was a 
freeze on hiring. In order to accommodate the restructuring, it 
would make no sense to — when you’re contemplating 
restructuring — to continue hiring people into positions that 
may, in fact, become redundant in short order. So there was a 
freeze put on the hiring. 
 
There was the reorganization. In the reorganization, there were 
some reductions of some positions. That’s now been achieved 
and now we get on with the business of providing Social 
Services — services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so in that context, then, it will be ongoing that there will be 
some vacancies that occur and therefore advertised and 
opportunities for employment occur. 
 
Mr. Chair, also what has occurred then, interestingly enough, 
sometimes when you look to solve problems, the solution isn’t 
what your first inclination would be. Sometimes we have an 
inclination to say we don’t have enough of something, therefore 
we need more of, more of that to do what we want. And I give 
as an example of that principle: we’ve heard from social 
workers for quite some time that the caseloads were high and 
that they had a difficult time keeping up to their caseloads. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Chair, I think it would be fair to say that 
more than anybody would wish, a fair amount of time that 
income security workers were spending was with clients of 
theirs, in essence kind of pushing paper to deal with 
qualifications and eligibility and so on. 
 
It is to the good credit, I think, of the Department of Social 
Services . . . And I would add with the advice about making 
changes, interestingly enough, coming not exclusively from 
administration or management but at the grassroots, and that 
what we hit on is a new system of registration which is now 
being fully implemented in this budget year for the jobs first 
program and the first step. 
 
And one of the things that that involves is in fact introducing 
some people to do clerical kinds of tasks which help to free up 
social workers to be doing less of that and more actual social 
work. And I’m kind of optimistic that in this transition in fact 
what social workers are doing is engaging increasingly in what 
they call transition planning — proactive planning, 
strength-based counselling with their clients, people of 
Saskatchewan, to enable them to move forward in independence 
in their own lives. Some of that can be employment related; it 
can be also be to dealing with a myriad of other potential 
problems that people who are involved in the income security 
system will often experience. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, I think what we’re seeing is workers doing a 
more effective job than was the case a year ago. And I would 
predict, Mr. Chair, on balance, that a year from now that I’ll be 
able to make exactly that same statement again as we enhance 
— or expand, I think is a more accurate word — the jobs first 
and first step planning together with Saskatchewan people as 
they come into the income security system. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I hope that gives the hon. members some 

comfort to know that we’ve, when looking at the balance, that 
we’ve seen it as appropriate to reduce the administrative 
activities, to keep the same level of front-line activities, and that 
I also believe in making the changes that we’re able to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan more effectively. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, good evening, Mr. Minister, and good 
evening to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to take issue a bit with your building 
independence program and your employment supplement 
program. And I take issue based on what some of my 
constituents have brought to my attention with their experience 
with the employment supplement program. 
 
Mr. Minister, Karen and . . . Kathy rather and Darren Dressler 
in my constituency are a couple that have four children and they 
had some questions concerning the employment supplement 
program which they were on. They were receiving the 
employment supplement but were cut off because Mr. Dressler 
was injured at work. He is currently on workerman’s 
compensation. 
 
Now according to your brochure here, Mr. Minister, regarding 
the eligibility for employment supplement for low-income 
earners, that employment supplement brochure says that 
benefits might be reduced if you’re collecting workmen’s comp 
or CPP (Canada Pension Plan) or EI (Employment Insurance), 
but it does not say you will be cut off. Mr. Dressler will be 
going back to work when he’s able to but at this point he’s not 
able to. 
 
And I remind you, Mr. Minister, that the Dresslers have four 
children, age nine to sixteen. I remind you that Mr. Dressler had 
a gross earnings of $1250 a month and he should have been 
eligible, according to your brochure, with four children, for 
$268 a month plus a supplemented benefit for children under 
thirteen. 
 
Mr. Minister, not only were the Dresslers cut off of 
employment supplements, but they were questioning why, 
according to your brochure, which states that they may have 
their supplement reduced if they go on workmen’s comp, but 
not cut off, why in fact your department saw fit to cutting them 
off completely. 
 
And one other question, Mr. Minister, that I’d like to put to you 
is with gross earnings of $1250 a month, they were receiving 
about 150 to $180 a month from employment supplement, when 
they were receiving anything, and according to the chart on this 
brochure, they should have received $236 a month plus the 
supplementary benefit for children. They did not understand 
why they were receiving less than that, and I’d like you to 
explain to this couple in my constituency the actions of your 
department in cutting them off completely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all in responding to the 
hon. member’s question, I have to make it very, very clear that 
one of the obligations of the Minister of Social Services, in fact 
of all members of the House, is to avoid comment which 
identifies specific individuals and their status with the 
department. I know the critic recognizes the accuracy of what 
I’m saying in terms of limitations by law and, so therefore, I do 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

want to share that legal obligation with all members of the 
House because we are all bound by that, and I certainly don’t 
have the right to violate that requirement. Therefore, Mr. Chair, 
it is by law impossible for me to, and certainly inappropriate for 
me, Mr. Chair, to respond to a specific case that the hon. 
member may raise. 
 
Let me say this, let me say two things in response to the 
question that the hon. member asks in her question. Point 
number one, the Saskatchewan employment supplement is not 
an income replacement program. It is not designed that way; it’s 
not intended to be that; it doesn’t pretend to be that. It is a 
supplement to income earned. 
 
And that’s . . . that is the stated purpose of the program. The 
Saskatchewan employment supplement is for families with 
children and intended to supplement income earned either 
through wages or maintenance or self-employment. And so that 
to seek that the program would meet an objective other than that 
would be wanting the program to do something simply not 
intended or designed to do. 
 
On the particulars of the case that the hon. member raises, Mr. 
Chair. I don’t know that she has provided that information 
previously to my office or not. If she hasn’t, I would simply 
encourage her to provide the specific information and I would 
be prepared then to have my office follow up and look at the 
specifics, and if there is change that would be in order, to 
ensure that that happens. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister. Mr. 
Minister, I have had absolute permission from the people 
involved to use their names in this situation. 
 
Mr. Minister, this case was brought forward to your department 
way back in, I believe, July of 2001, with the previous Social 
Service minister. So this case is clearly on record and should be 
known to your department, and should be known very well to 
your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, if it must be I will use general terms in order to 
explain the situation. From the time that the husband in this 
situation had to go on workmen’s compensation because he was 
injured at work — and he was told that because he was getting 
workmen’s compensation that he was no longer eligible for the 
employment supplement — and I would just let you know, Mr. 
Minister, that before that time, the mother of this family was 
staying home because she believed that the best thing to do for 
her children was to stay home and not go to work. 
 
And I think that’s one of the things that your government has 
spoken of at length, about the necessity for children to be cared 
for, and the necessity to have programs in place where children 
would have parents at home, and thus things like your 
employment supplement program. 
 
In this case when the department treated the husband in this 
case unfairly and cut him off completely from employment 
supplement because he was receiving workmen’s 
compensation. In fact the workmen’s compensation, as you well 
know, Mr. Minister, is not even close to his full wage. She 
deemed it necessary, the mother of this family deemed it 
necessary, to go and get part-time work. 

So, your program is based on a supplement to income earned by 
somebody in the family. This mother went to work in order to 
be eligible for this program so she took part-time work. When 
she then advised your department and the employment 
supplement program that there was one of the parents working 
again, she was told that her husband’s workmen’s compensation 
cheque would be added to her part-time work wage in order to 
factor in and determine whether or not they were eligible for the 
employment supplement. 
 
Now, this isn’t really fair. On one hand, Mr. Minister, you say 
that people have to be working in order to be eligible for this. 
We have someone working and then you factor in workmen’s 
compensation with it. You know which is it? You can’t have it 
both ways. 
 
Mr. Minister, this couple is quite upset. They feel that you have 
basically put a program in place that is not speaking very 
clearly about your real intentions. The intention is, as the public 
hear it, to have a program in place that is going to supplement 
people because they’re employed in order to help their children 
and to help families. On the other hand, what these people find 
out is when they apply for this and they try to bring to your 
attention that your department should be following guidelines 
that are in this brochure and you’re not doing so, they have a 
hard time believing that anything that your government does for 
families is in fact sincere. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you to reply to this family, and I 
certainly will if you would like me to bring this to your 
attention behind the bar tomorrow. But this has been going on 
for a long, long time already. These people may end up back on 
welfare, the very thing that you say your government doesn’t 
want to happen, the very thing that you say your government 
has put these programs in place to avoid people on welfare. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you to make sure that when you put 
programs like this in place, that they in fact are programs that 
are sincerely dealing with people in this province who are 
trying to work, trying to ensure their families are taken care of, 
and that are not a hoax because people do not admire this and 
they are frustrated with it. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if you’ve had other people in 
the province bring this kind of an instance to your attention, but 
I would certainly hope that if you have, you would beckon all of 
your staff and your people in your department to follow the 
guidelines succinctly so that people do receive the kind of 
benefits that they are eligible for without excuse. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Without 
responding to the taunts offered by the hon. member for 
Humboldt but just in a straight forward kind of way, I first of all 
do want to acknowledge — and I appreciate her stating on the 
record that she speaks with the permission of the individuals — 
and I would think it would be wise for hon. members when 
raising a particular case to do just that on the record. 
 
Because we are all bound by the same legislation and just in the 
interest of protecting the rights to anonymity, confidentiality, 
the rights to confidentiality by those who are recipients of social 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

 

services in our province, to those who may be watching, and in 
that category it probably would serve as a bit of reassurance that 
their confidentiality is secure because they don’t see names of 
individuals being used in the legislature without the permission. 
So I do want to say I appreciate the hon. member making that 
point very clearly. 
 
Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. member’s general question 
about policy that is implicit in her comments and her question, I 
would first of all have to say further to what I said in my 
previous answer that workers’ compensation is not income that 
is calculated in the supplement. That’s very clear. 
 
There are only three forms of income that are used to calculate 
the entitlement and those being then as I said before, Mr. Chair, 
wages, maintenance income, and self employment earnings. 
Insurance income is not included as one of the categories. 
 
And now in order to calculate eligibility for employment 
supplement, there are two things that are initially looked at. One 
is the total family income and the other is the number of 
children in the family, and then that determines whether the 
family is in the position to be calculated as to what their 
employment supplement benefits would be. And if they are 
within the range, then what is then determined is based on the 
incomes from those three sources — earned wages, 
self-employment, or maintenance — that the precise amounts 
are calculated. 
 
I would also point out as well, Mr. Chair, I think it’s useful for 
people to know that there is an independent appeal process 
that’s available to citizens; there is an independent adjudicator 
to whom they can appeal if they feel that they have been 
incorrectly calculated as to what their benefits would be. So I 
would remind the hon. member, all hon. members, that there is 
that ability for appeal that’s available to all of our constituents 
across the province. 
 
But having said all of that, Mr. Chair, once again I repeat — 
and I think the hon. member may very well wish to provide me 
some more additional specific information — I simply cannot 
and will not comment related to a personal circumstance here in 
the House. And again, I would be happy to look at the specifics 
of the hon. member’s case that she has to see if there’s 
something that should ought to be changed in order to more 
accurately provide the benefits they’re entitled to as 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to return to one of the things I mentioned to you initially in 
my comments. And that’s that in your brochure on employment 
supplement eligibility, there is a statement at the bottom of this 
page stated, other incomes, and it states that if you receive from 
Employment Insurance, workman’s comp, or the Canada 
Pension Plan, the amount of supplement you receive may be 
reduced. 
 
Why in this case, is it a policy of your government not only to 
reduce the amount of employment supplement but to cut it off 
completely? Is that the policy of your department right now? 
Because that is what has happened in this case. With no 
explanation and with my constituents referring to your very 
words in your employment supplement brochure, I’m 

questioning why your department staff have the authority to cut 
them off completely? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, I want to thank the hon. 
member for verifying by quoting from the pamphlet what I just 
finished saying, that there are three sources of income to 
determine the eligibility of a family for Saskatchewan 
employment supplement — wages, maintenance, or earned 
income. The hon. member correctly quotes from the pamphlet 
saying that the other items she referred to are not used in the 
calculation. 
 
Again, I refuse to comment on the specifics of a case but only 
say, Mr. Chair, that the policies are as I’ve described them and 
the assessments for eligibility are based on the information 
available: number of children, and then the amount of wages, 
maintenance, or self-employment income to determine the 
eligibility as to whether or not and if so, how much eligibility 
there will be. 
 
Again, I do repeat to the hon. member that if she would like to 
have a specific case looked at, then I’d be happy to review that, 
Mr. Chair, and I would invite her to provide the information to 
me. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you make 
mention of the eligibility requirements. Wages are one of them. 
This gentleman did not have a wage. He ended up going on 
workmen’s comp. He was told by your department because of 
that he was cut off completely, obviously because there was no 
wage and part of the eligibility is that you have to have a wage. 
 
In order to be able to have the kind of income and money that 
they needed to support their four children, the mother of this 
family went on a part-time job. What she got from your 
department after that when she again, once again applied for 
employment supplement was that her husband’s income — and 
I guess your department determines that workmen’s comp is an 
income; it certainly isn’t the income he was getting before but, 
nonetheless, there’s even question as to whether that’s an 
income — but that was going to be factored in with her 
part-time wage. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think this is unacceptable. I think that there 
needs to be a clear and concise definition of guidelines handed 
out to your department staff on how to handle these situations in 
the future. 
 
And I will, as soon as possible hand over this situation to you so 
that you might do these people some justice in accordance with 
your very own guidelines. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, once again, I thank the hon. 
member for contributing to the clarification that it is not an 
insurance benefit that is used to calculate eligibility for 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. 
 
I repeat what I said earlier, Mr. Chair, that the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement is a financial incentive to be attached 
to the workforce. It is put in place precisely for that reason. And 
it is, Mr. Chair, for that reason then that the categories used to 
calculate eligibility for Saskatchewan employment supplement 
then are, as the hon. member has correctly said, wages, 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

maintenance, and self-employed income. 
 
I do consider it to be extremely important that the guidelines be 
clear and concise. I think our discussion here tonight has helped 
to clarify that the pamphlet is accurate, and that I would hope 
that it would serve to continue to serve as a clarification to 
families who are eligible. I am very pleased, Mr. Chair, that 
increasingly some 8,200, I think it is currently, families are able 
to benefit from the Saskatchewan employment supplement to 
assist them, low-income families, and their attachment to the 
labour market. 
 
But I repeat: the employment supplement is an incentive put 
into place by the building independence program of the 
Department of Social Services to promote and support the 
attachment to the labour market. It’s not an income 
replacement; it doesn’t pretend to be. It should ought not to be 
represented as that. It simply is not; that’s not its purpose. 
 
Workers’ Compensation is — that’s a program that is in place 
to be an income replacement program. Employment Insurance 
is an income replacement program put in place to be an income 
replacement program. 
 
The Saskatchewan employment supplement is not an income 
replacement program. It is a program to support attachment to 
the labour market, Mr. Chair, and I think it’s one that, by and 
large, is doing its task effectively. And once again, I’ll look 
forward to specific information from the hon. member to follow 
up as appropriate regarding her own constituent. Thanks, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m just 
having a little bit of difficulty following this. I think, as my 
colleague mentioned, the case in question, when the husband 
was working was bringing an income in that was supporting the 
family. And unfortunately due to an accident and an injury, then 
that income turned into a Workers’ Comp payment or an 
insurance payment. And that insurance payment actually, based 
on the criteria you’ve laid out, ends up being actually less, and 
therefore if the criteria we follow here would trigger an 
employment supplement to that family because of the loss of 
that employment. 
 
The reduction, if you will, in the income — and on one hand 
while you’re calling it insurance because it happens to be 
coming from Workers’ Comp — it’s the same thing as paying 
that individual for the work that they were doing only they’re 
only getting partial payment. And then I understand you’re 
saying to my colleague, because the pamphlet indicates that 
you’ve actually got to be working, well how can you work 
when you’re injured and your income has been cut back. 
 
On one hand that income is ineligible because it’s an insurance 
plan, so therefore the spouse goes and gets some part-time so 
there’s an employment coming in. Next thing you know that 
once the spouse gets, actually finds, some employment, then all 
of a sudden that insurance now becomes part of the calculation 
and it’s calculated as income, and therefore it pushes the level 
of total available revenue to that family over and above what 
would be calculated as the level that would actually qualify for 
supplement. 
 

So I guess the problem I’m having, Mr. Minister, on one hand 
you’re saying this is insurance but then it’s an income to be 
calculated as part of the total family income. And I guess that’s 
where the problem is arising, Mr. Minister. How can it be 
termed insurance on one hand and then calculated as income on 
the other, and therefore deemed as not being eligible for the 
employment supplement? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure how to do this 
except to repeat myself. First of all let me make it very clear — 
I have said several times, this is not insurance. I have not said 
this is insurance. I have said very clearly several times, the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement is not an income 
insurance program. It is not income insurance. 
 
In fact it’s often struck me that the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement is well-named. Sometimes it’s not true that 
government programs are obvious what they are by their name, 
but the Saskatchewan employment supplement I think is 
well-named because, Mr. Chair, it is Saskatchewan’s 
employment supplement program. That’s what it does. It 
supplements employment. It doesn’t pretend to be an insurance 
program. 
 
We have Workers’ Compensation, which is an income 
insurance program, and federally, the employment insurance 
program, which is an insurance program. And the hon. member 
may very well want to put on the records or have some 
discussion debate on the record with the Minister of Labour. 
For example, on the Workers’ Compensation benefits under that 
income insurance program and the consequences when an 
injured worker finds him or herself unable to work. 
 
But the Saskatchewan employment supplement has never ever 
represented itself as an income insurance program. It may very 
well be, and I think the hon. member is saying that he would 
like to see there be some form of additional income insurance 
program above and beyond what currently exists today. I think 
that’s what he’s saying that he might have a constituent or 
constituents feeling. But, Mr. Chair, it would be a departure 
from the stated objective, the outline of operational criteria for 
the Saskatchewan employment supplement for it to be 
represented as anything other than an employment supplement. 
 
So I simply repeat it’s for that reason. It was introduced as part 
of the building independence program to support low-income 
families attaching themselves to the labour market that there 
was introduced then based on the number of children and the 
earned income through wages, maintenance, and self-employed 
income to supplement that to aid in that attachment to the 
labour market. 
 
So, please, Mr. Chair, I would ask through you that the hon. 
member not quote me as saying this is an insurance program. I 
am clearly on the record, if we want to review the Hansard, as 
saying several times, I think, in the last half hour, this is not an 
insurance program; it is an employment supplement. There. I’ve 
heard the hon. members’ opposite say it together and I think we 
may have it now, Mr. Chair, and we look forward to continuing. 
And I think we’ve got this clear on both sides of the House 
now, Mr. Chair. 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, do you 
consider workmen’s compensation benefits an insurance or an 
income? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, my understanding of the 
Workers’ Compensation program is that it is an income 
replacement program for workers who have been injured on or 
associated with a job. It is not one of the income categories 
included in the Saskatchewan employment supplement to 
calculate eligibility for that. There are only three categories — I 
repeat — we’re going to get this clear, you’re going to get this 
clear, sooner or later. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, that’s all right. I got the message. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Okay the hon. member assures me that 
she’s got the message so I’m going to give her a chance to 
clarify that she’s got the message and I’ll look forward to the 
next question, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the minister. 
In a letter from the Minister of Social Services to myself in 
regards to this specific family situation the Minister of Social 
Services at that time, August 7, 2001, indicated in a letter to me 
that: 
 

Benefits provided by the workmen’s compensation board 
are intended as an income replacement in the event of a 
work-related injury. Since the individual is no longer 
working at the job he or she is no longer incurring direct 
child-related work costs. Therefore also supplementing 
workmen’s compensation board through SES does not 
directly relate to the incentive to increase labour force 
attachments to earned income. 

 
All right. Now, Mr. Minister, the very fact of the matter is when 
you get back to this family’s situation, they were incurring 
child-related costs. When this husband went on workmen’s 
compensation he was getting an insurance. That should not 
have been calculated as an income. 
 
After the fact, as I’ve mentioned before, the mother of this 
family went to work part-time and this mother then reapplied 
for the employment supplement. What she was told when she 
reapplied was that her husband was getting an income and that 
was going to be calculated. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, is workmen’s compensation — in your 
view — is workmen’s compensation of any amount considered 
to be an income? And I don’t believe that it is; and in fact your 
own brochure says that if in fact people are getting workmen’s 
compensation there might be a consideration that they have 
some money coming to them that will require a recalculation of 
their employment supplement and it may be reduced. 
 
Nowhere in this brochure does it say it’s going to be cut off 
completely. And you still haven’t answered the question that I 
posed to you as to whether or not your department staff are 
adhering to the very words in your brochure, that in fact the 
employment supplement may be reduced. In this case it was cut 
off. Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, without trying . . . 

without repeating myself, I think that the hon. member would 
expect me to say that the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement is not an income replacement program, and that it is 
intended to supplement employment attached with the labour 
market, looking at eligibility at three criteria — wages, 
maintenance, and self-employed income. And I think we’ve got 
— I think we’re agreeing to that on both sides. 
 
The hon. member may be of the view that the program should 
be different. Fair enough. The program has never attempted to 
be different . . . has attempted to serve as an income 
supplement. 
 
But it may be . . . Let me take one more whack at this thing, Mr. 
Chair, to see if we can get this . . . the policy understood clearly. 
And I do appreciate the desire by the hon. members opposite to 
have it understood clearly. That’s a noble objective. And I think 
if we can get it understood clearly in the House here tonight, 
we’ve got it made because everybody will understand then. 
 
Mr. Chair, two things happen. First of all, when a family applies 
for the Saskatchewan employment supplement, then what you 
look at is the total family income to determine whether they’re 
in a range that’s eligible. So, in that context, any form of 
income is included. If it’s determined . . . and included in that, 
income through Workers’ Compensation. If it is determined that 
the family is eligible, then in order to calculate the specific 
amount of eligibility, you look at two things. The number of 
children, and then on the other part to determine the specific 
amount of eligibility, what is the family income adding together 
wages earned, maintenance income received, and self-employed 
income. 
 
Perhaps that helps the hon. member understand. When I listened 
to the letter that she quotes, as I heard it, I think it was saying 
exactly what I’ve been saying here tonight. I don’t think there’s 
a divergence of explanation between the letter she quotes and 
what we’ve been saying on the record. 
 
And once again, I do say to the hon. member, I’m simply not 
able to comment specifics in the Chamber here, or anywhere 
else, and I will welcome getting the specific information and 
following up in the review of that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the 
minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was really intrigued listening to you speak a 
little while ago about the number of people that are receiving 
benefits under Social Services, and I think you made the 
statement that for 87 straight months, the number of people 
receiving services has gone down, down, down. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me, in the year 1998-99, how many 
people received benefits compared to the year 2000-2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just if I could seek clarification, 
are you asking the total number of people over the course . . . 
different people over the course of that period of time or are you 
asking for equivalent comparisons month to month . . . month 
over month or year over year in the same month — 
February-February, for example — or are you asking grand 
total number of cases? 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, just for clarification, I’m 
requesting in the total year how many recipients were on the 
rolls for Social Services in the years 1998-99 compared to the 
year 2000-2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, in 1998-99, the average caseload at any 
point in time was 34,842 cases, and in those households then, 
Mr. Chair, there were 68,561 individuals. In the calendar year 
. . . sorry, the fiscal year 2001, there were on average 33,363 
cases, and in those households, Mr. Chair, there were 62,242 
individuals on average. 
 
So the difference between those two years, Mr. Chair, is that in 
2001, as compared to ’98-99, there were approximately 1,500 
fewer cases on average, and 6,000 fewer people in those 
households receiving assistance. On average, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure you’re 
aware that I asked a written question a while ago about the 
number that was answered by the Minister of Health after being 
referred to him by your department. I asked a question, in each 
of those fiscal years, how much money did the Department of 
Health spend on dental, optical, and ambulance services for 
Social Services recipients. Ambulance costs, pardon me. 
 
The answer, in 1998 on dental it was 4,857,762. Optical is 
fifteen ninety-eight three forty-two. And ambulance is 
1,071,180. 
 
Mr. Minister, ambulance costs in the year 2000-2001 was 
$1,334,028. Mr. Minister, you just confirmed to me that there 
was 6,000 fewer recipients of social services benefits in this 
2000-2001, and yet there is a 17.5 per cent increase in 
ambulance costs in the same time. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you explain to me why these costs would 
have gone up in this time frame when there’s actually 6,000 
fewer people receiving benefits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, I think . . . I don’t think the hon. member is 
suggesting anything other than legitimate use of ambulance 
services. I certainly didn’t hear that implied in her question. 
 
The ambulance services are used, Mr. Chair, purely and simply 
because they are required. And, Mr. Chair, I presume then that 
based on the health requirement needs for ambulance service, 
that is the amount that was required. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I obviously was not trying to say 
that there was something wrong in this calculation. But I am 
wondering and I’m sure you’re wondering as well, Mr. 
Minister, how 6,000 fewer people can spend $234,310 more in 
ambulance costs in one year than 6,000 more people in the year 
before. We also will note that in the dental and optical amounts 
that there was actually very little decrease, although there was 
6,000 fewer people. 
 
Is your department looking into this, and I’m wondering how 
does your department account for this discrepancy? 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I simply have no reason to 
believe that there is anything fraudulent or inappropriate about 
the use of ambulance services. I have no information that says 
to me that ambulances were being used in 2001 in any way that 
is improper for them to be used. 
 
Now she may want . . . the hon. member may want to put her 
question to the Minister of Health in Health estimates before the 
Assembly. I do note with interest that comparing those two 
years in response to the question, written question that she put 
that in fact dental services dropped by some $250,000, optical 
services dropped by some $130,000, and that ambulance 
services increased by some 200 . . . looks like about $260,000. 
 
When you put those together, I don’t, Mr. Chair, pretend to 
have any insight as to why the ambulance services were higher 
in the same way I don’t have any specific insight as to why 
optical and dental services were lower. I presume in all three 
cases that these health benefits provided to low-income people 
in Saskatchewan were used legitimately, and if the hon. 
member has any information to the contrary then I would 
welcome hearing that in order to do a review of that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, it 
was the minister and not myself, that used the word fraudulent. 
I never intended to speak about that at all. What I wanted to 
know was how 6,000 fewer people can make that much of a 
difference. 
 
Mr. Minister, the ambulance costs of $1,334,028 obviously was 
a combination of air ambulance and road ambulance. Is that the 
. . . do you have that type of information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the Department of Social 
Services simply doesn’t have that kind of data and is not able, 
capable of producing it because we don’t have it within the 
department. The hon. member may wish to put that question to 
the Minister of Health in the Health estimates. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think the committee will recognize that we’ve now 
passed the point in which we were scheduled to move to 
Industry and Resources for estimates of the House. And 
therefore — with thanks to the hon. members for their 
questions, the officials for their able assistance — Mr. Chair, 
then I would ask that we move to Industry and Resources. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to my 
right is Larry Spannier, the deputy minister of Industry and 
Resources. To his right is Debbie Wilkie, executive director of 
corporate resources. To my left, Dan McFadyen, assistant 
deputy minister of resource development. Immediately behind 
me is Donald Koop who’s the assistant deputy minister of 
mineral revenue and investment services. To his right, Bruce 
Wilson, executive director of petroleum and natural gas. And 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

 

behind us are Bryon Burnett, assistant deputy minister of 
industry development, and Jim Marshall, assistant deputy 
minister of economic policy. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the new Minister 
from Industry and Resources, welcome, and to your officials, 
welcome here tonight. It’s always a pleasure to be able to ask 
questions regarding my critic area which is forestry. And it’s 
always a pleasure to deal with somebody who actually basically 
lives in an area where forestry is a huge, huge industry. And 
I’m hoping that the answers that the minister will provide me 
will give some direction as to what’s happening in the forestry 
industry. 
 
In regarding the forestry, I would like to ask a question to the 
new minister regarding what he sees and what kind of a plan he 
has for the upcoming year in regarding to the forest industry 
that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Well I want 
to say to the member with respect to the direction that this 
government is taking, it’s very much part of the program we 
announced sometime ago, as it relates to doubling the forest 
industry and the production of the forest industry in our 
province. We, through an analysis, had determined that we were 
harvesting in the neighbourhood of 50 per cent of our 
sustainable harvest in this province, and we determined that it 
would be one of the economic development initiatives for 
Saskatchewan, that we would expand this sector. And so we’ve 
been working with the private sector over a number of years. 
 
There has been an incremental private sector development 
somewhere just under a billion dollars in the last three years. 
New OSB (oriented strand board) plants — there’s some on the 
drawing board. And so in terms of physical development of 
plants, I think that the private sector has taken us up on our 
offer to expand the development, create jobs and investment 
here in the province. And so that has happened. 
 
The Meadow Lake oriented strand board plant is a $220 million 
project. They will be turning sod up there shortly. We have 
been dealing with Alberta newsprint company in terms of the 
potential for development of a newsprint plant and a pulp mill 
plant in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve initiated and established the Saskatchewan forestry 
centre in Prince Albert, which will assist us in developing value 
added, working towards agroforestry and forest science. The 
centre will be employing up to 20 people once fully developed 
and fully operational. Federal and provincial government have 
invested in the neighbourhood of $15 million in that project, so 
I think to say that we have established a good base in terms of 
the expansion to the industry is a fair comment. 
 
There is more that we can do. There is more that we will do. 
You will know that the dimensional lumber industry has faced 
some challenges. The sawmills in northern Saskatchewan have 
been impacted by the trade actions of the Americans — unfair I 
might say. I believe time will show them to be unwarranted. We 
have been working as a government with our provincial and 
federal counterparts to present our case to the Americans. 
 
So part of what we’re attempting to do is establish a healthy 

base for what I believe is one of the brightest sectors of 
economic growth that our province has on the horizon, and we 
will continue to focus very much on ensuring that we optimize 
opportunities for Saskatchewan’s people and for investors to get 
a good rate of return on their dollars that they invest in the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know in your 
comments you were saying about all the prospects that may 
happen in the upcoming years regarding the forestry industry, 
and we know that the forest industry could be a major boom in 
Saskatchewan, and I know some of the things that are holding it 
back is the embargo between Canada and the United States. 
 
In your comments you said that as far as the job and numbers 
that you were looking at that with the forestry centre coming up 
in the city of Prince Albert, which you’re from, that will create 
jobs as far as in the administration part of it. In regarding to the 
number of jobs as proposed in the province of Saskatchewan 
regarding forestry, is a lot of them more to do with 
administration jobs? Or are there actually going to be workers 
actually working in the field sawing, cutting, and doing 
whatever in the forestry industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, when 
we announced our strategy as it relates to developing the forest 
industry, we indicated that we believed we could create 10,000 
new jobs in northern Saskatchewan and add 1 billion dollars to 
the provincial economy. And as I said, I think we’re well on our 
way. 
 
I don’t want it to be unnoticed that this is more than promises, 
more than commitments. In Hudson Bay there is a $200 
million, brand new oriented strand board plant. In Meadow 
Lake there is a $200 million plant starting this spring. The 
Wapawekka sawmill just outside of Prince Albert is new. The 
Big River sawmill, one of the largest and the most 
technologically advanced in North America is new — it’s up; 
it’s running. 
 
We’re in negotiations on some other initiatives. I believe that 
we have very good potential to make those happen. So is it just 
promises? The answer, Mr. Chairman, is clearly not. These are 
a reality. 
 
We promised and committed ourselves to the establishment of a 
forestry centre of excellence in our province and we’ve 
delivered. We’re working now with the private sector, with 
some of our federal counterparts. There’s Timberline; there’s 
Foreign Tec. I can go through the list and a list that will be 
expanding and will be growing. So this is not pie in the sky and 
it’s not potential although we’re only partway through. I think 
we’ve got a very good start on our initial announcement. 
 
The private sector investment is evident. It’s there. It’s working. 
It’s creating jobs. And I think the people in northern and central 
Saskatchewan are very comfortable with what we’ve been able 
to achieve working with the private sector. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In your comments 
you were saying about the industry and how it’s been hit by the 
trade wars that we’ve had. In regards to the embargo between 
Canada and the United States in the softwood lumber issue, 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

what has your government done in regards to working with the 
minister, Pierre Pettigrew in regarding, trying to resolve this 
very, very serious problem that we have in regards to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well officials within the 
government departments, Mr. Chair, and to the member 
opposite, have been working very closely not only with trade 
officials from the federal government. As you will know this is 
an initiative that is the responsibility, as it’s international trade, 
that is led by the federal government. 
 
We have people working with them, advising them, putting 
Saskatchewan’s case forward as it relates to our circumstance 
here in the province. I think that we have some very capable 
and qualified people who very much understand the nature of 
our industry as it relates to access to forestry, the process that 
we use in terms of accessing a forest management agreement, 
understanding of the costs of our timber, the worth of our 
timber as it relates to our environment, our growing patterns 
here in the province, and the fact that we are not unduly, in this 
province, supporting the forest industry. We create I think a 
reasonable tax regime, I think we’ve created a reasonable access 
process, and those are the kinds of things that our officials put 
forward in consultation and working together with the federal 
government. 
 
Our counterparts from British Columbia, and from Quebec, and 
from Ontario, from Alberta, other forest industry and forest 
resource-producing provinces are doing similar to what we are 
doing. And I’m certainly very comfortable that our officials 
have represented the province well and presented a very strong 
case on Saskatchewan’s behalf. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in 
regard in what you’re saying regarding the embargo, as you 
know and I think you just reiterated too, that the four provinces 
that were originally signed with the United States regarding this 
negotiations was BC (British Columbia), Alberta, Ontario, and 
Quebec. Do you feel because of that . . . those four provinces 
belonging to it in the first place, do you feel Saskatchewan has 
an unfair advantage in trying to deal or help out with 
negotiations regarding the embargo between Canada and the 
United States? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, I don’t believe so. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So you’re working hard with Mr. Pierre 
Pettigrew in regards to it? Have you heard . . . is there anything 
coming down the pipeline in regards that may resolve this issue 
in the near future or, if not, when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m told, Mr. Chairman, by the 
official that it’s in the hands of the Americans as to when they 
want to come back to the table. Hopefully that will be soon. 
Hopefully there will be a resolve to Canada’s satisfaction and to 
Saskatchewan’s satisfaction in the near future. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was at a meeting 
on Saturday and I was talking to some of the people in the 
forestry industry, and I kind of overheard the effect that a date 

of May 6 rings a bell. Now have you heard of anything coming 
down regarding May 6 as far as the . . . regards to the trade war 
problem that we have in the softwood lumber industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, I could say to the member 
opposite that our officials, on an ongoing basis, deal with 
deadlines and deal with time frames. The officials are very 
much in tune with the day-to-day administration and operation 
and negotiations, and I trust that they’re doing their best on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if there is action that needs to be taken and moved upon, 
and for my office, my officials will let me know. At this point 
the negotiations and discussions are in their hands and I’m 
confident they’re doing the best job that can be done on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan and the industry. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
regarding the duties that’s been slapped on Canadian softwood 
lumber industries, something in the neighbourhood of 33, 35 
per cent, you know, your officials know, and so do we in 
Saskatchewan know that that’s created a real hardship on a lot 
of our industry and our workers within the industry and 
especially the smaller operations and a lot of them have cut 
down on their staff. They’ve cut down their operations to a 
point where some of them even have had to close their doors. 
 
Is there anything that you can comment on regarding the small 
operators of this province regarding the softwood lumber 
industry that you could reflect to them as help or whatever in 
that regards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I just would want to 
say to the member opposite that market conditions are often not 
what industry would want and would like to see and the 
fluctuations in the market sometimes create the shutdown of a 
shift. As an example, Big River. That mill was scheduled to 
operate on three shifts a while back. That decision was delayed. 
It may be as a result of actions taken by the Americans that 
there would be a re-evaluation of the mill as it operates, the 
time it operates. There may be a temporary shutdown. 
 
I don’t know that. Those would clearly be decisions that would 
be made by industry and by the owners of the assets. There are 
clearly some smaller mills who have been impacted as well by 
market downturns. 
 
So I would only say that industry is of the opinion, and I believe 
this firmly, that we are acting in the best interests of the 
province as it relates to the softwood lumber initiatives taken by 
the Americans and we will continue to work with industry and 
we will continue to press hard to make sure that we have access 
to American markets as we should have. 
 
You know, I guess for many of us, it’s somewhat disconcerting, 
perhaps frustrating, as we have watched years of negotiations 
take the form of free trade agreements with the Americans. And 
I’ve heard it said that it’s rather unfortunate that we have free 
trade as it relates to our oil and our gas, but in terms of 
softwood lumber we have some difficult circumstances. 
 
I’m hopeful, and I think the industry players are hopeful, that 
we will see a resolve to this soon. We all know that there’s a 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

 

large and a very powerful lobby as it relates to the forest 
industry in the United States who have had some impact, I 
believe, on decisions that have been made by trade officials and 
political officials in the American government. And clearly that 
has some impact on our industry across this country. 
 
I think what our industry people are looking for is a fair 
opportunity to access markets in the United States, which is our 
largest client as it relates not only to forestry products, but as it 
relates to fertilizer and other issues. And that common sense 
will ultimately prevail, and that our industry players will have 
access to those markets. 
 
When I look at Saskatchewan’s industry as it relates to the 
dimensional lumber industry — and you know the area maybe 
better than I do, we’ve both been residents of that area for a 
long time — as you’ve said, we do have interest in that industry 
because it employs our friends, and our neighbours, and it very 
much is part of the economy of the communities that we live in 
and work in. I think that our people know, the industry knows, 
our workers know, that we have probably the most modern saw 
lumber facilities anywhere in North America. 
 
And our sawmills are competitive. They’re new, for the most 
part; well maintained; they’re well operated; and we’ve got a 
good workforce that supplies the resource in order to keep those 
mills operating. 
 
And are we competitive? You darn right we are. As we should 
be. And if given a level playing field with the American 
markets, in spite of the freight, and in spite of the distance to 
some of the markets, we’ll compete with them any old time. 
 
And so I think, and I believe you would agree with me, that we 
would look to the Americans to sit back and reassess their 
position and allow the markets on a level playing field which 
we believe they are to determine who gets what share of the 
market. 
 
And all I need to do is look around our communities, and I look 
at the mills and I look at their operations, I look at the 
efficiencies, and as I said the workforce. And we should be 
allowed to compete and if we’re allowed to have those doors 
open we’ll compete and do very well. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
Ottawa there has been MPs (Member of Parliament) in Ottawa 
that are saying that maybe what our federal government should 
be doing is helping out the forestry industry. And if they’ve 
raised money or got money to give to places like Bombardier 
and the ice crisis that was in Quebec and other places like that, 
surely to God that maybe they can come up with some kind of 
dollars to help the forest industry. 
 
If that is true and that’s what they’re looking at, has there been 
any talk or have you heard of any information coming from 
your federal counterparts in regarding to something like that; 
and is it only going to be in the East or is the West going to be 
affected by that and are we going to get some help? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I have heard nothing from the 
federal government with respect to supporting the forest sector, 
as I’ve heard nothing from the federal government with respect 

to support for our farmers. 
 
So if there’s consistency there I think it’s fair to say that we on 
this side of the House have recognized it. You know I 
understand that there’s been some support for Bombardier in 
terms of contracts and some of the initiatives that they have 
attempted to put to completion. 
 
And I mean look, I wouldn’t attack Bombardier because they 
were able to access support from the federal government in a 
trade dispute between another aircraft manufacturer somewhere 
in some other hinterland. I would only say to Bombardier, 
congratulations because what you have done is you have 
allowed the Canadian government to understand that you can’t 
compete as an industry in Canada with an unfair subsidy that 
your competitors are receiving. 
 
Now if we were perhaps as fortunate to be able to have them 
understand that our agricultural community can’t compete with 
large subsidies in the United States and in Europe, I think that 
would make — and I would hope that would make — all of us 
here somewhat happy. 
 
But I think the forest industry would like to be able to operate 
without subsidy and on their own, in a market system where 
they have access to the population, who are the consumers of 
the vast amount of goods that they produce. I think, similarly, 
our farming community would like that same access on a level 
playing field. So maybe we need to do a little more work. 
 
Maybe Bombardier has been a little more successful for 
whatever reason, but I do know that whether it’s our farming 
community or whether it’s our forestry sector, all they want to 
do is have access to the markets on a level playing field. 
They’re competitive and they can do very well if they’re 
allowed to enter that marketplace without the markets being 
skewed by subsidies from Americans or Europeans. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In the 
financial statement it showed that the government gets revenue 
through the forestry industry through stumpage fees. In regards 
to the problems that we have in Saskatchewan right now — and 
I’m strictly speaking Saskatchewan forestry industry people — 
have you thought about doing something to help the forestry 
people there by lowering stumpage fees, which would be less 
revenue for you as a government, to help these people in the 
crisis that they’re going through today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I wouldn’t want to suggest that 
we’re in a crisis circumstance. I think we’ve got some pressures 
and some difficulties. I think it’s fair, as well, to say that we’ve 
got some very competitive stumpage rates here in 
Saskatchewan as it relates to the fees that we charge to our 
industry. I think that we have a reasonable level of stumpage. 
 
But I think that’s one of the problems that I hear from the 
American side of the border. And they say in a couple of ways: 
we don’t require harvesters of Crown forests to bid on that 
forest land so they don’t pay enough. And on the other hand, 
they say that our stumpage fees are already too low and that 
through stumpage fees we’re subsidizing industry. So to 
exacerbate that circumstance by yet lowering the stumpage fees, 
I don’t think would be helpful. 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker. You 
mentioned the fact that one of the wrong things that we do is we 
don’t charge enough stumpage fees or the fact that we don’t bid 
out our lumber . . . or our timber, I should say. 
 
Do you and your government feel that this may be an option 
that you could utilize is by having the timber bid on by the 
forestry companies, therefore you would gain more revenue, 
and it wouldn’t be a . . . I guess you’d call it a subsidy then? 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I don’t think the focus of our 
interaction with the industry has been to gain from them more 
revenue. I think the focus of this government has been to ensure 
that we got healthy forests with respect to the amount that we’re 
putting back into the forest industry. 
 
I would rather than to ask the forestry sector to be paying higher 
taxes, I would rather require and ensure that we’re dealing with 
reforestation on what we’re harvesting. And hopefully, 
government with working with industry over a period of time 
could look at some of the backlog for some of the poorer 
harvesting practiced and reforestation practices that took place 
some years back so that we can create a very healthy and a very 
sustainable forest. 
 
I don’t see, nor have I heard discussions around our table, 
around our cabinet table that we would want to look at 
increasing the cost of the forestry sector, whether it’s in the 
pulp, paper, or the sawmill industry. We think we’ve got a 
reasonable and a competitive rate. We think industry believes 
that, and that’s based on the billion dollars that they spent in the 
last couple of years here in our province upgrading their 
existing facilities and building new ones. 
 
And I think that’s what we’re looking to do. We’re looking to 
create, working with the forestry sector, the 10,000 jobs that we 
believe are there and that are available. And we’re going to 
continue to do that. 
 
So I think we have a reasonable balance. The private sector is 
comfortable. And certainly we have our disagreements; that will 
happen. That’s the nature of doing business, but that’s why you 
go to the table — to work out your differences. And I think 
we’ve been very successful with the industry in doing that. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the province of 
BC a lot of their timber is sold on a bid-for-service process. 
They generate a lot more dollars that way. Alberta is also 
looking at going that route right now. 
 
Now it’s easier for those two provinces to look at it because it’s 
somewhat different in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan we have 
two huge FMAs, and a FMA is a forest management agreement. 
 
Now if we could generate more dollars into the government 
through the bid system that BC is doing, and Alberta is looking 
at adopting, if we could do that, I know that’s going to make a 
major difference to the huge FMAs that we have. And those 
two big ones is Weyerhaeuser and Mistik. 
 
Do you see that as a possibility of doing that, and if so, then 

what occurrences would happen in regards to the two FMAs 
that we do have in place now; what would happen to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would say to the member 
opposite that I think the first principle would be for us, 
irrespective of what Alberta or what British Columbia might do, 
is to honour the existing agreements that we’ve signed with 
people who have invested many hundreds of millions of dollars 
in our province. 
 
As you will know, those are not short-term arrangements; 
they’re long-term, 25-year agreements with five-year renewable 
option, renew option clauses. And I think that those businesses 
have invested a lot of money in this province, based on that 
agreement and those agreements. And we’re not about to 
change the relationship we have with them by scrapping those 
agreements. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
The reason I brought that point up, Mr. Minister, is regarding 
with the two huge FMAs that we have, those two huge FMAs 
take up approximately 90 per cent of the forestry industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know it is a lot easier to deal with two rather than 150, but do 
you feel that — just with those two FMAs — do you feel that 
the industry is looked at in the proper manner so that everybody 
that has a stakehold in the forestry industry is looked at fairly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would want to remind the 
member opposite that just a short while ago we entered 
negotiations with all the forest management agreement holders. 
And what was done was an analysis of the inventory within the 
FMA, and there was a determination of how much they were 
harvesting, how much they were using; and there was, in fact, 
introduced a use-it-or-lose-it component to the FMA. 
 
We believe that the amount that’s being allocated, some of that 
was removed from their FMAs, as you will know as well, and 
some of that was reallocated to other usages. I think that the 
utilization within the FMAs is well documented. I don’t think 
there is a lot of, if there is some, wastage in there. 
 
I think for the most part they’re optimising the allowable cut 
within the FMA. And if new information would come to light 
as a result of analysis in terms of the inventory within an FMA 
that would show us that in fact they’re not utilizing the 
maximum amount available to them, we would then look at 
reallocating that to another user. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to the two huge FMAs that we have, there are many, 
many small operators that have cut trees and have had forestry 
permits for years and years and years. In the last couple years 
you could see those permits dwindling to a point now where 
they’re non-existent. 
 
Many of the small operators have been phoning saying, look 
Denis, we can’t get a permit any more to cut trees. We can’t log 
in a certain area. Now we’ve contacted SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) and they say it’s 
because the two huge FMAs have the jurisdiction over it and 
they won’t relinquish it. When the small operators phone the 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

 

two large FMAs, which is Mistik and Weyerhaeuser, they say 
no it’s SERM — now it’s not SERM but at that time up until 
just a couple of weeks ago it was SERM was the problem. 
 
Meanwhile whatever the problem is there’s a number of small 
operators out there that can’t get any wood to cut, their permits 
have been taken away. I’d like your reaction on that point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well in response to what the 
member says, you know the industry over the last 15 or 20 
years has changed fairly dramatically as you will know. In my 
riding, the . . . (inaudible) . . . in Prince Albert, I can name you a 
half a dozen families who have for 50 years made their living 
working in the forest industry cutting posts, poles, rails, saw 
timber. And I can also tell you that the number of families who 
were working in the forest industry today has changed very 
dramatically and there’s many, many fewer people working in 
the forest industry. 
 
It’s a much less labour intensive operation than it was many 
years ago. All one has to do is go to the forestry expo every 
second year in Prince Albert or others around the country, have 
a look at the harvesting equipment, have a look at the 
technology that’s been developed as it relates to saw mills, large 
and small, and you don’t need to be a mathematician to add up 
the fact that it takes fewer people to harvest the same amount of 
wood. 
 
And I mean it’s unfortunate from a personal standpoint and 
from families that there is a transition and things change. But 
that’s the reality of that industry. It’s much less labour 
intensive. 
 
I would like to say to you that in terms of small operators there 
have been 10 new allocations to small operators from 
Weyerhaeuser’s relinquished areas and that has taken place in 
just the last short while. And there are some businesses that 
have . . . and small operators that have faired quite well with 
respect to the re-allocation. And I understand all of the small 
operators didn’t get what they were asking for. And that is 
unfortunate, but it’s also the reality of the changes to 
technology and the changes and turns of the demand out there 
in the forestry sector. 
 
I mean the days of a team of horses and a chain and skidding 
logs out of the bush in that method, there may be some of that 
happening, but there’s surely not that much as there used to be. 
Technology has changed — it’s a less intensive industry as it 
relates to people working in the industry. 
 
It’s not unlike agriculture. I mean we both have a little bit of a 
farming background as well. And I can remember the days of a 
12-foot one way and perhaps 18, 20 feet of cultivator. We all 
remember that. It’s not how it’s done any more and there are 
fewer people doing a lot more work in a day with larger 
equipment. And that’s the reality of the industry. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand 
where you’re coming from in regards that there has been 
significant changes in the industry. But it just seems like in 
Saskatchewan — especially the forestry industry — that 
everything has gotten bigger and it’s felt that the only way to do 
business in the forestry industry is with big operators. 

And I find it ironic that the small operators in the province of 
Saskatchewan that have been cut out of the system somehow 
don’t have a job, and what are they going to do? They’re 
packing up and they’re moving out of the province which 
brings our numbers down. But I know you have made the 
comment, Mr. Minister, many times that when they move out 
that’s just more for the rest of them . . . the rest of us. 
 
Anyway I want to end on that, Mr. Minister, in regards to the 
embargo between Canada and the United States and I would 
like to switch over to a problem area that I have tried to deal 
with with other ministers for some time all through last year. I 
asked questions regarding forest-fringe problems. 
 
And I know I got a strange look from the old minister from — 
or not the old, the previous; that was the word I was looking for 
— the previous minister for Municipal Affairs in regard to 
forest-fringe problems. And I’m hoping now that you, Mr. 
Minister, as the new minister regarding forestry issues, that we 
can get some concrete answers regarding this and solve some of 
the problems that the forestry people — forest grazing people 
— have in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, in regards to that, the forest fringe area is an area between 
where the farming ends and the forestry starts. And in regards 
to that there is 28 RMs (rural municipalities) that are affected 
by this forest fringe problem. Now the forest fringe problems 
are dealing with the cattle operations within. And one of the 
main problems that this cattle grazing people have is the fact 
that in 1995 there was an amendment to the law that allowed 
the municipalities to charge a tax — a municipal tax — on the 
said land. I’ve went through all these questions with the 
previous Minister of SERM and he’s told me many times that 
that’s the question you’ve got to deal with with municipal 
government. 
 
Last year I asked the Minister of Municipal Government the 
same questions and he said no you have to direct those 
questions to the Ag Minister. I asked the Ag Minister those 
questions and he said no you’ve got to deal that with SERM. 
And I can understand that to a point because there are three 
jurisdictions that have an interest in that part of the province. 
The problem is, Mr. Minister, there are no answers given and 
the minister that allowed this tax to be charged, there’s only one 
certain organization that’s paying and that is the cattle grazers. 
 
Now, I know, Mr. Minister, that your government is famous for 
trying to find ways to charge tax. And I’m suggesting that 
maybe you should tax BS because that’s the only thing you 
haven’t done in the province of Saskatchewan and I’m sure you 
can create a lot of tax dollars off that even from the members on 
the opposite side of the House. 
 
But, in regards to that, Mr. Chair, in regarding the tax that this 
cattle grazing people are paying, have you been informed from 
either the previous Minister from Municipal Affairs, or the 
Minister from SERM, or the Minister from Sask Ag in the 
problems that the grazing people in the forest fringe area are 
having? 
 
The Chair: — Order. I would just caution all hon. members in 
their use of language that he be on the right side of 
parliamentary language, and I’m saying that before the minister 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

comments. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me begin 
by saying I’m not sure that the question justifies an answer. 
And I want to explain to you, not because of the language used, 
but I want to explain why I say that, sir. And that’s because I 
think the member opposite is quite clearly confused. Municipal 
government taxation issues is not a responsibility of Economic 
and Co-operative Development, it was not a responsibility of 
Energy and Mines, and it is not a responsibility of Industry and 
Resources — never has been, never will be. 
 
With respect to the issues that you’re describing, the forest 
fringe area involves some agricultural land that is administered 
by the department, Crown land that’s administered by the 
Department of Agriculture. The environmental component and 
policy, as it relates to utilization of that, is partly housed in the 
Department of SERM, former, now in the Department of 
Environment. 
 
And I understand your frustration. But if you would take some 
time, and I think if you would be a little patient, you could 
probably sort these things through for yourself. Or, if you can’t, 
you could ask one of your colleagues who’s been here a little 
longer to help you work your way through this incredible 
intricate bureaucracy that seems to confuse you. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I want to describe for you a process 
of estimates in which there is broad-ranging discussion that 
takes place during some of these estimates as we go through the 
budget book, and perhaps your colleague from Rosthern, who’s 
been here awhile, a seasoned member, could help explain to 
you how you could get access to any arm of government, if 
they’ll let you get up to ask a question. But if you use the 
approach you used a couple of minutes ago, my guess would be 
even the Leader of the Opposition wouldn’t let you get up to 
ask a question. 
 
And before I close, I just want to make one comment with 
respect to employment opportunities. We aren’t going to, in the 
forest industry, create opportunities by reducing subsidies or by 
reducing stumpage fees that would yet exacerbate the 
American’s position as it relates to us and as it relates to exports 
of timber. We’re not going to do that. 
 
And I want to tell you, we’re going to continue to work to 
create job opportunities for people in the forest fringe area, and 
we’re going to continue to work with the private sector and 
announce $220 million oriented strand board plants like the one 
in Hudson Bay, and we’re going to continue to work with 
companies like Tolko to employ people in the new oriented 
strand board plant that’s taking place in Meadow Lake and 
we’re going to continue to work with companies like 
Weyerhauser to have people work in state-of-the-art facilities 
like there is in Hudson Bay, right in your backyard. And we’re 
going to continue to work with people like Alberta Newsprint 
Company to explore the opportunities for job opportunities in 
pulp mills and in newsprint plants; and we’re going to continue 
to work with companies like Zelenskys in La Ronge, who 
employ people, who want to expand the number of people they 
employ. 

But I’ll tell you what we’re not going to do, sir. We’re not 
going to sit back and bemoan the fact that the industry is 
changing. We would rather help to adapt people to new 
employment opportunities in the forest industry, in new jobs, in 
new investment, in new job opportunities, and that’s what we’re 
going to do from this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to your comments of late, maybe I don’t know the 
process, but I went through all last year in estimates asking the 
three ministers I thought were responsible and I never got a 
straight answer. And I can see from the answer he just gives me 
now I’m still not going to get an answer. 
 
So I’d like to say to the minister opposite in regards to forest 
fringe problems: where do I go to address problems in estimate, 
and which minister do I contact in trying to get an answer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I can respond to that by 
describing to you clearly where you can go to get an answer. 
And I will tell you, sir, that I will answer within the purview of 
my department anything that we do, any policy that we are 
responsible for — that’s why I’m here, and I’ll be here as many 
times as need to be. And anything that we do under our budget 
items in this part of our budget, I’ll respond to. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, so what you’re 
saying then that the forest fringe problems of the province of 
Saskatchewan is not under your jurisdiction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You ask me a specific question and 
I will give you a specific answer. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — The forest fringe problems . . . or Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Chair, is forest fringe problems under your 
jurisdiction, and do you answer to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Which forest fringe problem? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — The forest fringe problems, Mr. Minister, 
that I’m asking are lands that are between agriculture and forest, 
which is known as forest fringe, and there are operations taking 
place within that said land that are not paying taxes, like forest 
cutters and anybody that goes in there to take forest out that are 
not paying nothing as far as taxation on that land, but yet cattle 
grazing operations are. 
 
Now is that your jurisdiction or is that someone else’s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Perhaps the member could clarify 
whether it’s Crown-owned land? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, if you’d read up on the 
policies, you know very well that the forest fringe land is 
SERM-owned land which is government land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, SERM does not 
own land. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — What was your answer, sir? 
 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — It was quite simple. SERM, the 
department of SERM does not own land. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — The land in question is Crown land, is it not, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Is it Crown land administered by — 
because there’s different entities of administration — who’s it 
administered by? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — It is Crown land administered by SERM, 
Mr. Minister. It’s funny, I know the answer; I’m just trying to 
figure out why you don’t, and you’re the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well if it’s administered by the 
former department of SERM, then it would stand to reason that 
when estimates come up you would ask the minister responsible 
for that part of the budget. Which is what I said to you a couple 
of minutes ago. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Okay. Then why, Mr. Minister, when I 
asked the questions to the minister of SERM last year, he said it 
was not. Why then, if it’s not his responsibility, and you’re 
saying it’s not your responsibility, then whose responsibility is 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well the first thing I would want to 
do is check the record to see and to ensure that, the validity of 
your remarks. That’s the first thing I would want to do. And I’m 
not going to work on the assumption that you bring to this 
Chamber. I’m only saying, if you ask the minister responsible 
for a department a question that’s pertinent to that department, 
that’s where you would go. 
 
I’m saying, with respect to your question tonight, that is not in 
the purview of my department so I should not be responsible to 
answer it. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Did I 
hear you right by saying that the land in question, which is 
Crown land, under the jurisdiction of SERM — or then SERM 
— is not your responsibility. 
 
If that is the case then, the forestry people that cut timber in this 
land, who do not pay a tax, is that or is that not under your 
jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So therefore what you’re saying is forestry 
is not on your jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — It’s not economic development. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, forestry is your portfolio. Is it 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, this department is 
responsible for forestry economic development. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Minister, I was under the assumption 
that forestry is your department and anything to do with forestry 
is the responsibility of you as the minister. And I’m asking 

questions regarding forestry and you’re not giving me an 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, I am sorry that you were 
under that misconception. Perhaps you could consult with some 
of your colleagues. They can take you through the blue book 
. . . or maybe I should do it and that will maybe save any further 
misunderstanding. 
 
I’m going to take you to the budget estimates 2002-2003 and on 
page 43 you’ll find under Vote 26 a department called 
Environment. And under (ER09), I’m going to quote: 
 

Develops and administers policies and programs to 
implement an ecosystem-based approach to managing 
forests. It also promotes environmental sustainability of the 
forest industry and mitigates the effect of natural 
disturbances that could affect the use of or access to forest 
resources. 

 
You’ll see under that sub-programs: forest programs, 
reforestation, insect and disease control. They’ve got salaries 
there, forest fire operations, recoverable fire suppression 
operations, and so on. I’m hoping that would help clarify for 
you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, your 
department is Industry and Resources and on page 76 there’s a 
section in there; it says, resource and policy development. Is 
that not your jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Right, policy development as it 
relates to economic development. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — But it doesn’t relate to forestry then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we can go through 
this for a whole hour and I’m more than willing to do that. I can 
only tell the member that under this department we’re 
responsible for the economic development component of 
forestry. 
 
If the member can’t manage to comprehend that, I can’t help 
that. But I’m going to answer questions as it relates to industry 
development. And that’s under the subvote for Industry and 
Resources, Vote 23, page 74 of the blue book, you’ll see a 
heading Industry Development (IR03). And under the 
sub-programs you’ll see forestry development, and that’s the 
area that this department is responsible for. 
 
And I’ve been answering questions as it relates to forestry 
development earlier this evening. And I will answer those 
questions that are under the purview of this portfolio, and under 
this department. And I think that’s a fair and reasonable 
position to take. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Can 
you inform me — as you’ve stated, the member that doesn’t 
know a whole lot about how the process works — can you then 
tell me, and direct me to which minister I ask the questions on 
forest fringe problems in the province of Saskatchewan, so that 
when the next minister comes up that you’ve stated to, I can ask 
these very same questions? 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, to the people in Saskatchewan that 
belong to forest fringe areas, it’s been a circus of me asking 
questions to the ministers, and no one is giving me an answer, 
and it’s always been a runaround. It’s someone else’s problem. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ve got you on the spot now. Direct me as to 
which minister I ask these questions to, so that I can get my 
answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can guide the 
member to three different departments depending on what his 
question would be. 
 
One would be the Department of Environment. The other would 
be the Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs. And the 
third would be the Department of Agriculture, just depending 
on how he asked his question and what it pertains to. Those 
would be the three departments that can, in all likelihood, help 
you through your conundrum. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. You 
know I understand from this government that when the Premier 
come out with his new budget this year that he was going to 
have smarter and smaller government. Well boy, I fail to see 
this. It’s not changed one bit since last year in regarding to the 
problems people in this province have to go through. 
 
And when we start talking about red tape, the bureaucratic red 
tape that the people of the province of Saskatchewan have got 
to go through, this is a perfect example of what’s got to go on 
just for people in this province to find out the answer to the darn 
problems they have in this province. 
 
In regarding to more forestry problems. I would like to switch 
over to forest fringe contingency fund. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in regard to the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund, where is it at as we speak today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — That’s not in my portfolio. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I guess that’s under Environment, my 
colleagues say, so then I cannot ask any questions regarding 
forest fire contingency funds. 
 
Mr. Minister, in regards to the comment you made regarding 
Tolko up in Meadow Lake, I understand that it’s up, or it is 
started. There has been a news release that put back last year 
regarding . . . the environment impact assessment notice was 
given, and that was dated up until December 20, and then there 
was 30 days for responses to that. Now that’s put us into the 
end of January, the first part of February. 
 
Where is the operation regarding Tolko and the new OSB plant 
in Meadow Lake as we sit today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think I indicated just a few 
minutes ago they’ve been doing some preparatory groundwork 
and they’re about ready to break ground, and we will be up to 
celebrate the kickoff to that new mill very shortly this spring. 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I know 
that the people of Meadow Lake are looking forward to that 
starting. I know the people of Meadow Lake are anxious to see 
it up and going because they know it’s going to create some 
jobs in that area. 
 
Therefore I think at this time that I have no more further 
questions for the minister. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, it’s been an interesting discussion this evening about 
forestry and forestry policy as how it’s related to economic 
development in the North. And it’s a very important industry in 
Saskatchewan especially in light of the difficulties that it’s 
facing with the US countervail that we have been hearing in the 
news now for some number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the difficulties arising from that and the 
pressure that’s putting on the industry in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we hear of plants slowing down, 
plants running at 50 per cent capacity, some of them shutting 
down to utilize the more efficient mills, Mr. Chairman. All of 
this causes concern as to what is the long-term viability of the 
forest industry when faced with the potential of high countervail 
duties from the US (United States) sector. I know a number of 
the producers are looking at markets offshore to try and offset 
the losses to the US market. 
 
Has the minister made an estimate as to the impact that the 
countervail will have on Saskatchewan’s industry if it goes into 
place? I understand that there is a short moratorium in place 
right now while the law in the US deals with the countervail. So 
what will the long-term impact be to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister, if the countervail goes ahead as it seems to be 
proceeding right now, and what level of countervail do you 
expect to see from the US industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the impact 
on the different entities within our province will be different. 
Many of the mills don’t predominantly have American markets. 
Some have almost entirely American markets to deal with and I 
think the economic circumstances of each mill will be a little 
different. So I mean that would be very much internal and 
information internal to each different saw mill. Each different 
entity that produces dimensional lumber and lumber that’s 
subject to countervail. 
 
So I think it’s very much a different impact on different areas. I 
can’t speak for each one of the companies, only to say that 
we’re going to attempt to work to try and ensure that the 
countervail duties are removed so that we can have access to 
that market place. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, there is currently a small 
window open where the countervail is not in place. What is the 
government doing to encourage the sale of 
Saskatchewan-produced lumber to all the markets, both in the 
US and offshore from Canada while that short window is open 
where no countervail is in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would 
assume that industry is taking advantage of the window as you 
will recognize is there. But I just want to say to members 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

 

opposite, we’re attempting to negotiate an agreement. There are 
in fact two appeal mechanisms, one through NAFTA (North 
American Free Trade Agreement) and one through the World 
Trade Organization. And hopefully if we are required to take 
our case to these two appeal mechanisms a favourable result 
would be achieved. And we’ll see where that takes us, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
The hour being late in the evening and the questions having 
been very interesting in the last . . . in particular in the last 20 
minutes, Mr. Chairman, I am assuming that members opposite 
would be willing to come back to Estimates as it relates to 
Industry and Resources at some other time, so I would move 
that we rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:39. 
 


