















































Hansard: June 19, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2179 
 June 19, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan concerned 
about the condition of Highway No. 23, west from Junction 9 to 
the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by residents of Porcupine Plain, 
Nipawin, Greenwater, and Hudson Bay. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand again today to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens in the Humboldt and . . . Humboldt and area, rather, 
who would like to see their Humboldt territory operations office 
for Saskatchewan Housing Authority remain in the city of 
Humboldt. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
vibrant city of Humboldt, as well as from the communities 
surrounding Humboldt, which would be Fulda and Carmel. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of people who are 
concerned about the closure of the Humboldt operations office 
for the housing authority. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functional territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from 
Annaheim. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon 

I’m proud to rise on behalf of people concerned about the high 
cost of prescription drugs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the great community of Tisdale and I’m happy to present 
on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
dangerous condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to make necessary repairs to Highway 58 
in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from 
the community of Chaplin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
In duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Eyebrow, Tugaske, and 
Brownlee. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from injured workers not covered by WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board). Their prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizen by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and equitable 
treatment be given to those injured and disabled people and 
their families and be diligent in this most urgent matter. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Lake Lenore, St. Louis, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about the closure 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

of the Humboldt territory operations office for the 
Saskatchewan Housing Authority. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt and 
Muenster. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents concerned 
with the boundaries of the new regional health authorities. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
regional health authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
health authority. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Govan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 
in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned with the fishing on Besnard Lake. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives, 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that the natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Big 
River, Coronach, Big Beaver, Bengough, Swift Current, and 
Coronach. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 157 and no. 164. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 70 ask the government the following question: 
 

In 2001 how much did the provincial government provide 
in funding to West Central Road and Rail Limited; was 
this funding a loan, a grant, or an equity investment; if it 
was a loan, what were the terms of the loan; does the 
provincial government have representation on the board 
of West Central Road and Rail Limited; and if so, who 
are they and what is their background? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 70 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of the Public Service Commission: what is 
the current salary range for junior secretaries in the 
minister’s office? 
 
And there’s a number of other questions about staff. 

 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 70 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of SPMC: does the Central Vehicle Agency 
have guidelines for updating and regular replacement of 
passenger motor vehicles in its fleet? If yes, what are those 
guidelines? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 70 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: how many cases are currently 
in the review and appeal process for the farm land property 
tax rebate program; and further to that, how much money is 
left outstanding as a result of these cases? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I may address 
another question: 
 

To the Agriculture minister: how many rebate applications 
were submitted to the farm land property tax rebate 
program in the year 2001; and further to that, is there any 
money left in the program for the year 2001 — left to be 
paid out — and if so, how much? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
see there are a lot of special people in the Assembly here today, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to introduce some of them to you. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and all the members of the 
Assembly a number of guests which are seated in your gallery. 
They are here to mark United Empire Loyalist Day in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The United Empire Loyalists, Mr. Speaker, were given the 
mark of honour, the Unity of the Empire, by Governor General 
Dorchester in 1789. They were allowed to pass it on to their 
descendants as recognition for their loyalty to and service in 
defending the Crown during the American Revolutionary War. 
 
Among our guests today, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Logan Bjarnason 
who is president of the Saskatchewan branch of the United 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

 

Empire Loyalists of Canada. Mr. Bjarnason is wearing a replica 
of his ancestor’s uniform from Butler’s Rangers. 
 
A number of other members are also here in period costumes. 
Among the other Loyalists joining Mr. Bjarnason and 
celebrating United Empire Loyalist Day are his wife, Shirley; 
Gerald Adair of Maryfield, the branch’s secretary, and his wife 
Pat; Doris Taylor of Regina, treasurer, and her husband 
Clarence; and Lorna MacKenzie, also of Regina, the branch’s 
genealogist, and her husband Ken; Wendell Johnson of 
Rosetown, past president, and his wife Joan; Nelle Balkwill of 
Regina, also past president; and Margaret and Roger Nefstead 
of Outlook. 
 
There’s also in attendance, Ms. Linda Smith, Ken Fader, a 
former colleague from a previous life, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Lloyd Redick. I would ask all members of the Assembly to give 
a nice warm welcome to all our guests that have joined us here 
today from the United Empire Loyalists. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And, Mr. Speaker, by your leave and leave 
of the Assembly, once again to you, I am very pleased and it is 
a privilege for me to introduce to you here today as well Mayor 
Ken Baker who is here from Lloydminster, Mayor Al 
Schwinghamer, mayor of Moose Jaw, Mayor Wayne Ray from 
North Battleford, and Mr. Mike Badham who’s the president of 
the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
 
Please help me welcome these gentlemen to our Assembly here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the minister, and on behalf of the official opposition 
extend a welcome to the individuals who are here representing 
the United Empire Loyalists. 
 
In that group is a couple from Maryfield, as the minister 
indicated, Pat and Gerry Adair. I met them as they were coming 
in the door and I asked Gerry why he didn’t have his costume 
on and his wife said she hadn’t made it yet. 
 
But I’d certainly like to welcome all the guests and we wish . . . 
trust that they’ll have an enjoyable day. I believe they’re going 
to Government House later in the day. So again, let’s extend a 
warm welcome to these guests who are representing the United 
Empire Loyalists. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly 32 students in your gallery from the 
glorious little village of Meath Park, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students today are accompanied by their 
teachers, Mr. Travis Wilkinson and Miss Bernice McNair. They 
have three chaperones with them also, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lloyd 
Slonski, Mrs. Julie Billay, and Mrs. Suzie Romanuik. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not often that I get visitors from a school this 
. . . down in Regina from so far away, and I would wish that all 
members of the Assembly to please join me in making the 
students from Meath Park feel very welcome here today. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce to you 16 members of the Lyndale School. 
They are students from grade 4 to grade 6, and they are from the 
Lyndale School in Oungre, Saskatchewan, and that is at the 
very western part of my constituency. 
 
And I’ve already met with the students and we’ve had our photo 
taken and I enjoyed the visit we had very much. And I hope 
they enjoy the proceedings this afternoon and the rest of the day 
in Regina. And I also hope that they have a very safe trip home. 
 
And these students are accompanied by their teacher, Marlene 
Santer, and chaperones, Bernie Persson, Lyn Johnson, and 
Angie Oshust. 
 
I thank you very much. Please join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
this afternoon to introduce, I think which is the entire east 
gallery, who are here from the Tisdale Elementary School. 
There’s 72 students and their parents and chaperones coming 
from three classrooms in the Tisdale Elementary School. 
They’re Mrs. McRae and her class and parents of rooms 401 
and 501; Mrs. Ratushniak and class and parents from Room 
502; and Ms. Martinson and class and parents from room 503. 
 
They’re here today on a field trip to visit to Regina and its 
particularly prideful for me to introduce them to the Legislative 
Assembly and welcome to Regina. And I’d ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, and 
I’d ask her to stand, is Ms. Patrina Friedle. Patrina has been a 
key member of the committee organizing the National 
Aboriginal Day celebrations which are to take place on Friday. 
 
And it is her hope that all members will participate in the 
celebrations in Wascana Park on Friday, and that all citizens of 
the province will join in the celebrations of National Aboriginal 
Day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following the 
minister’s welcome to the mayors, I too would like to welcome 
the mayors here this afternoon, and in particular Mayor Ken 
Baker from my hometown of Lloydminster. And accompanying 
Mayor Baker is Moe Aschenbrenner, sitting in your gallery, Mr. 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

Speaker. Could we give them a welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are four 
guests sitting in your gallery that I would like to introduce to all 
the members. First of all, I would like to introduce the mayor of 
Kyle, Ansgar Tynning, and his wife, Norma. And if they would 
please stand so everyone can see them. 
 
The other two people that I take great pleasure in introducing 
are Bodil Egset and Annlaug Stundal. They are visiting us from 
Norway. They are guests and friends of the Tynnings, and we in 
the Assembly hope that they enjoy the proceedings, that they 
get a feel for the province of Saskatchewan, particularly our 
visitors from Norway. And we just welcome you very warmly 
to our Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
entirely appropriate that I should follow up the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar with the appropriate greeting to our friends 
from Norway. And I would like to say: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Norwegian.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

United Empire Loyalist Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to recognize United Empire Loyalist Day in 
Saskatchewan. This is a day in which we recognize the fact that 
roughly 4 million Canadians, or about one in six, can trace their 
ancestry back to the United Empire Loyalists, those brave 
individuals who remained loyal to the Crown and came to 
Canada rather than participate in the Revolutionary War. I am 
one of those 4 million, Mr. Speaker, and proud of it. 
 
Our ancestors brought with them many of the values which are 
still the taproot of our Canadian society today — our respect for 
diversity, our belief in peaceful rather than violent change, our 
balance of individual rights with collective responsibility; and 
encompassing them all, our system of parliamentary democracy 
which, for all its flaws, remains the best in the world. 
 
I think it is important to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the 
original Loyalists were not just British. They included liberated 
slaves, Mohawk First Nations, German, Dutch, Scotch, and 
Irish colonists. Our multicultural society starts there, and as the 
United Empire Loyalists descendants settled across Canada, 
including many in Saskatchewan, they carried with them the 
values which I mentioned. 
 
On a personal note, last year one of our United Empire Loyalist 
guests was my friend Betty Caldwell, who has since passed 
away. Betty and I often sat together in church and one day she 
told me how her ancestors had sold my ancestors a piece of land 
in the Kingston-Napanee area. Mr. Speaker, she would have 
been pleased with this tradition that we have established on 

June 19. 
 
Every person, every family, every group that comes to Canada 
enriches us, strengthens the communities upon which our nation 
continues to grow. This is certainly true of the United Empire 
Loyalists, and I am proud to honour them on this day, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 

Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker and 
members, more athletes from my constituency are being 
inducted into the Saskatchewan Sports Hall of Fame. 
 
The 1989 national junior fastball champions, Melfort Cheyenne 
Chev-Olds 222s, are being recognized for their achievements in 
the national baseball world. The team started their journey in 
1984, when it won the Western Canadian Bantam 
Championship. The boys went on to win third spot in the 1995 
National Midget Event and the National Midget Crown in 1996. 
The coach, Doug Holoien, attributes their success to the young 
guys’ commitment. He said: 
 

These kids go out on practices. They didn’t want a night 
off. If they didn’t play, they wanted to practise and they 
played hard in their practice. 

 
The kids in turn attribute their success to their coach. Keith 
Mackintosh said his teammates were committed, but Doug 
Holoien deserved all the credit, and was the best coach he ever 
played for. Keith remembers the players waiting for Doug to get 
off work so they could practise together, and at times Doug hit 
ground balls to them until his hands were bleeding. Softball 
Saskatchewan and Softball Canada also recognized Doug as 
Coach of the Year at the end of 1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the House, the members of my 
constituency were, and still are, extremely proud of these 
athletes, and it is my pleasure to ask you to join us in 
congratulating our home team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News from Stats Canada 
 
Mr. Addley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the rains have come; the 
sun is now shining; 11,000 more people working in 
Saskatchewan; the kids are just about out of school and ready to 
hit the road on vacation with their families — the well-paved 
roads, I might add. If that’s not enough good news to bless us 
all, then our completely objective friends at Stats Canada has 
given us one more reason to smile. 
 
So hold on to all three corners of your hat, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
more good news for Saskatchewan. Manufacturing shipments 
jumped 11.2 per cent in Saskatchewan from March to April — 
the largest increase in all the provinces. Shipments, or the 
amount of sales by manufacturers, improved to $638 million in 
April. 
 
And as we’ve said before, we don’t look over our shoulder at 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

 

other provinces to judge our performance the way some in this 
Assembly might; but were we to compare, we would see that 
Alberta increased by a mere 2.3 per cent. 
 
The largest improvements came in wood, food, and chemicals. 
Also there’s good news from farm implement manufacturers, 
who are quite busy and confident of having a good year. One 
more piece of good news, according to Kent Smith-Windsor of 
the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, is that manufacturing 
firms are expanding into the US (United States) and being quite 
successful. 
 
There you have it, Mr. Speaker, the straight goods from Stats 
Canada by way of The StarPhoenix and Leader-Post, courtesy 
of good management and sound policy of the optimistic 
members on this side of the House. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Linda Hryciw Receives Principal Appreciation Award 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to inform our Hon. Assembly of an incredible accomplishment 
by one of Saskatchewan’s outstanding professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers lies 
the community of Meath Park, a community, Mr. Speaker, that 
those of us who live nearby have always believed to contain the 
best kindergarten to grade 12 school anywhere. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as it turns out, we may be right. The Saskatchewan 
Association of School Councils, at its annual meeting in 
Saskatoon, has honoured Meath Park’s principal, Linda Hryciw, 
as their first annual winner of their Principal Appreciation 
Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had many opportunities to witness first-hand 
the enthusiasm and dedication Ms. Hryciw brings to Meath 
Park School in her desire to have the best kindergarten to grade 
12 school. Chair of the Meath Park local board, Wendy Grubbe, 
states Ms. Hryciw not only wants students to feel good at Meath 
Park School, but also that they do well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Hryciw’s success in developing a 
participation school model including parents, community, and 
school is leading the way in raising good citizens for our ever 
changing society. Mr. Speaker, the genuine caring and high 
expectations Ms. Hryciw places upon herself, staff, and students 
have earned her this very prestigious award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Linda Hryciw for her excellence in contributions to the success 
of Meath Park School. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Sound Stage 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the last few days 
in this House, we’ve heard from the member from Wood River 
how the Regina sound stage is this huge liability. Counter to 
this though, Mr. Speaker, I have a Sask Party press release 

dated July 27, 2001 in which the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena identified construction of a state-of-the-art 
sound stage as, quote: 
 

One of the key ingredients for the successful development 
of Saskatchewan’s film industry. 

 
Another key ingredient: the continuation of the film and video 
tax credit, which this government has done just as this 
government, in partnership with the city and the federal 
government, has now built the sound stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to whom should we throw our support in this 
titanic battle of who speaks for culture in the Saskatchewan 
Party? I don’t know about you, but my money is on the movie 
critic from Wadena, for I think she’s recognized that one of the 
key ingredients of a successful film industry is the sound stage 
— something that has been done by this government. 
 
You’ll note, Mr. Speaker, that the proof was in the pudding this 
morning as Kevin DeWalt of Mind’s Eye Pictures made a 
preliminary announcement of a $3.3 million film to be shot 
entirely in Saskatchewan with the interior shots and production 
moving into the new sound stage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — One thing’s for sure, Mr. Speaker. For the 
Regina sound stage and for this exciting development, two 
resounding thumbs up. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Achak Training Course 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Achak is a Cree 
word that means spirit. But Achak is also a privately held First 
Nations-owned corporation that is providing an introductory 
Aboriginal awareness Web-based training course that will assist 
organizations with their cross-cultural training needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Achak’s representative workforce, including 
Aboriginal peoples course, has been officially launched on May 
16. And I had the privilege of attending the official opening 
ceremonies for Achak this past Friday in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Eileen Gelowitz is the president and the driving 
force behind Achak and its exciting new initiative. 
 
The course is composed of five modules. They are: no. 1, our 
changing workforce; no. 2, Indian and Métis history review; no. 
3, frequently asked questions; no 4, workplace strategies and 
partnerships; and no. 5, workplace interaction. 
 
The course takes about two and a half to three hours to 
complete and I am pleased to announce that I’m a graduate of 
the course and found it very worthwhile. 
 
I would encourage other members to check into the course if 
they haven’t already taken it, and also join me in wishing Eileen 
Gelowitz and Achak all the best in this endeavour. 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Financial Assistance for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Details are now 
emerging about the federal farm package to be announced 
tomorrow. But there are conflicting reports as to whether this is 
new money or whether it’s simply a repackaging of existing 
money. 
 
The only thing that we know for sure so far is that it is not a 
trade injury payment. And Ottawa also says they expect the 
provinces to pick up 40 per cent of the bill. Mr. Speaker, none 
of this is good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Can the Premier give the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan any more details on the package? Specifically, is 
the $5.2 million new money or is it simply a repackaging of 
existing money — the $5.2 billion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I am hesitant to speak on 
behalf of the federal government, but my understanding of the 
package — it’s been described — is that a portion of this 
package is in fact existing dollars, a carry-through of about $1.1 
billion on an annual basis, and there is new money that should 
be described as trade injury money. 
 
It is around this package of new money that’s to meet the trade 
injury, occasioned by the European and the American subsidies, 
that we hold to the position — and I appreciate the support of 
the Leader of the Opposition on this point — we hold to the 
position that this money should be 100 per cent new money 
funded by Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would hope that the Premier’s had more than just a rough 
briefing on this package especially if the federal government 
has the nerve to think that we should also be paying for part of 
this package. You would think the Premier knew exactly what 
the federal government had in mind. He would know exactly 
how much new money is involved, how much old, existing 
money is involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another question to the Premier and perhaps he 
can answer this one: what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
Order, please. Order. Order. Order. The Leader of the 
Opposition may start over if he wishes. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
would think that the Premier and the Agriculture minister would 
know every detail of this package, particularly if the federal 
government has the nerve to think that we should be paying 40 
per cent of it. 

Mr. Speaker, has the Premier received any briefing on this? Can 
he tell us: what will Saskatchewan’s share of the program be; 
how would this money be paid out; when would it be paid out; 
and will it be set up in a way that truly helps Saskatchewan this 
time? He better know the answer to those questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Here we are, here we are, Mr. Speaker, 
trying to deal with a extremely serious issue facing Canadian 
farmers and Saskatchewan farm families, and we get the 
theatrics from the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
The fact of the matter is no provincial government knows the 
detail of this plan — no provincial government. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Agriculture will be 
leading the ministers of Agriculture of Canada in sitting down 
next week in Halifax to deal with just these questions. The 
questions of detail are important, Mr. Speaker. And he is going 
there with the support of this Premier, with the support of 
premiers across Western Canada, with the support of Western 
Canadian producers, to say that in the matter of trade injury this 
needs to be 100 per cent federal, new dollars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, how is it the 
Premier thinks that he should know anything about this when it 
appears that even Terry Hildebrandt of APAS (Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan) has more briefing on 
this package than the Premier of Saskatchewan has on the same 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party remains fully in support 
of a trade injury payment 100 per cent funded by the federal 
government. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it looks like the 
Premier has been losing that argument. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the clock is ticking. The announcement is 
going to be made tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are sitting on the edges of their chairs all across 
this province waiting to find out what the answer will be. They 
expected the Premier had a hand in putting that together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if in fact the rumours are true and Saskatchewan is 
expected to pay 40 per cent of this, how is the Premier going to 
change the federal government’s mind? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it has been 
my assumption to date — and I hold to that assumption and I 
hope I can hold to that assumption — that when I speak to this 
issue on the national stage that I’m speaking also for the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent this . . . I spent a good chunk of this 
morning at the Farm Progress Show and a good bit of that time 
speaking to the national media about this issue. We are not 
bending on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition suggests perhaps there are, 
perhaps there are more persuasive things that he might want to 
do. I invite him to move ahead. I invite him. I invite him to seek 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

 

a minister with the . . . a meeting with the Minister of 
Agriculture, federal — see if he can get it. I invite him to seek a 
minister . . . a meeting with the Prime Minister of Canada. I 
invite him to do it. And if he can and if he can move them, I’ll 
tell you, we’re right behind him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it is becoming so obvious 
that our Premier is completely in the dark on this issue. How 
would we know if he’s bending if we can’t see him? We don’t 
know where he stands on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the announcement is going to be made tomorrow. 
We just saw Mr. Vanclief, the federal Agriculture minister, say 
that he’s going to release the details. It’s going to be cast in 
stone after tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, the Premier still says that 
he’s going to negotiate a better deal. 
 
So how is he going to do this? How is he going to convince the 
other provinces to stand with him? How is he going to convince 
the federal government that they need to fund this program 100 
per cent fully and that there needs to be a trade injury payment? 
How is he going to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition says that 
he does not know my position on this matter. Well he must be 
the only one of 30 million Canadians that doesn’t. I don’t know 
where he’s been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the 
Leader of the Opposition by inference suggests that he would 
be very effective on this file. I have a clipping here from The 
Hill Times, Canada’s parliamentary newsletter, where several 
years ago the Leader of the Opposition went to Ottawa on 
behalf of Saskatchewan producers. Here’s what it says, quote, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Handshake for you. Saskatchewan Party leader and former 
Reform MP Elwin Hermanson was back on the Hill last 
week trying to drum up support for an aid package for 
Saskatchewan farmers. The former Reform Agriculture 
critic met with opposition critics, but he could not swing a 
sit down with the Agriculture minister, Lyle Vanclief. 

 
Quote, he said: 
 

“I used to be friends with Lyle when he chaired the 
Agriculture committee in the last parliament,” said Mr. 
Hermanson, adding that this time he only got a handshake. 

 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we need more than a handshake from 
the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, while as Leader of the 
Opposition, and without a support of provincial government 
whose Agriculture minister was in Mexico suntanning, at least 
the official opposition was using all the powers at their disposal 
to do something for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — This government is ineffective. They have 
all the levers of government to pull. How can the Premier stand 
up in this House and face the people of Saskatchewan, the farm 
communities of Saskatchewan, when he has failed in every 
instance in regarding this injury payment program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, here is the Leader of the 
Opposition’s definition of failure. About one year ago, 
thereabouts, I took the office of Premier. About 10 months ago, 
on behalf of Canadian premiers, I picked up the file to speak on 
behalf of the premiers of Canada around the need for trade 
injury payment and the support of Canadian farmers. 
 
Three months ago, the federal minister of Agriculture — who 
once in a while gives a handshake to the Leader of the 
Opposition — that federal minister was saying three months 
ago there would not be one more thin dime, not one more thin 
dime for Canadian producers. All the money was out in existing 
process. That was three months ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have moved that federal government from a 
position of zero to a position today of $5.2 billion, we think. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not enough but it’s a lot more progress than 
he, the Leader of the Opposition, or anybody over there has 
ever achieved for Canadian producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Settlement with John Popowich 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is for 
the Minister of Justice. In 1992, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon police 
officer, John Popowich, was charged with sexually assaulting 
children at a Martensville daycare centre. In 1993, a judge 
found Mr. Popowich not guilty. In 1994 the Mr. Popowich sued 
the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) Justice minister and his 
prosecutors for malicious prosecution. After fighting the lawsuit 
for eight years, a judge told the government that if the case went 
to trial the Justice minister and his prosecutors would almost 
certainly be found guilty of malicious prosecution. 
 
So yesterday the NDP agreed to settle with Mr. Popowich by 
paying him $1.3 million. And then the minister chalked up the 
whole thing to an honest mistake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister clarify his statement? Were 
Justice department officials guilty of an honest mistake due to 
lack of judgment, or were they guilty of malicious prosecution 
in the case of John Popowich? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan yesterday admitted to Mr. Popowich that 
mistakes had been made, and apologized to him and offered 
compensation which he agreed to. 
 
This is not an easy matter, as the member will know. It’s a 
situation which as a result of actions of prosecutors, Mr. 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

Popowich was caused untold grief from which he still suffers 
today. 
 
The prosecutors at that time, Mr. Speaker, used the judgment 
. . . used the information they had available about child 
witnesses and child sexual abuse cases. With the use of their 
best judgment, Mr. Speaker, they concluded that a prosecution 
was warranted. As it turns out, that was not the case, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is why the settlement took place today. 
 
And it’s appropriate for me, I think on behalf of everyone, to 
indicate to Mr. Popowich our sincere regrets and our apology. 
And I’ll be meeting with him and his family shortly to convey 
that to him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll note that the 
question was not answered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister admitted yesterday to reporters that if 
the Popowich case went to trial the government would be 
forced to pay an even higher award to Mr. Popowich than $1.3 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the courts don’t order multi-million-dollar awards 
because of an honest mistake or a lack of judgment. Malicious 
prosecution is an extremely serious offence. It means that 
Justice department officials acted maliciously in fraud of their 
duties. And according to the Supreme Court of Canada, in order 
to prove malicious prosecution there must be an absence of 
reasonable and probable cause for charges to be laid, and 
prosecutors must have acted with improper motives that abused 
or perverted the justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister call this an honest mistake 
when a judge said there was strong evidence of Crown 
prosecutors abusing and perverting the justice system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, in the pretrial discussions with Mr. Justice Baynton it 
became clear that it was likely that the Government of 
Saskatchewan would be responsible for malicious prosecution. 
And that is why the settlement took place. 
 
Settlements take place all the time as the member will know, in 
order to resolve matters in the best interests of the parties 
concerned. Mr. Popowich, as you know, Mr. Speaker, and as 
the member will know, has said this is the end of the matter for 
him. I think we should listen to what he says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thankfully Mr. Popowich’s situation is over 
after about eight to ten years. But this minister still must take 
responsibility for what happened during that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada clearly considers 
malicious prosecution as a very serious matter. That’s why the 
court has set the threshold of proof so high, Mr. Speaker. 
 

According to the 1989 Supreme Court decision in the case of 
Nelles v. Ontario, I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . malicious prosecution requires not only proof of an 
absence of reasonable and probable cause for commencing 
the proceedings but also proof of an improper purpose or a 
motive . . . that involves an abuse or perversion of the 
(justice) system of criminal justice for ends it was not 
designed to serve . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Justice minister has all but admitted that his 
department officials were guilty of malicious prosecution in the 
Popowich case, which according to the Supreme Court of 
Canada is when, and I quote, “the prosecutor acts maliciously in 
fraud of his duties,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
Guilty of pursuing charges against Mr. Popowich with motives 
that abused or perverted the justice system in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, what specific actions is the NDP government 
taking to ensure this kind of incompetence, fraud, and abuse by 
government officials against innocent citizens never happens 
again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me remind the 
member that the prosecution’s department deals with 84,000 
inquiries a year, 18,000 of which go to prosecution. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a job which requires judgment on a day-to-day 
basis, and in which in the vast majority of cases, the 
overwhelming majority of cases, that judgment is unquestioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years there have been five cases in 
which these issues have arisen, Mr. Speaker. So I think we need 
to keep it in that context. 
 
(14:15) 
 
But let me just say this, that with the information available at 
the time, Mr. Speaker, two prosecutors responded in accordance 
with their best judgment, Mr. Speaker. We have accepted the 
responsibility for those errors, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
responded with this apology and with this settlement, Mr. 
Speaker. Nobody is very happy with this situation, Mr. Speaker. 
We have taken steps to ensure that this will not happen again. 
And the member will know that instances of this have not taken 
place in the province since. 
 
There is education seminars and a whole range of things, Mr. 
Speaker, which have clarified the protocol so that we now do 
things in a way which is appropriate with the knowledge we 
now have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — There may have been, Mr. Speaker, 
thousands of cases in this province that have gone through 
quietly. This however is a case of national pre-eminence. Also 
this is one of the very few cases where malicious prosecution 
has taken place. And that puts it into a totally different category 
and should not be confused with all the other thousands of cases 
in Saskatchewan. 
 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government must take full responsibility 
for the massive abuse that took place in the malicious 
prosecution of John Popowich. Mr. Popowich has suffered, his 
family has suffered, the taxpayers have suffered, and the public 
confidence in the justice system has been very severely 
undermined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government incompetence and a track 
record of legal bungling and abuse has led to the loss of faith by 
Saskatchewan people in the NDP’s justice system, and that is 
unacceptable. 
 
Will the minister immediately establish an independent public 
inquiry into how the justice system was allowed to maliciously 
prosecute John Popowich, and destroy his life, and cost the 
taxpayers $1.3 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as the member will know, I never rule anything out. 
But it looks like it is — to me — that it is not necessary at this 
stage to respond in that way. But I am of course always open to 
considering these matters in the very near future. 
 
I would add though, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Popowich himself 
does not want an inquiry. And I think we’ve put Mr. Popowich 
through enough and we should listen to what he says, we should 
take his advice, and respect his wishes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Because of this government’s incompetence, 
Mr. Speaker, the issue has now become public confidence in the 
legal system of Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re dealing with 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Popowich has paid a heavy price for the 
NDP government’s incompetent management of the justice 
system. The taxpayers have paid a heavy price for the NDP’s 
incompetence. And yet the NDP apparently is not interested in 
getting to the bottom of how Saskatchewan’s justice system has 
gone so wrong. 
 
The Justice officials responsible for the malicious prosecution 
of Mr. Popowich 10 years ago are still prosecuting cases for the 
government, and the minister wants to chalk the whole thing up 
to an honest mistake and just move on. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s just not good enough. Will the Justice 
minister immediately establish an independent public inquiry 
into the malicious prosecution of John Popowich so the public 
understands what went wrong and so this kind of government 
abuse is never allowed to be inflicted on innocent citizens and 
taxpayers again, so that we can all start to rebuilt trust in 
Saskatchewan’s justice system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can assure the 
member, for what it’s worth, that we have taken every step to 
ensure that that this will not happen again. Province . . . across 
the country, and indeed across North America and around the 

world, these situations arose in the early 1990s, as the member 
will know. There was a peculiar set of circumstances which led 
to that situation here as well as in other places. 
 
The protocols have been changed, Mr. Speaker. There’s been a 
whole lot of education and work done with prosecutors, Mr. 
Speaker. We now know a lot more about how to deal with child 
witnesses in child sexual abuse cases of this sort. 
 
We have victim service fund programs designated specifically 
to dealing with these questions, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 
assure the member that every step has been taken to ensure that 
the kind of situation that arose in 1992 and has not arisen since, 
will not arise again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Shortages 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is 
for the Minister of Health. Yesterday the Canadian of Institute 
of Health Information released a report indicating that the 
number of registered nurses in our Saskatchewan health system 
is declining and that the average age of RNs (registered nurse) 
working in the system is also increasing. 
 
The report echoes the information provided by the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses earlier this year that indicated 
500 nurses had left our system last year alone, and that 
Saskatchewan had lost almost 1,200 nurses since 1999. 
 
In fact the report indicates Saskatchewan’s decline in nursing 
numbers is almost three times the national average decrease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are discouraging trends but the NDP 
government has known about this for several years because 
we’ve raised it time after time after time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP government failed so miserably 
in keeping their promises to increase the number of nurses 
working in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, sounds like they found the 
double dose of lemons in the back room today. 
 
But what . . . Mr. Speaker, what I would say to the members 
opposite, and to the people of Saskatchewan, is that we have 
been involved in working with the profession to make sure that 
we are prepared for the future. But there are a couple of pieces 
of information which I think all members would like to hear. 
 
One of the things is that Saskatchewan, in the same information 
that the member opposite is referring to, has 80.8 nurses per 
10,000 population. That’s higher than the Canadian average of 
74.3 and it continues to be above the national average like it has 
for many numbers of years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The point is, Mr. Speaker, that we have a 
challenge right across the whole country. If you looked at the 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

headlines on every paper in the country today, this is an issue 
and we’re . . . It’s the same issue in the United States. We are 
working at it together with our profession to make sure we’re 
ready for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the nurses that are working 
overtime, the nurses that are working to the point of exhaustion, 
they understand that this government’s record is three times 
worse than the national average. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And, Mr. Speaker, for those working nurses 
in the field that are overworked, they’ll be pleased to hear the 
minister answer by making cynical jokes about lemons, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only . . . Not only, Mr. Speaker, are we 
performing and losing nurses at a rate three times greater than 
the Canadian average, our nurses are older than the Canadian 
average. In fact 4,000 of our nurses will be eligible for 
retirement in the next 10 years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
the rate we’re going where we’re losing nurses each and every 
year, how in the world is this government and its failed policy 
going to meet the demands of the next 10 years when those 
aging nurses reach retirement age? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if every single graduate of every single university 
program, and every single one of them stayed in Saskatchewan, 
we’ll come far short of what we need for the future in this 
province. Why is the government ignoring that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined previously the 
many things that we are doing to increase our training, to work 
with bursaries. This year we are training 260 RNs; next year it 
will be 300. And we’re working together with the Minister of 
Learning. We are continuing to do all of the things that we need 
in that particular area. 
 
My concern, Mr. Speaker, is that the members opposite do not 
tell us what they will do on health care. They have said nothing 
since 1999 when they were going to do an audit and they were 
going to stay at zero increase in funds. That will not work in 
health care in Canada. 
 
What we need is to work together around the kind of action 
plan that we’ve set out for health in Saskatchewan so that we 
can have all of the professionals working together to provide 
the kind of care that we need for our people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 208 — The Crown Corporations Amendment 
Act, 2002 (Appointment of Directors) 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 
Bill No. 208, The Crown Corporations Amendment Act, 2002 
(Appointment of Directors). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 211 — The Accountability of Crown Entities Act 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 
Bill No. 211, The Accountability of Crown Entities Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 212 — The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 212, 
The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today on behalf 
of the government to convert for debates returnable questions 
no. 354 and 355. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 354 and 355 converted to motions 
for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Cities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 75, The Cities Act. The Cities Act presents 
to all of us a significant opportunity to advance and strengthen 
our cities and to create opportunities for more effective local 
government. 
 
As many members will know, the initial momentum for this 
legislation primarily came from the cities themselves. I want to 
commend the proactive approach taken by the cities toward 
advancing the current provincial/municipal relationship by 
putting forward proposals to revitalize and strengthen the 
governance of our cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to especially thank the city mayors 
and acknowledge each of them here today in my presentation: 
Mr. Tim Perry, the mayor of Estevan; Mr. Dennis Korte, the 
mayor of Humboldt; Mr. Ken Baker, the mayor of 
Lloydminster; Mr. Delmond Henderson, the mayor of Melfort; 
Mr. Mike Fisher, the mayor of Melville; Mr. Al Schwinghamer, 
the mayor of Moose Jaw; Mr. Wayne Ray, the mayor of North 
Battleford; Mr. Don Cody, the mayor of Prince Albert; Mr. Pat 
Fiacco, the mayor of Regina; Mr. James Maddin, the mayor of 
Saskatoon, Mr. Paul Elder, mayor of Swift Current, Mr. Don 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

 

Schlosser, mayor of Weyburn, and Mr. Phil Devos, mayor of 
Yorkton. 
 
(14:30) 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that our respective officials have 
been able to work together to prepare The Cities Act. Jointly 
we’ve been able to lay the legislative foundation necessary to 
increase the autonomy of municipalities and to reflect the 
principles advocated by the cities, while meeting the objectives 
of this great province of ours. 
 
I particularly want to commend the work of Theresa Dust and 
Merrilee Rasmussen, on behalf of the cities, and the officials 
from my own department, Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs, and their colleagues in the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Within a very short period of time they transformed the cities’ 
proposals into significant new legislation now before our 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, the province is very much committed 
to increasing municipal autonomy, and reducing provincial 
involvement in the governance of our cities where there is no 
overriding provincial interest. 
 
We recognize that Saskatchewan’s city governments are in the 
best position to make local decisions for the benefit of their 
residents. The Cities Act is a further extension and recognition 
of this commitment, and Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out 
some of the things that this city Act will do. 
 
It will modernize the relationship between the province and the 
cities. It will enable city governments to encourage initiative 
and creativity, and it will provide citizens with better, more 
accountable local government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act introduces the principles of natural person 
powers and areas of jurisdiction, while at the same time 
incorporating important elements of our current urban 
legislation. 
 
Natural person powers will provide municipalities with the 
same legal powers as individuals or businesses and will enable 
a city to administer its corporate affairs with more flexibility. 
 
Areas of jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, will provide cities with more 
flexibility to govern, regulate, license, and deal with a variety of 
local matters and future issues within municipal jurisdiction as 
they arise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Cities Act also contains a clear statement of 
principle and municipal purpose. These sections help to define 
the new relationship between the province, the cities, and their 
residents in more meaningful ways. And this statement of 
principles and municipal purposes forms the basis of a new 
approach to city governments’ accountability. 
 
More specifically, as we strengthen the authority and flexibility 
of the city governments, Mr. Speaker, we are taking steps to 
ensure that cities are more accountable to their residents and 
taxpayers as opposed to being held accountable to the 
provincial government. In this vein — accountability to citizens 
— The Cities Act contains a number of measures that improve 

the accountability and transparency of city governments to the 
public and to ratepayers. 
 
Seven such measures are: first, a requirement for cities to 
establish an independent review body to investigate and report 
on administrative matters that are of concern to residents and 
ratepayers. 
 
Second, a simplified appeal process to provide a less onerous, a 
less intimidating process for persons who appeal their 
assessment without the aid of lawyers or appeal agents. 
 
Third, a requirement for councils to pass a public notice policy 
setting out the types of notice that the residents are entitled to 
receive before their city councils make certain decisions. This 
policy must be in place within 30 days of a city coming under 
this new Act. 
 
Fourth, requirements for public notice before a city council 
establishes an investment or purchasing policy, borrows or 
lends money, moves capital funds to operating, sets 
remuneration for council members, and sells land below market 
value. 
 
Fifth, annual requirement for cities to publicize their debt and 
debt limit along with their financial statements and auditor’s 
report. 
 
Sixth, a greater transparency related to utility pricing and 
investment strategy. 
 
And the seventh, more transparent rules regarding when a city 
council or council committee can meet in camera or close a 
meeting to the public. These and other measures will ensure that 
cities continue to be accountable to the people who elect them 
by encouraging and enabling public participation in the 
governance process. 
 
With respect to property assessment and taxation, Mr. Speaker, 
The Cities Act has essentially the same provisions as the other 
municipal Acts with a couple of exceptions. The Act provides 
cities with expanded authorities to raise revenues by levying 
additional special taxes on property to pay for a specific service 
or purpose that can be completed and that affected properties 
can pay for in one year. 
 
The Cities Act also contains a simplified assessment appeal 
process that owners may choose to use for all single family 
residences regardless of the assessment value and for any other 
property whose assessed value is under $250,000. We have 
included an opting-in provision in the legislation that requires a 
city council to pass a resolution to bring the city within the 
ambit of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this opting-in provision is important 
as it gives each city council the ability to decide when it is 
ready to come under this Act. The new Act requires significant 
local government administrative capacity. And not all of our 
cities may be ready at the same time. Councils will be able to 
make this choice about what they feel is best for their residents. 
The authority to supplement the Act with regulations has been 
included in a number of areas so that public interests may be 
protected if need be and local governments are accountable. 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

These will be prepared over the coming months in consultation 
with the cities, prior to the proclamation of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Cities Act is a significant piece of legislation 
that brings a fundamental change to province/city relationships. 
In this vein we think that some of the principles of this 
legislation can also strengthen other municipal governments. I 
encourage other municipalities — urban, northern, and rural — 
to look at this new legislation to determine whether aspects of 
the Act may be made applicable to them. 
 
Our cities, Mr. Speaker, have much to offer in terms of social, 
cultural, and economic development for this great province of 
Saskatchewan. We have listened to city officials’ requests to 
modernize the legislation they are governed by. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, accordingly, I’m proud to move second 
reading of Bill No. 75 — The Cities Act. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 
certainly appreciate the opportunity to offer a few remarks with 
respect to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to Bill No. 75 and then 
subsequently to Bill 76 which is related. 
 
We just want to say, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition 
that we appreciate the fact the government has brought forward 
this Bill in this session. And we support the initiative of this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We have also met with the cities, we have met 
with the city mayors, and we understand the need for this 
particular piece of legislation. That being said, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a commitment on this side of the House to deal with this 
legislation in a quick manner. 
 
But that being said, there are members on this side of the 
Assembly — there may be members on the government side — 
that wish to become involved in this discussion before it is 
moved quickly to Committee of the Whole. 
 
You know, from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you 
that my first awareness of the desire on the part of 
Saskatchewan cities to have this kind of legislation came when 
I was employed by the city of Swift Current. And the city 
council in Swift Current made it pretty clear that this is the 
direction that they wanted the province to move in. 
 
And I recall, Mr. Speaker, that on one occasion when the city of 
Swift Current hosted the city mayors and 
commissioners/managers in Swift Current, the management 
team at the city was involved in helping to organize that and 
attending the functions. And the arguments that were made by 
the cities for this was pretty clear. 
 
And let’s be very straightforward with respect to what’s 
happened here. This is an excellent example of the cities of this 
province who have really carried this issue from beginning to 
end. 

They developed the concept for the modernization of their own 
legislation. They fleshed out exactly what they thought that new 
legislation should say. They went to the extent of drafting a 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I think it forms much of the basis of what 
is presented here. There are some changes — we understand 
that. 
 
And of course the natural person powers represented in this Bill 
and the delivery of those to municipalities should the Bill . . . 
should the government proclaim it immediately after it’s 
passed, or when they do, is essential in terms of what the cities 
were striving for in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It does strengthen their authority. And so it should, Mr. 
Speaker. So should this body do exactly that. In fact many 
would say, and I would include myself among them, many 
would say that it is past time, past due that we would make 
these changes in this province. 
 
It is this level of government, this local level of government that 
deserves to have its authority strengthened more than any other 
level of government, Mr. Speaker. This is the level of 
government that has been the best fiscal stewards of the . . . of 
the public purse. This is the level of government that has 
balanced its books — that must balance its books. This is the 
level of government that doesn’t use free votes more often as 
though . . . as we would even like to see us take in terms of a 
small step in this legislature; they but use them all the time. 
That’s the function, of course, of local councils. 
 
This level of government more than any other deserves to have 
its authority strengthened, and that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition congratulates the government for introducing this 
Bill this session. We were hearing — and granted, it was 
perhaps mostly rumour; obviously things have changed over on 
the other side — but we were hearing that potentially we 
wouldn’t see this Bill this session, that there was more work to 
be done. 
 
But the minister has gone ahead and introduced it in this session 
so that it can be dealt with and passed this session and, for that, 
we are supportive. 
 
And with those brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will move that we, 
at this time, adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Cities Consequential Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Cities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, passage of The Cities Act 
will require some consequential amendments to existing 
bilingual Bills. Therefore, I rise today to move second reading 
of Bill No. 76, The Cities Act Consequential Amendments Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We want this Bill. It 
makes a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker, for this Bill, No. 76, 
obviously to travel with Bill 75 through the legislative process. 
And as a result, we will also be adjourning debate, Mr. Speaker. 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

 

Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2)/Loi de 2002 

modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation 
des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
stand today to speak to Bill No. 77, The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2). 
 
This Bill amends The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 
1997 which is the unproclaimed bilingual version of the current 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. 
 
Essentially, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 77 is the bilingual version of 
Bill No. 48, which I spoke to in this House on May 22. Just as a 
reminder, Bill No. 48 introduces a number of initiatives which 
will, first of all, enhance the Liquor and Gaming Authority’s 
accountability as a regulator. 
 
Next it will improve business and administrative practices 
related to liquor permits. It will also enhance the authority’s 
legislative basis for action in its role as distributor and regulator 
of the liquor and gaming industries in the province. And it will 
support the authority’s role in promoting the socially 
responsible use of liquor and gaming products. 
 
Bill 77 contains the same amendments and regulatory 
provisions and has the same intent. Mr. Speaker, I hereby move 
that Bill No. 77, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I listened carefully to the minister’s comments where 
he said that Bill 77 was simply a French translation of Bill No. 
48. 
 
If that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, I have to look at the Bill and 
wonder why is there English in the Bill if it’s simply a French 
translation of Bill No. 48. Or is the minister translating the 
French now into English, Mr. Speaker? And maybe that’s what 
he meant when it was a French translation, that he’s taking the 
French law now and translating it back into English again. 
Because if it’s simply a translation, Mr. Speaker, of Bill 48, 
then it should simply have French in the Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because the minister isn’t clear on what this 
Bill is about, there’s no way we can allow this to move ahead 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the minister was bringing in Bill 
48, and we have provisions for translation, to have both the 
English and the French Bills brought before this House 
together, Mr. Speaker, in the same Bill, why wasn’t it done in 
Bill 48? Is the minister’s department not competent enough to 
bring in one Bill dealing with the legislation that’s supposed to 
be done with, Mr. Speaker? 
 

You know, I looked through the Bill a little bit and I noticed the 
part that the minister mentioned, noticed the part the minister 
mentioned about fetal alcohol or the proper use of alcoholic 
beverages and gaming. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re also very concerned about fetal 
alcohol on this side of the House. In fact is my colleague, Mr. 
Speaker, from Kelvington has a Bill before the House dealing 
with that very issue, Mr. Speaker. Dealing with fetal alcohol . . . 
and the recognition . . . the recognition, Mr. Speaker, of fetal 
alcohol syndrome day to be on September 9. And I would ask 
that the members give consideration to that since they’re 
demonstrating also, Mr. Speaker, a concern in this Bill for fetal 
alcohol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues in this Bill that we 
need to go over to determine whether or not this is actually a 
direct translation of Bill No. 48, and it will ask the minister to 
clarify the need for English in this Bill if it is indeed just a 
direct translation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 61 — The 
Regional Health Services Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak to Bill No. 61 which is concerning the regional 
health authorities Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill has wide, sweeping powers and has the 
potential to change the very face of health care in 
Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, we fear that some of these 
changes will have a negative impact on health care in 
Saskatchewan. It will not be for the betterment of the people of 
Saskatchewan, nor will it improve the delivery of service. But 
what it will do is give almost unlimited power to the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our question is: how is this positive for the people 
across Saskatchewan who are in need of health care services? 
 
And what this Bill also continues to do is take away more 
community involvement and more of the decision making and 
put it into the hands of the Minister of Health. Again we see the 
NDP and its ministers having more and more say and 
controlling the very lives of the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Their record to date, Mr. Speaker, has not been very good. And 
I think they should consider the people of Saskatchewan that 
today are suffering needlessly because of the NDP’s inadequate 
response to the health care needs in our province. 
 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen, over the last 10-some years with the 
NDP, how they have changed how health care is delivered in 
Saskatchewan. And one of the major concerns is the loss of 
local input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1993, the NDP chose to close some 50 hospitals 
as well as the Plains hospital in Regina. The people especially 
in southern Saskatchewan are still suffering because of that 
closure. There was needless millions of dollars spent in the 
closure of the Plains hospital, and it’s yet to be shown to anyone 
in this province how it actually helped them, how it improved 
the delivery of health care. And I think you need go no further 
than to ask the doctors and nurses of this province how it has 
negatively affected the health care delivery in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only did it negatively affect people that 
were used to accessing the Plains hospital, but it also negatively 
. . . the closure negatively affected people throughout all of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, when the NDP chose to close hospitals, it 
very negatively affected the delivery that people were receiving 
in rural Saskatchewan. And it very much limited the local input, 
and my fear is that with this new Bill, it’s going to even further 
limit local input. 
 
One example of what happened in 1993 was in Bengough, 
which is in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, and at 
that time the NDP closed the hospital. I had the opportunity to 
be there in 1995 and to tour the hospital right after they had 
locked the doors. The beds were still in place, it looked like it 
was in full operation, but the place was vacant because the NDP 
had chosen to close it. 
 
And the people of Bengough had put away several thousand 
dollars — I believe, if my memory’s correct, around $50,000 — 
that they had saved. And they intended for that to be used 
towards improving their existing hospital. That money was 
taken by the district health board. There’s still questions today 
about what happened to that money. The people in Bengough 
certainly did not have any say in what happened to it, and it was 
taken from them. 
 
Radville became a health centre which one had . . . which once 
had acute care beds. Pangman did not lose their beds at the 
same time as Radville and Bengough did, but eventually they 
also lost their acute care beds. And so the result is that Weyburn 
is the only facility in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
that has acute care beds, and theirs have been greatly reduced 
over the years. 
 
And this is just an example of one constituency in 
Saskatchewan. The same has happened throughout all of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And our concern is that this . . . the 
changes now to regional health boards will again diminish the 
local input and the say that people have in what is going to 
happen in their own local centres, and how people in their 
communities are going to access health care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen, since the restructuring the last 
time, that health care has not improved but it has continued to 
decline. We have seen increased length of waiting times for 
surgery, for tests, to see specialists. We have seen the 

workplace deteriorate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I had occasion to speak to a specialist in 
Regina some month ago, and he told me of his concerns about 
the decline in the access to operating time in Regina, and the 
needless time that doctors are having to spend determining how 
they can work out who’s going to access hospital time, how 
they’re going to make it happen, if there are beds for recovery, 
if there are beds on the ward, and so on. They’re spending 
precious time that they could be using in the direct delivery of 
health care in order to try and administrate a system that is 
failing, and failing badly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when . . . it’s about I believe in . . . it is in 
the year 2001, when we had several nurses that worked at the 
emergency in Regina that came forward and voiced their 
concern to us, and this concern is still in place today. And I’d 
just like to quote from one nurse who said: 
 

We as nurses are put in very difficult position due to lack of 
staffing. We are unable to care for patients properly. We 
are not staffed to deal with the volume of patients who we 
keep for . . . 24 hours (plus). (Our) . . . unit is not designed 
for patients to stay long term. There will be more 
resignations throughout the district if staffing is not 
improved. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been the promise of the NDP since 1999 
when the nurses went on strike that they would improve the 
workplace, and yet today we see that the workplace has not 
improved. In fact it is in continual decline. We have seen nurses 
leaving, support staff leaving, and doctors leaving in increasing 
numbers. 
 
And what the result of this has been, even longer waiting lists 
and people that are needlessly suffering because they are not 
able to access care on a timely basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s also been a grave . . . great concern 
amongst doctors and nurses about the lack of adequate 
equipment, updated equipment and supplies. One doctor in 
Regina told me recently that they went for five years without 
any money at all in their budget for new equipment, and even 
something as small and what we might consider insignificant, 
but as scissors in the operating room that were not up to 
standard of what they should be using. 
 
And so we’re happy to see this year, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
additional dollars for equipment. Sadly some of the money has 
been spent on items that I think the people of Saskatchewan 
would probably not agree the dollars should have been spent on, 
such as ice machines and floor sweepers. And I would hope that 
the NDP would reconsider next time when they are using 
precious equipment dollars, where this will be spent. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have grave concern of people across 
Saskatchewan about the lack of input that is going to be allowed 
under the new regional health Act for input from local 
communities. As well, we do not see any indication that there 
will be input from doctors and nurses, people that work in the 
health care system, that could give very, very good advice to the 
people that are making these decisions and the restructuring of 
health care in Saskatchewan. 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

 

And many of these people have a wealth of information and 
their expertise and knowledge certainly should be put to use so 
that we can improve the health care system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not only heard from doctors and nurses 
but we have also recently heard from lab techs and X-ray 
technicians and other support staff who are suffering because of 
a lack of adequate staffing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill further erodes community involvement 
and services needed and required to carry out the duties in the 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP promised — and this has been a promise 
since back in the days when medicare was first introduced — 
that the people of Saskatchewan would have accessible, free 
health care for everyone no matter where they lived in 
Saskatchewan. And our concern is that the further you take 
away the involvement at the local level and it becomes into 
regional boards, that you’re going to have even less accessible 
health care, you’re going to have even less say and input, and 
people in the outlying areas are going to be forgotten in the 
fray. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is concern. The concern is being heard 
across the province about this. And, Mr. Speaker, especially in 
rural Saskatchewan people have been hard hit by health care 
reform in the past and so are very leery of what will happen 
now. 
 
But the ripple effect of the decline in health care services in 
rural Saskatchewan has been to cause grave concern for the 
people that live in our major centres of Regina and Saskatoon, 
because as services decline in rural Saskatchewan, people were 
pressed to come into Regina in order to access the care they 
required — not only in the hospital but also to see doctors, 
specialists, for tests and so on. 
 
And so it has put a very, very major strain on the whole system 
throughout the province. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been often brought to my attention, and I 
have spoke about this in the House previously, is that the whole 
issue that we have facilities throughout Saskatchewan where we 
have excellent doctors that are not able to perform to their 
utmost because they do not have any acute care beds. And they 
can only offer services such as seeing patients and then 
diagnosing them and moving them on to someone else should 
they require hospital care. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the Minister of Health 
would consider this and utilize these smaller hospitals and the 
expertise of the doctors that are there, and their willingness to 
serve the people of their area. Especially for cases for elderly 
people, seniors that want to stay in their hometown that 
sometimes require one or two days of hospitalization, and for 
younger children who need a short stay in the hospital for minor 
reasons and want to stay close to their families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Oberholzer of Radville is one doctor in 
this province and is a prime example of a doctor that has 

committed to his community and would certainly like to see 
some acute care beds added to his facility. And then that would 
free up time in Regina and Saskatoon, and free up beds for 
more critical cases. And, Mr. Speaker, we believe on this side 
of the House that that should certainly be something that should 
be looked at as far as health care reform. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I spoke to Dr. Oberholzer last week and he 
indicated to me that he has put together a proposal — in fact he 
gave me a copy. He had also some time ago sent it to the 
Minister of Health and had requested a meeting with the 
minister to discuss his proposals. This was before the health 
care reform and the regional health Bill was finalized. The 
minister refused to meet with Dr. Oberholzer. He indicated that 
he didn’t meet with individuals, he only met with groups. 
 
And I find that very appalling, Mr. Speaker, that a doctor in 
Saskatchewan — when we’re in such a short supply of doctors 
— a doctor who cares about his community and about the 
people of Saskatchewan who has an idea of how we can 
improve the health care services, would be denied a meeting 
with the Minister of Health. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the minister would still 
take into consideration the part that smaller centres throughout 
Saskatchewan can play in improving a health care delivery in 
our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today as the member from Melfort spoke 
about earlier, that we have a decline in nursing in Saskatchewan 
and it’s becoming very alarming and it is certainly having an 
influence on the health care delivery that we are . . . have come 
. . . that we want in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in Weyburn it’s very evident that we have a problem here. 
We have seen recently where the ICU (intensive care unit) has 
had to be closed because there were no nurses to staff it. We 
have EMTs (emergency medical technician) that work in the 
hospital now on the night shift especially, because there are not 
enough nurses to staff. Nurses are being denied holidays or else 
having their holidays cut short because there is no one to cover 
for them. 
 
And as the member for Melfort indicated, our nurses are 
working very, very, very many hours of overtime. They are 
working to exhaustion. They are denied holidays. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, nurses in this province and other health care 
workers do this because they believe in the people that they 
serve. They have a heart for the people. And I really believe that 
the nurses and support staff in the hospitals have what has held 
our health care system together at all in this province over the 
last few years because of their dedication to their job. 
 
And for the Minister of Health today to make jokes about the 
nursing profession and about the concern about the lack of 
nurses and that they are leaving our province because of 
workplace conditions that were promised to be improved in 
1999 — and have not to this day been improved, and in fact, 
they have steadily grown worse — I think it’s appalling that the 
minister would stand up and would take this kind of an 
approach to a very, very serious issue in our province. 
 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

And we are most fortunate that we have got the nurses, the 
nurses that are still here are here and that we . . . the service that 
they do provide. And we certainly do not need to be pushing 
any more of them out of this province by not appreciating them 
for what they have provided for us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the government, the NDP government, says 
that they believe in and that they promote rural revitalization. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, by taking more and more control about . . . 
away from people and diminishing their say and their delivery 
of health care in their areas, I do not believe that this is going to 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The key to survival and growth in rural Saskatchewan is to have 
services provided, such as hospitals and health service centres; 
and we need schools and highways. This government is 
determined to destroy all three. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must maintain these services in rural 
Saskatchewan if we are going to revitalize rural Saskatchewan. 
And one of the key cornerstones of that is a good health care 
system because people will not stay in, they will not move to, 
they will not start businesses in areas where there is not 
adequate health care services. 
 
And this is one of the things that people look at when they are 
going . . . determining if they should start a business or if they 
should expand their business. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . it gives us grave concern that 
less and less care is given to maintaining health services 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are long . . . have been the 
champions . . . have held themselves up of the champions of the 
poor and the less fortunate. And yet in many, many cases our 
health care system, delivery system, and how it has changed has 
affected the poor and the less fortunate more than anyone in 
Saskatchewan because they do not have the means to access 
services in larger centres. 
 
I know in my constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy that I have 
had people come to me and ask how they could access services 
in Regina and Saskatoon. They needed a means of 
transportation to get there. And not only do they need the means 
of transportation but they also then have the extra expense of 
food and lodging, and for many . . . in many instances if family 
members are in hospital for surgery and are in for several days, 
these people, their family has to find a way to be able to afford 
to stay there and be close to them because they are not able to 
be looked after in rural Saskatchewan in their homes and in 
their hometowns or communities any longer. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it is some of the less fortunate in our 
society that certainly have been ill-served by the movement of 
all services or the most important services to deal with health 
care, to the larger centres. And this doesn’t seem to be a 
concern of the NDP. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned before, that the Bill takes 
more control away from communities and into the hands of the 
minister. And this has not worked well in the past. People need 
to be empowered at the local level in order for them to be able 

to make decisions that directly affect them and their families 
and their communities. And when they have that empowerment, 
they get involved and they make things happen. 
 
And just one case that I’d like to bring to your attention, Mr. 
Speaker, is — and we see this in many communities — is local 
ambulance service where many communities have taken upon 
themselves the responsibility to ensure that they have a good 
ambulance service in their area. And they’ve done this through 
purchasing ambulances, through volunteers training to work on 
the ambulance, and coordinators volunteering to get . . . to look 
after making sure there’s always a volunteer in place, and so on. 
 
And I would just like to quote from an article that is in the 
Radville paper. And the heading is, “Radville EMS appreciates 
support.” And I quote: 
 

Radville EMS since its inception has enjoyed the support of 
Radville and area in a variety of forms including 
community fundraisers, personal and memorial donations. 
This letter is an opportunity for us to thank everyone who 
has contributed to this cause and gives the public an . . . and 
give the public an idea of what their donations have 
purchased. EMS staff need to review these donations and 
determine what equipment purchases would improve 
patient care and comfort. 

 
And then, it goes on to list who has given and what purchases 
they made. 
 
And at the end of the letter, it says: 
 

Radville EMS is proud to acknowledge these people in our 
community for their support. Without it, the operation of 
this service would not be possible. 
 
Sincerely, the staff of Radville EMS. 

 
And so, Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan and 
throughout Saskatchewan are willing to get together and to help 
provide services that this . . . the government has failed to 
provide for them. But they must feel that they have 
involvement, that they have some say, and that they are being 
listened to in order for them to take ownership of these issues 
and to buy into them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we see in this Bill is that the 
government is taking away local control and is putting the 
control into the hands of the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government talks about, in the Bill, 
community advisory boards and this is their answer to local 
input. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan, 
when they hear this, will be asking themselves: is this going to 
work as well as the transportation advisory committees that 
were put together some time ago by the NDP as an answer to 
local input? I know that in my constituency, many of the people 
that were asked to serve on those boards have since quit, thrown 
up their hands and said, I have no input anyhow so why am I 
wasting my time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned that the community advisory 
boards talked about in this legislation will fall under the same 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

 

category. And I have a concern that this will be just another 
buffer for the NDP government to deflect criticism and to 
assign blame to someone else, should blame fall. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess another question that is being asked 
is: who is making the decisions now? We have the district 
health boards that are still in place. But my understanding now, 
from speaking with people in my constituency yesterday who 
are involved in the committees, is that we now have regional 
planning committees that are making decisions. Now when I 
asked if they actually were making decisions, the answer was 
well, they’re not making decisions, they’re just making 
recommendations and then that they will pass these 
recommendations when they are actually the board in charge. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, as we know, decisions are being made 
and are being announced in the media and are being put 
forward, such as where administration offices are going to be in 
the new regional districts and where . . . who is going to be the 
CEOs (chief executive officer). So clearly, the regional 
planning committees who are, in essence, the new boards are 
making decisions and they have not been appointed as such yet. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is some concern at the local level that 
these meetings are being . . . meetings and decisions are being 
made behind closed doors, that the public has not had input, the 
public is denied access to these meetings as well as the media. 
And it is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that even the district 
boards that are still in place have also been denied access to the 
meetings, have not been asked to take part in the process. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s bringing many questions to mind in 
the local areas about, really, who is in charge and why they are 
being denied any input into what is going to transpire in the 
weeks and months ahead in the restructuring of health care in 
their areas. 
 
And it makes us wonder what kind of planning process would 
exclude the very people that the plan is being made for. And so 
it’s bringing into question what is going on with this 
government and what their real intent is. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there also refers to in the Bill about affiliates 
and the service provides . . . that they are going to be able to 
provide. And it is my understanding from reading the Bill that 
now affiliates are going to be under the authority of the Minister 
of Health, the same as every other health service provider in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have an affiliate in my constituency, the 
Radville Marion Home, who has had concerns previous to this 
Bill being introduced, about how they feel that their authority 
and their decision-making powers have been eroded from them. 
And this is going to, apparently, further erode their input and 
their decision making. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to the Committee of 
the Whole, when I’ll be able to ask the minister some direct 
questions about how affiliates will be affected by this. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, affiliates have raised millions of dollars 
in this province to provide health care. And they’ve created a 
very positive environment and have taken the onus upon 

themselves to provide this service. And it would be a very sad 
day for Saskatchewan people should the NDP somehow erode 
them of their responsibilities and their decision making. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the support of the idea for the 
regional health . . . I don’t believe that there’s probably too 
many in the province that would be opposed to the idea of 
regionalization if it means that we have a better health care 
delivery system. 
 
And we recognize the fact there has to be a decision made 
where specialized services are going to be performed . . . what 
is the responsibility of hospitals in smaller centres and so on.
  But the disconnect with the communities is the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We must give the authority and decision making to local people 
so that they can best serve the people in their communities. We 
do not believe that the control should be handed over to the 
Minister of Health and that the ability to make decisions is 
solely his. And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the Bill, three full 
pages are identifying regulations that can be made and changed. 
 
Now for the people of Saskatchewan who are not used to 
legislation and so on, they must understand that regulations are 
changed without coming before the legislature, without public 
input, without debate. And three full pages of this Bill list items 
in this Bill that can be changed and altered through regulations. 
And that is a very, very serious concern of mine and the 
members of this side of the House, and I’m sure will be of the 
people of Saskatchewan when they realize that this is what is 
happening. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to read from an article — this is 
actually almost a year ago now — that was written by Randy 
Burton, and it is called “NDP content to sit on its thumbs.” And 
I think it expresses the concern that we have for the health care 
system in Saskatchewan. And I quote: 
 

For years, if not generations, the NDP in this province has 
successfully propagated the myth that only it can be trusted 
to protect medicare. This was an article of faith amongst 
party members and MLAs during the triumphant days in 
opposition during the ’80s and even during the early ’90s 
when cabinet ministers claimed the NDP’s ownership of 
medicare justified their cuts. At the time they could at least 
claim they had a plan to reform the system, while they were 
busy balancing the budget. That notion has long since been 
abandoned and urgent problems are left to languish. 
 
Desperately trying to craft his image in the mould of 
Tommy Douglas, Premier Lorne Calvert may be 
remembered as the man who presided over the death of his 
idol’s dream. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is grave concern throughout all of 
Saskatchewan because of the health care system that people are 
asked to live under. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, I believe that 
many people have grown apathetic to what’s going on. They’ve 
come to accept the waiting length . . . the time of wait that they 
have for surgery, for tests, to see a specialist. And it’s a sad 
commentary on what is going on in the province that was the 
founder of medicare that we have come to this, Mr. Speaker, 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

where we cannot provide care for the people of this province. 
 
And as an MLA, and I’m sure that most members of the 
Legislative Assembly also receive on a daily basis horror stories 
from people in Saskatchewan who have received inadequate 
service from the health care delivery system that we have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the NDP made promise after 
promise of what they would do to improve health care in 
Saskatchewan. And the heading of their platform was, We’ll 
Improve Health Care with More Staff and Service 
Commitments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they indicated that they would improve care 
by adding 500 more health care providers and we all know that 
that certainly has not happened. In fact we have lost, I believe, 
it’s around 1,200 workers since that time. 
 
They also promised that they would have publicly funded 
ambulance service. And to quote from their promise in the 
election campaign: 
 

We’ll introduce a single reasonable fee for ambulance 
services. And we’ll begin to reduce ambulance charges 
throughout the province — starting by eliminating all fees 
for transfers between health (care) institutions. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that that has not happened. Mr. 
Speaker, key — another promise — key service commitments: 
 

We’ll work with health providers to ensure that key service 
standards are met for all patients. Three key priorities: 
 
All patients arriving at emergency rooms will get a 
preliminary evaluation by a health provider within 15 
minutes of arrival; 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that that’s not happened. I had 
occasion to visit an emergency ward in Regina about two weeks 
ago and the sign up in the emergency ward is, you know, giving 
two to three to four hours of time that you would have to wait. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another promise was waiting times for key 
surgical procedures will be cut by at least 30 per cent over the 
next four years. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that that certainly 
has not happened. 
 
And I hear the members opposite talking about emergency and 
the care that’s given there. And it certainly is not . . . has any 
reflection on the people that work in emergency. It is because 
they are . . . have a staff shortage. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, now in Regina and Saskatoon, in the aisles 
we have permanent beds there. At one time when I’ve did . . . 
when I visited the hospitals in 1999 they had them temporarily 
and they’d say, well this is where we have a bed set up in the 
aisle for today. But now when you go they actually have the 
numbers on the walls. They are permanent fixtures, Mr. 
Speaker, because they do not have enough beds to look after the 
people. And if the members opposite would care to go and see 
for themselves and visit a hospital in Regina or Saskatoon, they 
would find that this in fact is true. 

And, Mr. Speaker, so the promises of 1999 campaign certainly 
have not been kept. And, Mr. Speaker, another promise is . . . 
was that they would fair and improved access to health care 
services, and I guess that’s what this whole Bill is supposed to 
be proposing and making available. But this was a promise in 
1999 and it . . . I quote from their campaign promise: 
 

Over the next four years, we’ll continue to work to improve 
services in communities across the province — ensuring 
that services are available to people as close as possible to 
where they live. Some of the services that we will be 
protecting or expanding in all parts of the province include: 
 
Basic medical and emergency services 
 
Diagnostic services such as lab testing, x-rays, and CT 
scans 
 
Asthma programs 
 
Obstetrics and follow-up care for children 
 
Women’s health services such as breast cancer screening 
and improved treatment for heart disease and stroke 
 
Early childhood intervention services 
 
Diabetes and renal dialysis programs 
 
Improved mental health services. 

 
In fact what we’ve seen in the mental health system is that they 
have a cut in the money that is . . . that they can access for 
services. It certainly has not been improved. And if you go 
down the list, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that most people in 
Saskatchewan could attest to that these promises have not been 
kept. In fact conditions have not improved, they have 
deteriorated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another promise was that they would 
improve working conditions. And we know today that by 
reading the paper and the comments from the RNs that this 
certainly has not helped. And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if any of 
these promises have been kept and no wonder there is contempt 
for the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are waiting; many are 
suffering on waiting lists. Many whose quality of life has been 
very negatively affected and many whose families have also 
been negatively affected. And sadly to say, Mr. Speaker, some 
people have lost their lives in this province because they could 
not access adequate health care service on a timely basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, many people have had to go out of province 
and out of country to access health care services, because they 
had to make a decision whether they would sit here in 
Saskatchewan and wait their turn to access service or whether 
they would pay, after they’ve paid taxes all their life, and they 
had to decide if they would pay again to go somewhere else to 
access service. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just spoke to a lady yesterday from the 
town of Bengough who was put in this very situation, who had 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

 

to go to the Mayo Clinic because she could not access the 
appropriate treatment in Saskatchewan. In fact, we did not even 
have a doctor in Saskatchewan who could perform the very 
specialized surgery that she needed. And she did not have the 
time to sit around and find out and get approval — she had four 
days that she was given to get to the Mayo Clinic — and is now 
hoping that she can be paid for those services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this is the kind of situation that people are faced in 
Saskatchewan, they have to decide to go ahead and spend a 
lifesavings in order to access the care they need. And, Mr. 
Speaker, sadly we have grown apathetic and we have accepted 
this as a way of life, and it’s a sad commentary on the NDP 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are many other of my colleagues who 
want to speak to this Bill because of the huge impact that it’s 
going to have in their constituencies and our concern about 
more and more power and control being put in the hands of the 
Minister of Health and into the hands of government, and less 
and less control by the local communities and less say in how 
health services will be delivered. 
 
So at this time, I would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. No. 62 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 62 — The Health 
Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 
apportant des modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur 
la santé be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak to Bill No. 62 which is a consequential 
amendment to the . . . that is tied to Bill 61. And so, we have 
asked that these Bills be stayed together . . . or to . . . that they 
stay together and we speak to them at the same time. And so we 
will move to adjourn debate on Bill 61 as well . . . or 62 as well. 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag Bill No. 57 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to stand 
in the House today to address Bill No. 57, an Act which deals 
with a number of critical changes to the automobile accident 
insurance in Saskatchewan. 
 
On June 7, the minister briefly outlined these changes in regards 
to the new Safe Driver Recognition program and the new tort 
system which be optional to the present no-fault system. 
 
I would like to talk today about the various aspects contained in 
this Bill, along with some questions which are very important in 

defining this new legislation. First of all, the new Safe Driver 
Recognition program, since the recent provincial mail-out to 
our residents which promoted this new program, my office has 
had several inquiries about the limitations of the program. The 
safe driver program provides good drivers with a very modest 7 
per cent or less reduction in licensing cost depending on the 
point system. We see that poor drivers receive points against 
this system and so they will have to pay extra. 
 
While the fundamental point system is something that 
Saskatchewan drivers have been calling for, most people 
thought that the program, however modest it might be, should 
be applied for all vehicles licensed in this province. Right now, 
this bonus program applies only to private vehicles and farm 
class vehicles. 
 
The business owners in Arm River constituency are not happy 
about being left out of the process. Certainly, they agree that the 
private citizens and struggling farmers be given the break that 
they need in these uncertain economic times. But they are 
asking to be included in this program. Many of these businesses 
are enduring economic hardships as well. And they want to 
have available the same kind of reductions that apply to all the 
rest of the citizens in Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many truckers that drive many years and never have a 
single traffic violation. This is quite a feat considering the 
amount of hours that they spend on the road each week, and 
given the fact that the licensing fees they’re assessed represent a 
major operating expense for their trucking company. 
 
I would like to ask the minister, that while he states that 72 per 
cent of the province’s vehicle population and two out of three 
vehicle owners will receive a discount in their vehicle 
insurance, what is his reason for the business owners and 
truckers to be shut out of this program? 
 
What I would suggest is that we’re seeing more of what this 
government does best, and that is not to support in any way 
private businesses who wish to succeed and produce jobs for 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it is clear that the only way that the other 28 per cent of the 
province’s vehicles that are not covered by this new program 
will get coverage is maybe to create a new Crown corporation, 
then maybe they will be covered. 
 
There are also questions arising from people that in the habit 
. . . that are in the habit of an annual renewal of their vehicle 
licence. Of course before changes were made to allow for 
optional payments every three months — and every month now 
— people in this province were used to paying their licence 
plates up for a full year. And there are still many residents who 
prefer this method of paying in full on their renewal date. 
 
However it’s been determined that if your renewal is today for 
example, in the month of June, you will not receive any 
discount on this annual renewal unless it is renewed after July 
1, 2002. 
 
We live in the computer age, so what is so hard about applying 
the 7 per cent discount in advance for the 11 months that 
applies to the annual renewal? I guess that it’s just another way 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

this government attempts to draw more money out of those who 
can afford to renew annually. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a curious case of the fee 
structure presently used by SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) in case of a licence plate transfer. This would be a 
case that no doubt will be repeated in the next few months. 
 
I have a constituent who is retired and no longer able to drive. 
He no longer has a driver’s licence due to health problems. 
Now presently he has always registered his car in his name and 
his wife drives the car. This constituent inquired about the 
discount on his vehicle licence only to find out that he does not 
qualify because he has no driver’s licence. 
 
The only way to get the discount is to transfer the car to his 
wife’s name. The fee for this is $20. But there’s a little more to 
this than that. The licence plates were personalized and for the 
transfer into his wife’s name there was another $20 fee. That 
makes $40 in total fees so that they can take advantage of a 7 
per cent discount in the wife’s name. The discount on his $500 
annual licence plate renewal is $35. 
 
So when you look at this situation, the gentleman’s actually 
paying $5 more to get the discount for this year. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I said that this won’t be that uncommon, given that many 
seniors residing in our province today. It may also apply to 
disabled people who do not have a driver’s licence. They own 
and plate a car, hire a driver, and have no one to transfer the 
plates to so as to obtain the discount. This definitely is 
something that the minister will have to address as time goes by 
with his new discount program. 
 
There are many aspects in this Bill which look at the whole 
no-fault insurance program that this government put in place in 
1995. The minister said in his comments on June 7 that, quote, 
“no program is perfect.” And I think that all of us here on the 
opposition side agree that the . . . with the minister that no-fault 
insurance was far from perfect. 
 
Indeed the hard-working members of the Coalition Against 
No-fault Insurance have been telling this government for years 
about the serious problems with the no-fault insurance presently 
in place. The premier option that this government seems to be 
adopting is one that the coalition has been advocating ever since 
no-fault was put in place seven years ago. 
 
Many people with severe . . . with serious injuries calls . . . 
caused by at-fault parties have received far from adequate levels 
of compensation for the tragic . . . tragedy that have been . . . 
that they have been through, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Any avenues 
to pursue additional compensation for their injuries were far and 
. . . were few and far between. Now at least we’re seeing some 
light at the end of the tunnel for these people. 
 
The minister indicated that medical and rehab limits have been 
increased from half a million to 5 million and are retroactive to 
those that have been seriously injured since January 1, 1995. 
Well this increase, for those with serious injuries as a result of a 
car crash, clearly we must look at the difference between the 

two amounts and declare that this alone indicates how much 
this government has failed injury claimants in the last seven 
years. 
 
But when you look at the Bill and when you look at the issue of 
the maximum permanent impairment benefit, we see only a 
modest increase to 175,000 from the current benefit of 143,000. 
I would certainly like a clearer statement from the minister on 
how this will be achieved . . . will achieve in any way the 
quality of life for someone who is severely, permanently 
impaired by giving him only $32,000 more for the same injury. 
You know clearly on this Bill the minister’s math is 
inconsistent in certain regards of this Bill. 
 
We see that, also looking at this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, see 
that the income replacement benefit now pays up to 90 per cent 
of net income based on a maximum gross salary of $58,000 per 
year. Now this would appear, on the surface at least, to cover a 
broad range of incomes that would be normal and are economic 
today. However, we must be very careful when this government 
talks about paying up to 90 per cent of net income. I believe the 
words up to 90 per cent are like a lottery that you can win up to 
100,000, when in fact you may only win $10,000 at the end of 
the day. 
 
So I’d like to see some more clarification on when the 90 per 
cent figures apply to injury claimants. 
 
Also, the minister in his second reading speech talks about 
taking into account the personal situations for injured people 
such as caregivers, self-employed, and also people in the 
farming sector. The new insurance program would reportedly 
provide a benefit that allows them to hire apparently substitute 
workers to keep the business going. A business owner that 
cannot continue his business because of injury will be entitled 
for compensation for a limited time for what the government 
terms as fixed expenses, which continue after the accident. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to see a clearer idea of 
what these fixed expenses would be, and how the affected 
businesses would be compensated in this situation. Would it be 
enough for the injured business owner to discontinue the 
business without a significant loss? I’m wondering, you know, 
about that point. 
 
And when we see another proposed change that would indicate 
that an injury claimant would receive an income replacement of 
no less than the industrial average wage, now this, now this 
could be quite an increase over the current minimum benefit 
which is basically minimum wage. Hardly a wage that would 
look after the extra expenses that an injured person would have. 
Hopefully the minister will give us an idea of what the 
industrial average wage would be, according to this 
government. 
 
Bill 57 also includes some proposed changes to the death 
benefit provided to surviving spouses and dependent children. 
The proposal would calculate death benefits based on the 
income for the year prior to a person’s death. Now the minister 
adds that this will allow for a lost job or an on leave at the time 
of the accident. Certainly we have to provide as much of a death 
benefit that we are able in these tragic circumstances. But we 
cannot outline a death benefit simply based on one year’s 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

 

previous income. 
 
What if the reverse is true? What if the accident victim had been 
unemployed or on leave the year before; and further had he 
been working this year at a very good paying job when the 
accident occurred? Then I guess we would just have to declare 
that this person had bad luck, and I believe we have to base the 
accident victim’s income on the best-case scenario perhaps 
allowing for a review of three years income instead of one 
year’s income. I’m hoping that the minister looks at that. 
 
Death benefits to dependants of low wage earners will be 
provided with a death benefit compatible to federal support 
guidelines for a minimum wage earner. We would hope that 
these benefits would treat the afflicted family with compassion 
and not simply a need to look at the unfortunate low wages the 
victim was receiving. 
 
Disabled dependants over 21 will also receive these death 
benefits. And I must state for the record that the death benefit in 
this situation will hopefully address the needs of the disabled 
adult who suffers a loss as tragic as this. We see in this 
legislation that there is an increased death benefit provided to 
parents of a child under 21 who dies in a motor vehicle 
accident. More will be provided I understand in the Bill for 
funeral expenses, counselling for the surviving spouse, and 
grief counselling for the entire family. In a tragedy, you know 
such as this, I guess any extra assistance is welcome. 
 
So I would ask the minister in this case just what would be the 
defining elements of this case. Would it apply to all children 
under 21 that are riding in the vehicle or driving . . . or for that 
matter driving the car that is declared to have caused the 
accident, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Exactly what would happen here 
isn’t that clear and I guess maybe hopefully some of these 
questions can be answered later in this session under Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
Looking at the Bill, looking at the issue of lawsuits and the right 
to sue for pain and suffering, we all know that in the no-fault 
years there was very little opportunity to go to the legal system 
to obtain any additional benefits for a car accident victim. Now 
we see this government finally realizing that a limited amount 
of legal compensation is needed so the extreme cases of injury 
are properly compensated. 
 
We can start off by looking at the impaired driving . . . drivers 
who cause an accident. People injured as a result of these 
convicted drivers will have the right to sue the at-fault 
individual for pain and suffering, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
impaired driver — looking at the Bill — will be denied a 
permanent impairment benefit as well and if this is their second 
offence in five years they’ll be denied income replacement 
benefits. 
 
Now hopefully this will serve as a deterrent to those individuals 
who drink and drive, I guess, without worrying. But you know 
talking about that though, there are also many questions that 
arise when we look at why this government decided to return to 
a tort legal avenue as an option to the no-fault insurance 
program. The NDP has known for many years now that many 
innocent people have fallen through the numerous holes in the 
no-fault insurance plan. The number of cases has steadily risen 

as documented over the number of years which the members 
opposite would be quite aware of. 
 
Since 1995 the legal options to obtain extra benefits for those 
that have been victimized are so limited they were hardly worth 
pursuing. It would be interesting to examine whether this 
government has realized that compassion and understanding 
were notably absent in no-fault or whether political motives 
were at the heart of this dramatic shift in insurance policies. 
 
I’d like to talk a little more about the troubling aspects we have 
with Bill 57. But I also want to get back to some of the 
amendments in some detail. One of the scenarios described in 
this Bill is regarding intentional acts, that is drivers who 
intentionally use their vehicle to deliberately harm a person. 
 
Now no one would want to admit in our society today the 
possibility of this kind of criminal violence exists in our 
province. However, there are these kinds of problems and they 
are numerous enough to be mentioned in Bill 57. 
 
Now of course a driver who’s convicted, if I understand right, 
of using their vehicle to intentionally cause injury will be 
treated severely. This person will be denied both income 
replacement and permanent impairment benefits. And a victim 
now, now will have the right to proceed legally against this 
individual for pain and suffering which . . . many individuals 
over the number of years have been calling for that. 
 
You know, the question which can arise would be some sort of 
a clear statement which indicates whether the person who is 
harmed falls into categories of either pedestrian, or an innocent 
driver of the other vehicle, or of course innocent people who 
were in the vehicle of the convicted driver himself. 
 
Another amendment deals with . . . third parties will also be 
liable if it is determined that their negligence contributes to a 
car accident. The minister talked in his second readings about 
these third parties such as vehicle manufacturers, mechanical 
repairs, and parts suppliers, as well as licensed drinking 
establishments. We hope that the government has included 
enough guidelines so that certain definitions of liable third 
parties will be clearly stated in our justice system. If too much 
interpretation is required, then innocent third parties could be 
caught up in a legal battle in which neither the victim nor the 
defendant would be well served. 
 
As well as another issue that it deals with is mechanical failure, 
which in most cases is not difficult to detect but in some 
instances it can be. 
 
The whole issue of responsibility, also, of the average hotel 
owner in contributing to car crash has and probably will remain 
a serious debate in this province. In short we need to have the 
needed clarifications for the bar owners, then many difficult 
situations where the amount of liquor served would not be an 
issue which would tangle up the legal system for many years 
and which can happen in many cases. I think that’s something 
the minister should be addressing at that end. 
 
Also a look at proposed changes to the appeal system definitely 
needs to be worked on. The minister has stated that they’re 
developing a new appeal system which should be in place early 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

next year. 
 
Now currently an injured person can dispute any decision from 
SGI by requesting an internal review, also optional mediation, 
or applying to the Court of Queen’s Bench. The new proposal 
would include an independent appeal tribunal which forwards a 
report to a different minister of the Crown. The question that 
would be obvious here is, how would this proposal be any 
better if you have all the ministers sitting around the same 
cabinet table? There’s no doubt that different cabinet minister 
would be discussing the issue with the minister responsible for 
SGI. 
 
So I don’t see how this appeal can be called independent if you 
think of this situation in the terms I just spoke about. But of 
course this seems to be the way this government thinks or 
handles a lot of things these days — a review by the NDP for 
the NDP and about the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another issue we talked about that deals in this Bill is the 
premier option that has been put forward by the Coalition 
Against No Fault Insurance. Now it represents a compromise 
between a right to sue for unlimited benefits to a system which 
has certain limitations but still gives the injured person the right 
to sue, if I understand right, an at-fault party for pain and 
suffering. 
 
Now the minister’s gone to great lengths to indicate that the 
premier option and no fault option will be similarly priced. 
However the limits that the premier option sets may be closely 
examined to ensure that the victims are fairly compensated 
when they pursue legal action in any injury case. 
 
Also dealing with the two systems, I’ve talked to a couple of 
people that sell insurance and they don’t even know how 
exactly it’s going to work. Is it going to be up to them to 
explain which system to work? They want to know . . . 
naturally, hopefully there will be courses on it. But they really 
don’t want to get into the advising of which, which one to go, 
because if an accident occurs further down the road, naturally 
the person will be coming back to the person that sold them the 
insurance and say well, why did you talk me into that plan? I 
would have been better off under this plan. 
 
So there’s lots of questions there that have been raised just to 
my office when this was first announced at the beginning of the 
year that they’d be going to it. I had quite a few people that sold 
insurance — SGI agents, independent brokers — that are very, 
very concerned about this coming up. 
 
Another thing they were talking about is a deductible that 
would be in the amount of 5,000, the reason I guess being to 
keep nuisance case of pain and suffering awards to a minimum. 
 
Now we certainly don’t want to see our provincial court system, 
you know, burdened with lots of petty little cases, yet we also 
must ensure that the people who have larger and perhaps more 
pressing injuries to get the needed resources, that they may get 
on with their lives. 
 
The government still has in place, I believe, defined benefits for 
injured person regarding who is at fault. Whether these defined 
benefits are adequate is still certainly a question. When we look 

at the tort option, we see that lost wages will be paid up to $300 
per week. This amount is certainly very low when we look at 
the costs the average Saskatchewan family is looking at these 
days. 
 
When we talk about families, I see that there is provisions for 
homemakers and those not employed if they are injured. And I 
think it’s been a long time coming that this government realize 
the contributions of homemakers, caregivers, farmers, people 
that are in the system, you know, that maybe aren’t under a 
wage, and it’s kind of hard to define exactly how they . . . what 
kind of a wage they have. So I’m glad that they’re looking at 
that, you know, and that’s something that should have been 
looked at years ago. This government always seems to be fairly 
far behind. It always seems to be us that has to remind them to 
be looking at stuff like this. 
 
Another benefit, another option in looking at that Bill there, I 
see that $150,000 when a person suffers catastrophic injuries. 
Now I’d like to see a clearer definition of the word for that, 
what they call that kind of injuries. Because once again, any 
ill-defined term which is used in a court of law could end up in 
endless, endless legal wrangling, Mr. Speaker, and basically 
less benefits to the affected person as a result of higher legal 
fees. 
 
But even this money could be inadequate as the medical costs 
are constantly on the rise, and also if a person needs to be 
treated out of province. And with this government it seems to 
be that there has to be more and more the case unfortunately, 
the way the medical system and the way they handle it in this 
province has been going. 
 
Another aspect I would like to talk a little bit about the Bill is 
the death benefits. Through the tort, would be available to the 
surviving spouse for a minimum of 45,000 as well as the death 
benefit for dependent children to equal 5 per cent of the weekly 
income of the deceased. 
 
Now I don’t have a problem with death benefits, which of 
course would be sorely needed by any surviving family, 
especially with dependent children. This tragic you know 
situation is well beyond the issue of money when it occurs in 
many cases suddenly. You know we as . . . unfortunately in this 
province many people live in hard economic times and many 
families are struggling as it is. 
 
The minister also talks about benefits provided for those who 
suffer also permanent injuries as a result of an accident to a 
maximum of $10,000. 
 
Now we see that the minister, in the second reading, repeats 
itself in talking about injuries with a maximum permanent 
impairment benefit rising to $130,000 in this event. 
 
This certainly lends to quite a bit of interpretation by you know 
. . . could lead to quite a bit of interpretation by lawyers and our 
legal system. This government does not seem to realize that it 
must define terminology of this new program or the law system 
will be bogged down in lawsuits which will not benefit anybody 
in the long run. 
 
The minister also talks about indexing the benefits to the cost of 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

 

living. This indexing would apply to both forms of insurance 
coverage. While indexing the benefits would seem to be a fairly 
straightforward idea within the bounds of no-fault insurance, I 
would ask the minister how would he be indexing the benefits 
of the tort system when all that is known is a minimum and 
maximum amounts that are awarded? What is the . . . What are 
the same percentage? Will they apply to any award under the 
tort system? 
 
There is also a provision that any injured person would be able 
to sue for economic losses, that being the losses incurred a 
result of a collision above defined benefits. Certainly this could 
be seen as a very grey area. However there must of course be 
some allowances for economic loss in the event of a car 
accident injury. 
 
The minister kept stressing that the 5,000 deductible will keep 
any such nuisance case out of our legal system. In any event, 
however, there are a few lawyers which would offer advice to 
ask for anything but an amount far higher than this deductible 
so as to obtain enough benefits for their client, and for the legal 
fees that would be required to pursue a case through the court. 
 
The minister also talked about the ability of parents being able 
to make the decision on behalf of their children for the no-fault 
or the premier option of car accident insurance. It is very 
important that parents have this option as they should have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The question here: what would happen in the event of a divorce 
or separation or when there’s a question of a custody before the 
courts? Who in this instance would be responsible making the 
decision on behalf of the children? What would happen to 
dependent, adult children who are disabled and otherwise 
unable to make this critical decision on their own? 
 
Another issue that has been brought up is — and I don’t think 
this Bill addresses it — is an exemption for municipalities for 
liability in cases other than when there’s gross negligence 
involved. Over the past year or two there have been cases where 
individuals have taken rural, urban municipalities to court over 
instances that simply did not warrant the excessive drain on 
municipal budgets. In order that we can protect the viability of a 
municipal government, we must include this kind of language 
in any legislation where the ability to sue is an issue. 
 
You know, I’m not talking about a serious case of neglect 
where a municipal government or an urban government is 
clearly to blame, but basically a lot of legal wrangling could, 
you know, very well break a municipal government. So that’s 
. . . and that has been . . . I’ve had numerous calls or different 
RMs have talked to us about that, and they’re not that happy 
that that’s not included in this Bill. They would like to see some 
changes coming up or some clarifications on that, Mr. Speaker, 
you know. 
 
Quite clearly, you know, there are several nagging questions 
that bear repeating. We need to have the definition of a person 
injured in the accident. And would that include a pedestrian, the 
people in the victim’s car, and the people who are driving with 
the at-fault driver? I would like to see this part of the legislation 
completely clarified. 
 

In . . . (inaudible) . . . there are parts of this legislation that do 
need some work, and I’m hoping the members opposite will 
take a look at it. I’ve had other members talk about the different 
options, but I’d like to kind of talk — the Bill itself, and it is a 
quite lengthy Bill — to point out some of the legal problems 
that could arise from it. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I have . . . I know there are other 
members that would like to address this Bill, so I will adjourn 
debate right now. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 70 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 70 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
to enter into this debate. And may I say at the outset that when 
the NDP was in the opposition, they were strong proponents of 
fall sessions of the legislature which would introduce the key 
Bills for the session and then adjourn so that there could be time 
for reflection and public debate prior to coming back to the 
spring session at which the formal debate in the House would 
occur and Bills could then be voted on and passed or amended. 
 
Unfortunately as the NDP moved from opposition to 
government, they abandoned what I think was a very sound 
policy. And what we have instead found is that in the present 
session — we came into session in March — with the exception 
of the budget, we have dealt with quite trivial, irrelevant 
legislation up until well on into June. And in June the 
significant pieces of legislation, including labour standards, the 
hog barn Bill before us today; the ethanol Bill; the no-fault Bill 
that was before us today; and the regional health, the new health 
regions Bill came before us way late in the session, obviously in 
the hope that everyone would be tired of debate, tired of the 
session, and these Bills would be passed without serious debate. 
 
And I think that is not productive of a healthy democracy. It’s 
not productive of healthy debate. It is undermining this 
Assembly. And it is, of course, contrary to what the NDP said 
they believed in when they were in opposition. 
 
Now if I may address my colleagues on the opposition side, the 
Saskatchewan Party now says that it is in favour of fall 
sessions, it is in favour of placing significant legislation on the 
table so that it can be debated and discussed — not only in here, 
but in the province as a whole — rather than holding back 
significant pieces of legislation until the dying days of the 
session and then all of a sudden whipping it out. 
 
This is not the way to do it, and I would hope that the 
Saskatchewan Party would stand by its principles in the event 
that they become government and not follow the NDP of saying 
one thing in opposition and doing something very different in 
government. 
 
Well that said, the legislation before us would bring hog barn 
workers under the provisions of The Labour Standards Act. 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

This is not unique or new in the sense that there are already 
some other agricultural workers under the provisions of The 
Labour Standards Act. 
 
These include workers in egg hatcheries, greenhouses and 
nurseries, and brush-clearing operations, and now, as I say, hog 
barn operations. Mr. Speaker, Labour Standards Act is to 
provide the minimal worker rights in our province. 
 
There has been an historic exemption for those workers on 
family farms. They do not come under The Labour Standards 
Act. So the question then becomes, are workers in commercial 
hog operations do they follow the family farm model or do they 
follow the industrial model? 
 
I think it is self-evident that commercial hog operations are not 
family farm, they are industrial, and therefore I support this 
legislation before us this afternoon. I wish to say that I, myself, 
and my party are not among those on this side of the House who 
believe that the decline of western civilization can be dated 
from the introduction of laws against child labour during the 
Industrial Revolution. 
 
The essential point about commercial hog operations is that 
they follow regular scheduled shifts. And that’s what makes 
them industrial. And that of course is why the family farm has 
not been under labour standards, because you cannot run a 
family farm under scheduled hours of work and regular shifts. 
That’s not the way a family farm operates. 
 
But it is the way industry operates and it is the way commercial 
hog operations operate. So granting workers in commercial hog 
operations these minimal guarantees that all other workers in 
the province have, only makes sense to my way of thinking. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Now members of the opposition have said, quite correctly, that 
there are commercial operations, commercial hog operations 
which already guarantee to their workers rights equal to or 
superior to those rights contained in The Labour Standards Act. 
Well while that is correct, my only answer to that is that those 
commercial hog operations which are already granting to their 
workers those rights contained in the Act are not affected by 
this Act. It will have no impact on them whatsoever. 
 
It has also been pointed out by members of the Saskatchewan 
Party that some commercial hog operations are under union 
agreements. And there again, if commercial hog workers are 
under union agreements, this Act will have no impact on them 
whatsoever. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party says we need to build rural 
Saskatchewan. And I hope that is a statement which has the 
support of every member of this House. However, surely, Mr. 
Speaker — surely, Mr. Speaker, we are increasing rural 
Saskatchewan, we are building Saskatchewan, when we give 
workers in rural areas the same workers’ rights as workers 
elsewhere. And when we try and deny workers basic rights, we 
make rural Saskatchewan a less attractive place to live and to 
work. And I would ask my friends in the Saskatchewan Party to 
bear that in mind when they vote. 
 

If you want people to live in rural Saskatchewan, you want 
people to build lives and careers in rural Saskatchewan, then 
give those workers the same basic rights as workers elsewhere 
have, particularly when you are dealing with what is a 
commercial and industrial operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this case, I do find myself in agreement with 
one proposal before this House that comes from the NDP 
government and I say in terms of the Labour minister, that 
bringing forth this piece of legislation is proof that even a 
stopped clock is right twice a day. But I think that they have 
gotten it wrong in most circumstances but, on this occasion, I 
believe — I believe that this is not the family farm when you 
have massive commercial hog operations. This is the industrial 
model. The industrial model follows the basic laws of The 
Labour Standards Act. 
 
Now the only . . . now the Saskatchewan Party has also said, 
what if the owners of the operation — there are several of them 
— and then they have one employee so they get up to the 
minimum number to be a commercial hog operation. Well of 
course the answer to that is simple. Owners aren’t employees. 
Employees are employees, owners are owners. 
 
So I simply do not think, I do not think that giving rural 
workers, workers in rural Saskatchewan, the same basic rights 
as other commercial and industrial workers is any more likely 
to destroy this province than the minimum wage laws and the 
child labour laws that I know some of my friends over here find 
so destructive, but I must say I do not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say, on behalf of the Liberal Party, that 
while we are in opposition to the NDP’s use of the Crown 
corporations to drive private business out of this province, the 
way they have undermined investment in this province, the way 
they have undermined economic development in this province, 
that notwithstanding Liberal opposition to the way the NDP has 
failed to manage economic development in Saskatchewan, that 
we are not members of the Flat Earth Society. 
 
Now the one point that has been made by the Saskatchewan 
Party is that it would be very, very destructive if The Labour 
Standards Act was applied to the family farm. And I am in 
agreement that you cannot run a family farm according to 
regular shift work — that’s the way it is. 
 
However it is illogical to vote against this Bill on something 
that is not before us on the basis that it may some day and at 
some undefined time in the future be before us. If there is an 
amendment at some time before us to bring family farm 
employees under The Labour Standards Act, I will oppose it. 
But that isn’t before us. What is before us is should workers in 
commercial industrial hog operations be treated the same as 
employees in other commercial industrial operations? 
 
To my way of thinking the answer is obvious. The answer is 
obvious. If we want to build rural Saskatchewan let us elevate 
the position of workers in commercial and industrial operations 
in rural Saskatchewan to the same level as that enjoyed by other 
workers. And I support this legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak to this Bill, Bill No. 70, The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act. In fact as a duly elected member of this Hon. 
Assembly, I see it as my duty to speak to this flawed and 
cynical piece of legislation that once again picks winners and 
losers in our economy. And this time, and this time, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s in a rural economy — our agricultural economy, 
that economy that’s so much the heart of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is just one more strike at agriculture by 
this NDP government who know they now have no support in 
rural Saskatchewan. This government, Mr. Speaker, that know 
they won’t win one single seat likely in rural Saskatchewan — 
including the one presently occupied by the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
They have nothing to lose, Mr. Speaker, by further harming 
agriculture in this province to appease their union masters — 
those union masters, Mr. Speaker, who will fund their next 
election campaign. Mr. Speaker, this is a crass political sellout 
of the agricultural industry for the sole purpose of appeasing the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
The hog industry has invested hundreds of million dollars into 
the struggling economy of this province. They have created 
thousands of direct and indirect jobs. Those jobs offer good pay 
and good benefit packages. And the hog industry offers 
employment and top salaries for our university grads in 
management positions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this failing government doesn’t have many 
economic development successes to crow about. But the hog 
industry is one of the brighter spots in an otherwise pretty 
dismal record of job creation and economic development. More 
investment is required in this great industry, Mr. Speaker, if 
Saskatchewan is ever to reach our economic potential. This is 
one of the industries in which we have a natural advantage and 
great potential, and this government is willing to sacrifice that 
potential and the potential of this province to further appease 
organized labour. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if they do it, if they force this Bill into 
legislation, the people of Saskatchewan will remember this 
sellout at election time and there will be a price to pay for this 
arrogant, worn-out government and the left-wing, anti-business 
party that these members represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just a rural or agricultural issue. The hog 
industry, this successful industry that the government is willing 
to harm or even to sacrifice so that organized labour will fill 
their election campaign coffers, is a great benefit to the entire 
province. This industry broadens the tax base, both by direct 
taxation opportunities for the province and by indirect taxation 
opportunities from employees of the industry and the businesses 
that supply the industry in our cities and towns. Every nickel of 
tax revenue that is generated from a successful hog industry is a 
nickel of taxes that the rest of us all over this province, in rural 
areas and in our cities, don’t have to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through this piece of legislation, this government 
is killing the goose that laid the golden egg . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I wonder if the member for 

Athabasca might want to just walk around and have his 
conversation so that we can hear the member who is speaking. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through this piece of legislation this government is killing the 
goose that laid the golden egg and every citizen of this province 
should be gravely concerned. This is a dishonest and 
self-serving attempt by this government to wilfully . . . to an 
important, successful, and growing industry in this province; an 
industry that has been very fair and compassionate with their 
employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is extremely unfair for this government to 
pick out the hog industry for this kind of vilification, and it is 
quite apparent that this industry is just a stepping stone for this 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour puppet, the NDP 
government, to bring other sectors of agriculture under the 
umbrella of The Labour Standards Act. 
 
Hansard of June 13, 2002 gives insight into the long-range 
plans of this minister, Mr. Speaker, and this government, where 
the minister, speaking in support of this Bill, contends that 
agriculture was exempted from The Labour Standards Act 
because of some old-fashioned picture that she paints of a 
family farm of bygone years. But she goes on to say, and I 
quote: 
 

But the face of agriculture . . . has changed . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, those words should send a chill down the back of 
every farm operator in this province that has employees. That I 
think is a telling as to the government’s analysis of modern 
specialized agriculture, and I believe that it is an omen for other 
sectors of agriculture and what they can expect from the 
government in terms of labour legislation for the agricultural 
industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, proper consultation has not occurred with 
either hog barn operators or employees. And I quote from a 
Sask Pork media release dated May 14, 2002: 
 

Sask Pork, an industry organization representing 
Saskatchewan’s pork producers took issue today with 
remarks made by Minister of Agriculture in the legislature 
on Monday. Joan Steckhan, director of industry 
development for Sask Pork disagreed with the Minister of 
Agriculture that a consultation process on employment 
standards for the hog industry is under way. 
 
“Unfortunately (and she’s quoted here, unfortunately, she 
says) on May 1 after only one meeting, the Minister’s 
consultant cancelled the consultation process mentioned by 
Minister Serby. He told our representatives that there 
would be no further meetings.” Steckhan said. “From the 
point of view of producers, there is no consultation process 
taking place.” 
 
“Our industry has repeatedly asked the Minister of 
Agriculture for meaningful consultation on this issue,” 
Steckhan stated. “If the Minister of Agriculture could get a 
real consultation process started, producers would be very 
happy.” 

 



2204 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill makes our hog industry uncompetitive 
with our neighbours — neighbouring jurisdictions that have no 
such legislation in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been no consultation process with either 
hog barn operators or employees. The only group that this 
government has had consultations with is the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour. This Bill is a dishonest and crass attempt 
by this minister and this government to malign one of our 
greatest industries in this province for no other purpose than to 
fill the NDP Party’s campaign fund with union money. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on this 
Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(16:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
(Subvote HI01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. On 
my left is Harvey Brooks, the deputy minister of the 
department. To my right is the assistant deputy minister for 
operations, Barry Martin. And behind Barry Martin is Fred 
Antunes, the director of operations, planning, and business 
support. Directly behind me, Don Wincherauk, the assistant 
deputy minister for corporate services. Next to Don is Carl 
Neggers, the assistant deputy minister for policy and planning. 
And next to Mr. Neggers is Stella Madsen, manager of 
sustainable infrastructure. And in the back row is Cathy Lynn 
Borbely, leader of the budget development group. 
 
Mr. Chair, there are a couple of comments that I would like to 
make as we begin. I would like to note that I have the answer to 
the question that was asked by the member opposite during our 
June 13 session in Committee of Finance. The question, as I 
recall, asked if the Farmer Rail Car Coalition received similar 
funding from other partners as they previously received from 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, in his opening statements on June 13, the member 
opposite made the observation that the topic of the Farmer Rail 
Car Coalition was contemporary and of immediate interest. On 
this particular point the member opposite and myself can 
certainly agree. 
 
Mr. Chair, on Monday, June 10 it was brought to my attention 
that the Sask Party office had put forward an access to 
information request to my department regarding the acquisition 
of rail cars and a related maintenance facility. 
 
Following discussion that day with my officials as a . . . a 

response was finalized and sent to the Sask Party caucus office 
with an invitation to a thorough briefing regarding the 
disposition of the federal hopper car fleet and the support 
provided to the Farmer Rail Car Coalition by the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, the disposition of the federal hopper car fleet and the 
endeavours of the coalition to acquire that fleet are a 
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. These endeavours have wide 
support of farm organizations across Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Chair, in addition to the response we have prepared for the 
member opposite, I would like to take the opportunity to again 
invite the member and members opposite to a full and open 
briefing regarding the initiative of the coalition and the support, 
both past and current, that the province of Saskatchewan is 
providing for the coalition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Minister, 
thank you for the statement and the information that you have 
provided again. I accept with some gratitude, I would say, your 
offer to sit down with myself and members of the official 
opposition to review the Farm Rail Car Coalition, the 
agreements that have been put in place, and the opportunities 
that the purchase of those grain cars may or may not afford 
farmers. 
 
I think the reality is that we would be prepared to take 
advantage of that offer. We think that it’s important that we 
have as much information on that situation as possible. And in 
light of the offer, I would defer questions on the Farmer Rail 
Car Coalition from today’s session to a later session because we 
may be better informed of the government’s intentions and the 
intentions of the partners in that coalition as it pertains to the 
possible purchase and eventual operation of those cars. 
 
In light of that, Mr. Minister, I . . . And I also notice that 
lateness of the hour in today’s estimate session. So what I 
would like to do, if it’s agreeable, I think we’d give the 
remaining time of today’s session to various members from the 
opposition who have individual and specific issues they’d like 
to deal with in connection with roads in their constituencies. 
 
If I may so do, I would like to turn the rest of the session over to 
the member from Watrous. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don’t think the 
minister is going to be overly surprised that my questions today 
are going to be on Highway No. 15. I’ve brought the issue up a 
number of times every session since I’ve been elected and the 
condition of that stretch of highway has deteriorated even 
further at an alarming rate. And I feel that for safety purposes 
it’s almost becoming unacceptable for travel. It’s also a serious 
impediment to the economic growth in the community where it 
is located. 
 
So I have met, and I know the minister has also met, with the 
business people from the town of Nokomis and it was brought 
to my attention, as I’m sure it was with him when he had his 
meeting, that the traffic is detouring from Highway 15 and 
they’re bypassing the town. And the businesses are suffering 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2205 

 

quite a great deal because of it. 
 
And furthermore, he should also be aware that there’s three 
major grain terminals along that stretch of highway located at 
Semans, Nokomis, and Amazon. And the trucking companies 
have brought forward complaints to my office that their drivers 
no longer want to haul to these terminals due to the wear and 
tear that’s placed on their vehicles for having to travel on that 
highway. 
 
The tourism industry has dropped in the Nokomis area. The 
town of Nokomis used to benefit from the location close to 
Manitou Beach and the mineral spa. And as I mentioned before, 
the business owners are now experiencing a significant decline 
in revenue since the travellers are taking other routes. 
 
But the most significant problem is the safety factor. Nokomis 
has a health centre and Watrous has a hospital, and the 
ambulance drivers are saying that they have been forced 
unnecessarily to increase their travel time due to the condition 
of the highway, which puts the patients that they have at risk. 
 
The school buses are unable to avoid travel on the highway and 
that has been a concern of a number of parents that have phoned 
my office. And motorists in general have run a risk when 
travelling on that particular stretch of Highway 15. 
 
So this session I know the minister has taken note that I’ve read 
petitions almost every day. And the signatures on those 
petitions are a good indication that it is a well-travelled 
highway by a number of citizens from our province and from 
out of our province. 
 
And I would almost be able to bet money on the fact that 
anyone that took the highway because it appeared on the map to 
be the quickest and the most efficient route across the province 
would never make the mistake of travelling it again. 
 
So I would like to read in the record just a few of the letters and 
faxes and e-mails that my office in Lanigan receives about this 
stretch of highway. And then I would like the minister to give 
us some sort of timeline, some sort of hope of when this 
highway will be addressed and, hopefully, be fixed in an 
adequate fashion. 
 
So the one letter states, and I quote: 
 

This stretch of highway has gotten considerably worse 
since last summer. Someone is going to severely damage a 
vehicle. If you don’t watch it you may lose control. 
Something has got to be done with this road. It is used for 
the school buses. If it is not properly fixed, there’s going to 
be a serious accident on it. 

 
And that’s from Darlene Gross. 
 

When you travel Highway 15 west of Semans to Highway 
20 — you certainly have your eyes opened. The road is full 
of holes and it is washboardy in many places. This part of 
the highway is a disgrace. Due to the highway conditions, 
many semi’s are taking alternate routes, thus putting 
additional stress on our R.M. roads. 

 

And that was written by Gilbert Murney, the mayor of Semans. 
 

Fatality rate will be high due to inexperienced driver, 
weather conditions, heavy truck traffic . . . high speeds. 
This is not the Federal Governments total problem, nor a 
previous provincial governments excuse. This is right now! 
Let’s keep the pavement we have and fix the roads in this 
province and not go back in time. In the 1960’s there . . . 
(were) a million people in this province . . . (when) the 
roads were built. In the year 2002 we have a million, we 
should be able to maintain or better the quality of these 
roads. 

 
By Walter Sagen. 
 
In a phone call to my office a woman by the name of Darlene 
stated that, “this highway is in really, really bad shape,” and her 
daughter just had her tire sliced right on the pavement. And 
fortunately, we were glad to hear that the car didn’t roll when 
that happened. 
 
Another phone call dated April 23 was from a woman by the 
name of Lynn who just wanted me . . . to inform me that there 
had been a rollover the day before on Highway 15 and she felt 
that the vehicle had just simply lost control because of the 
condition of the highway. 
 
So I would really like this minister to give the community some 
hope, some sort of timeline of when this highway will be not 
just patched. It obviously hasn’t worked. And when will the 
highway be seriously addressed and fixed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I appreciate the concerns around 
Highway 15 and partly because the day that I went up to meet 
with the business people in Nokomis, I travelled the route from 
Semans across. And we found at no more than 80 kilometres an 
hour that it was quite safe to travel on. However, that road is not 
in good shape. It needs repair, we acknowledge that. 
 
It’s very important to note the work that has been done on 
Highway 15, noting that we recognize it as an important 
corridor and to also look at the work that is currently scheduled. 
You’ll see from . . . is it Melville right up to Raymore has been 
increased in terms of its ability to handle a heavier load and is a 
much better highway than it was before. 
 
We’ve also . . . you’ll see from Nokomis further over, we’re 
getting repairs done this upcoming year, further to the west. 
 
We have been working with the Area Transportation Planning 
Committee in that area trying to set priorities to make sure that 
where we’re investing the dollars that we have, we’re getting 
the best possible returns. So we’re doing this section by section. 
 
And the other thing that we’re doing, and it has been very, very 
successful, is working with the RMs (rural municipality), not 
only in this area but in other areas of the province where we’re 
able to develop alternate roads. We’re able to partner with them 
to increase funding for particular stretches of roads that are a 
concern. And so there are discussions going on with the RMs as 
well. 
 
And you’ll note that it’s probably a parallel to the kind of work 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

that has been done over in the area of Highway 51 where we’ve 
got agreement with the RMs and we’re seeing some good work 
being done. And it’s our anticipation that with successful talks 
we’ll be able to move ahead on this section between Semans 
and Highway 20 and we should have some pretty good roads 
there. 
 
In terms of actual timeline, that’ll partly depend on the 
discussion negotiations with the RMs involved. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would just like to mention to the minister 
that if you drive slow enough it’s quite safe to go across the 
middle of your field too, but that isn’t quite what the 
community is looking for. And that was definitely the point that 
I had made with the ambulance needing to use that highway is 
that they’ve had to slow down considerably and it’s at the risk 
of the patients involved. 
 
When you say, depending on how the talks go, can I just get 
you to clarify so you are no longer looking at addressing 
adequately fixing the highway, now you’re just going to 
negotiate alternative roads with the RMs and ignore the 
highway issues? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s important to note that in the 
discussions in terms of alternate routes, that’s not the priority 
that the RMs have. It is to do — as we’ve done with 51 where 
we don’t have good alternate routes — is to work in partnership 
with them to build it. 
 
What we’re doing on the other sections as we move further west 
from Nokomis is building those to structural pavement; we’ve 
. . . working with the RMs as well to get agreement to build that 
section between Semans and No. 20 up to that standard as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials, welcome. I have a question on two roads. I 
guess that makes it two questions then. 
 
First one is on No. 6 Highway from Watson towards Naicam. 
It’s a well-travelled road, and I’m sure that you’re well aware 
that Watson has the sign that says the crossroads of 
Saskatchewan. The highway between No. 5 and No. 6 join right 
at Watson and they really are the hub of this area of our 
province. 
 
And No. 6 Highway was well constructed a number of years 
ago but it’s starting to require some repairs. And I’ve had a 
number of people who ride motorcycles telling me they wonder 
if they can even get down it because of the cracks in the 
highway. 
 
Can you tell me when that highway is on the list for upgrading 
and repair? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member for Estevan on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
honoured Assembly some very important guests from my 
constituency. Seated in the east gallery are 14 students, grade 6 
students from the Westview Elementary School in Estevan. And 
today they are accompanied by their teacher, Marilyn 
McCutcheon as well as chaperones Rick Rohatton, Wanda 
Wishart, Linda Henderson, and Diane Goodmanson. 
 
And I would just like to let them know that what is happening at 
this time in the Assembly is it’s the estimates for the 
Department of Highways. And that gives members of the 
Assembly a chance to question the Minister of Highways on 
things that are happening in their constituencies regarding 
specific roads and things. And given the conditions of the roads, 
we are usually inundated with inquiries to make. 
 
So I will be meeting with the students and the teacher and the 
chaperones in a few minutes. And I look forward to that very 
much. So I ask all members in . . . ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these guests of mine from Estevan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 

Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I think I’d like to join in 
welcoming the guests from Estevan. 
 
And in response to the question regarding the highway from 
Watson to Naicam, this is an asphalt/concrete pavement that is 
just showing its age, basically, and this year it is not scheduled 
for work other than regular maintenance work on it. 
 
And at the end of this year it will go into — we recognize the 
condition it’s in — it will go into the work with all the rest of 
the major highways and it will be categorized and a schedule set 
for when it will be brought again up to standard. 
 
But it’s basically just showing its aging at this point; it’s not in 
the schedule for this year other than routine maintenance. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The other road that 
I’ve had concerns brought to my attention about is No. 667. 
This highway is one with the feed mill now that has just been 
opened or will be open in the middle of July. 
 
And when the owner was determining whether he should 
actually build his feed mill, one of his concerns was the road. A 
large number of trucks actually use this road and last week 
when it rained, it was just about impassable. This mill is 
actually . . . it’s used for many of the livestock for the hog barns 
in the area and it’s causing great concern for the owner. 
 
And I know that when the Premier was out in this constituency 



June 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

 

last week, he’d indicated that about 2 miles of that road is going 
to be built this year. Well 2 miles is . . . the road is going to start 
nowhere and go nowhere. It’s not enough. If we’re actually 
going to be building it, it’s better to actually finish it, at least get 
it to the place where this mill can be used. 
 
So the minister is . . . the constituent is asking when this road is 
going to be built so at least the mill can be gotten to by the large 
number of trucks that are trying to use this facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I appreciate the member’s 
concern and question around 667. 
 
It is important to point out though, that this is a municipal road 
and that it was through the heavy-haul program and the 
administration of the Government Relations department that it 
was designated as heavy-haul and these 3.2 kilometres will be 
paved this year. 
 
And it’s under the municipal road, and the agreements that are 
made there, that it will be furthered. And in terms of budget you 
could direct that to Municipal when they’re up for estimates. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister, 
welcome, and to your officials. Mr. Minister, I have a number 
of questions regarding highways in our area. 
 
But I’d like to start off with a question that I haven’t had a clear 
answer yet, and that was the gravel haul to Rocanville. I believe 
Langenburg Redi-Mix had that haul, it was a winter haul. And a 
number of concerns raised by a couple of local contractors in 
regards to even their ability to tender on this call. 
 
And I think at the time, if I’m not mistaken, they were informed 
that the call was or the tender was put out on the Net. And as a 
result of the fact that they’re really not . . . one contractor is not 
upgraded with a computerized system or network and isn’t on 
the Net, they missed that tender. 
 
But the other, the question I would like to ask is: what avenues 
does the minister, does your department follow up in releasing 
tenders so that contractors have the same access and ability to 
tender on a project like that? 
 
And the other question that came up very clearly — because in 
checking it I believe the contractor was actually out of 
Manitoba — the question that arose is: would local contractors 
or contractors that actually have Saskatchewan licences have a 
preference over out-of-province contracts or how does the 
department handle these types of tenders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the process of tendering 
has . . . really, we are not exclusive in terms of whether it can be 
Saskatchewan or Manitoba contractors. 
 
But there are other issues that are important in the issue of 
tendering, particularly for materials, because we have to have 
particular specific quality materials for different jobs. 
 
It’s also important to note that a detailed answer was provided 
in writing to the member on this earlier, I’m told. And so, if 
there are more depth of detail that’s required, we can again 
make that available. 

But I think it’s also important to note that when the tenders are 
let, that the information does go out on the Net. And 
Saskatchewan has made tremendous inroads in terms of making 
high-speed Internet accessible throughout Saskatchewan. There 
are of course contractors who don’t have the Net, but that’s not 
the only place it goes out. It’s also out in the newspapers and so 
contractors do have access to the papers and can tender from 
there. 
 
But there are a number of detailed aspects to this which we’d be 
quite willing to provide in written form as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and to the minister; yes, Mr. Minister, 
there was some information that was . . . that came via letter. 
But there was a question that still wasn’t really answered and 
the answer regarding the contractor having a licence to operate 
in Saskatchewan, is that a requirement of out-of-province 
contractors that they actually have a licence to operate in the 
province as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — For out-of-province contractors there 
are some important conditions that have to be met. There is no 
licence involved in it but Department of Finance has some 
conditions that must be met before they can contract in the 
province. And that is that there are taxes on fuel that have to be 
complied with and there are also taxes on equipment that is 
brought in, sales taxes on equipment that is brought in and used. 
 
I’m told that in this particular case the contractor from 
Manitoba has complied, has worked in this province previously, 
and has met the standards in terms of Finance’s request for tax 
payment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s 
exactly what the individuals in the community and the 
contractors were asking of me. Because they basically were 
saying they wanted to make sure that everyone’s playing on the 
same level playing field. And that, that I believe answers that 
question. So I appreciate that. So that we can indeed say, yes, 
everyone has, and they recognize that if they’ve got access to, 
then whoever’s . . . has the best qualified tender gets it as long 
as we’re all bidding with the same . . . on the same level playing 
field. And that’s the important feature. 
 
Mr. Minister, regarding No. 8 Highway, and I want to say that 
the people in the Moosomin area, Moosomin and Maryfield 
area, are certainly appreciative of the fact that No. 8 Highway 
will, I trust, be completed in this construction year. Maybe not 
all the pavement will be down or the dust-free surface. 
 
A couple of questions did come up though in regard to the 
grade through the Pipestone Creek area. And I believe in a 
couple of spots the grade was actually elevated substantially 
versus what it was in the past. And the question arose as to the 
amount of fill that was used on that grade and whether or not 
was necessary to increase that grade as much as it was versus 
the level of the grade on Highway No. 8 through Pipestone 
Creek in the past. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could respond to that. 
And as well . . . And let us know what the . . . you’re hoping for 
a completion date on that construction project. I think, I have a 
feeling that it probably took a little longer than what was 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2002 

 

anticipated. I’m not exactly sure if we weren’t anticipating 
completion last year. Certainly it was wetter in the spring to 
start with. 
 
But if we could just answer those questions and let us know 
why the grade was raised as much as it was and whether or not 
the department’s anticipating that this will . . . project will be 
completed this year. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the 
Assembly, our page — not page, excuse me — one of our 
interns is sitting in the gallery, Wendy Moellenbeck. And with 
her is her father and her sister — or perhaps I’m misjudging a 
little bit and perhaps it’s her mother, but she looks certainly 
young enough to be her sister. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce those all to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. On behalf of the government caucus, I too would 
like to welcome you to the Legislative Assembly. The page . . . 
or the interns, I’m sorry, is a new experience for us as 
legislators. It’s been very exciting and I want to tell you that we 
very much enjoyed having your daughter with us here. It was a 
good experience for us and I certainly hope it was for her as 
well. 
 
So thank you very much, and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Follow up on the last question. Just to 
give you the figures that 81 per cent of the contracts that were 
awarded were in-province contracts and 19 per cent were 
out-of-province contracts in the ’01-02 year. 

So onto Highway No. 8. The issue of the grade is there was a 
technical briefing given to the area transportation planning 
committee that . . . and it was quite detailed, to help them 
understand the amount of grade that was put in, material that 
was put in to build the grade. 
 
But very briefly, it is that on the south side there’s high 
subjectivity to slides and so you don’t want to cut into the slope 
very much. And so then you have to bring in the fill in order to 
get a grade that meets standards because it is a fairly substantial 
valley. So that’s the basic reason why the amount of fill is put 
in there. 
 
And finally, in terms of the projected deadline, it is our hope 
that this surfacing will be completed by the end of this 
construction season but there are vagaries that could make that 
not possible. But it is our hope, our intention to have surfacing 
done by the end of this season. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:50. 
 


