















































Hansard: April 12, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 April 12, 2002 
 

 

657

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are certainly 
very concerned about the exorbitant increase in long-term care 
services in Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon it looks . . . Oh yes, and there’s one here from Osler 
also. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this morning on behalf 
of citizens concerned about the tobacco legislation. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Weekes, Lucky Lake, Melfort, and Naicam. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Bredenbury, Whitewood, Gerald, Yorkton, 
Churchbridge, and Langenburg. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on the conditions of the highways in this 
province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 

Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of lives and to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area, Mr. Speaker. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Francis, Colfax, 
Weyburn, and Estevan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the crop insurance increase in premiums. 
 
And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Osage, Weyburn, Fillmore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here signed by 
citizens opposed to the possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as lab, physical therapy, 
public health, home care, long-term care services available 
to the users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Craik and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by people 
in regards to the natural resources. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution to the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the petition is signed by citizens from Shellbrook, 
Canwood, Fort Qu’Appelle. And a whole list of names are First 
Nations trappers in La Ronge. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and received. These are petitions regarding the fee 
increases for long-term care services, and for the adoption of a 
fiscally responsible snowmobile policy, and addendums to 
previously tabled petitions as sessional papers no. 7, 8, 11, 17, 
18, 23, and 24. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in 
introducing someone in the House today that’s really no 
stranger to any of us. Mr. Gordon Barnhart is in the Assembly 
and he’s been in charge of the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program since its beginning. I’m sure everyone in the 
House has benefited from his ideas and from his insistence and 
determination that this program should be brought to the House. 
 
So I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming him into 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, three guests that are sitting in your gallery. Mr. 
Speaker, here to watch this morning’s proceedings and 
determine whether they’re film-worthy are Mr. Ralph Brosche 
and Mr. Alexander Dannenberg, both from Berlin, Germany, 
and with them is Valerie Creighton, the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Sask Film. 
 
Now Mr. Brosche and Mr. Dannenberg are successful 
independent film producers. They are here in Saskatchewan to 
meet with potential production partners, and I ask all members 
to join me in welcoming these gentlemen here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition I also would like to invite our guests 
from Germany to the chambers today. And again, I would hope 
they are looking seriously at the film production in this 
province so we can produce a bit of profit from our film 
industry in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Program 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today the official 
opposition says goodbye to two young ladies who have proven 
themselves to be tremendous members of our team over the last 
three months. 
 
Jessica Waiser and Maria Kurylo have been working in our 
caucus since January as part of the Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program. Jessica worked with me and Maria worked 
with the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these two young women have been an absolute 
delight for all of us in the Saskatchewan Party caucus and we 
will miss them very much. We’ve benefited from their 
infectious enthusiasm and their ideas and their belief in the 
future. 
 
After today, all the interns take a short trip to Ontario and when 
they return, Jessica and Maria will go to work in the 
government caucus office. On behalf of all the opposition 
MLAs and our entire staff, I want to wish Jessica and Maria 
good luck in all their future endeavours. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in doing so, we welcome Wendy 
Mollenbeck and Tim Baker, who will be joining us in a few 
days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in its first year, the internship program has proven 
valuable for all involved and I hope it continues for many years 
to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
today on behalf of myself and other members of the Legislative 
Assembly who attended last night’s Regina Chamber of 
Commerce third annual Paragon Awards, I want to congratulate 
the nominees, the finalists, and the winners of those awards. 
 
These awards celebrate business excellence in our city and last 
night’s awards ceremony certainly highlights the extent to 
which Regina’s business community has grown and prospered. 
 
If there was one recurring theme in last night’s speeches is . . . it 
was that we need to spend more time celebrating 
Saskatchewan’s successes. It was a true pleasure to listen to 
Christine Stapleton, the head coach of the U of R (University of 
Regina) women’s Cougar basketball team talk about the 
strength of Saskatchewan people and her Team Saskatchewan 
approach to leadership on the court and our ability to translate 
that same attitude in a success in our own community. 
 
Time and again last night, Ms. Stapleton, the award winners, 
the finalists, and business people talked about the need to leave 
behind the stereotypical self-deprecating Saskatchewan 
approach of downplaying our accomplishments and to start 
celebrating our successes here at home. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues in the Assembly, I want to 
congratulate the chamber of commerce, the finalists and 
winners of the 2002 Paragon Awards, and Regina’s business 
community for the successes they have achieved and the work 
they do in building our economy and making Regina a great 
place to call home. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too wish to join 
in the congratulations to the winners of the third annual Paragon 
Awards held last night at the Centre of the Arts promoting the 
spirit of business excellence in Regina. And what a gala 
evening it was. Business excellence in this province should 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

 

always be and is in fact being recognized. Success is 
contagious. 
 
Nine awards in different categories were presented to the 
winners selected from 27 finalists, all excellent examples of 
what can be and what really is achieved in this province. 
 
Congratulations to the double winners: the Phoenix Group, 
Wascana Flower Shoppe. Congratulations as well to CJME and 
in partnership with The Salvation Army in the Community 
Alliance Award. Other winners were the Tourism 
Saskatchewan, Curves for Women, Partners in Motion, Hotel 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And a special congratulation to the business of the year, 
honouring the Phoenix Group, this presentation being made 
from a guy we all know from Prince Albert. And a special 
congratulations to Mr. Roger Phillips for receiving this year’s 
President’s Award for Outstanding Achievement. 
 
And finally, a special recognition should go to the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce for bringing the Paragon Awards and 
this special recognition of business excellence to this city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Democrat Party Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, last night in the home of 
Tommy Douglas a significant and a reassuring event took place; 
significant because a packed hall of fervent New Democrats 
came to hear the Premier speak about the many good things that 
are happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
We were entertained, Mr. Speaker, by the excellent choir from 
the Weyburn composite high school which sang for us songs 
from the Wizard of Oz, including the opposition’s Grow 
Saskatchewan mantra, “Somewhere Over the Rainbow,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We were served an excellent and ample meal for $12 a plate — 
unlike the $25 the Sask Party charged for its recent banquet. 
The NDP, Mr. Speaker, knows value for money. 
 
By the way, Mr. Speaker, there were more people last night in 
Weyburn at this one event than came to the entire Sask Party 
secret tour of Saskatchewan. And this fundraiser, Mr. Speaker, 
occurred in Saskatchewan not Calgary. Reassuring, Mr. 
Speaker, because in this rapidly changing world it is comforting 
that some traditions are unchanged and thriving. 
 
People in Weyburn and throughout our province like to come 
together for good food, good fellowship, and good news. 
Another tradition we will return to shortly, Mr. Speaker, is an 
NDP (New Democratic Party) MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) for Weyburn-Big Muddy. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Paraplegic Association Awards 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 

members of the legislature, last night it was my pleasure to be 
in attendance at the first Canadian Paraplegic Association 
awards and recognition dinner here in Regina. 
 
This dinner is to recognize the association’s members’ 
accomplishments in a variety of categories and achievements. 
The guest speaker was Mr. Ron MacLean who is the national 
honorary chairperson for CPA (Canadian Paraplegic 
Association). He is the well-known host of Hockey Night in 
Canada and sidekick to Don Cherry on Coach’s Corner. 
 
The event’s honorary chairperson was Brad Hornung, a former 
Regina Pat hockey player and now an NHL (National Hockey 
League) Chicago Black Hawks scout. 
 
And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, last night’s award winners 
in the following categories were: member volunteer, Bruno 
Hudolin; career, Daryl Stubel; business 
development/entrepreneur, Don Terry; female athlete, Collette 
Bourgonje; technological achievement, Keith Lusyk; male 
athlete, Clayton Gerein; youth leader, Lisa Franks; volunteer, 
Brent Gough; and creative endeavours, Carolyn Scott. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the Assembly to join me 
today in congratulating all of these winners and the many 
volunteers of the Canadian Paraplegic Association for a job 
well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

Canadian Gaming Industry Awards Dinner 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the sixth annual Canadian 
Gaming Industry Awards dinner was hosted by the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority and the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation at Casino Regina. This dinner recognizes 
achievements across Canadian gaming and honoured Edmund 
Bellgarde. 
 
Assuming the responsibilities of the first acting president in 
2000 of SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) and 
then president and chief executive officer in 2001, Mr. Edmund 
Bellgarde has realigned priorities, cut operating costs, and 
doubled net profits by reaching $18.6 million. The four First 
Nations operated by SIGA employ a total of 1,250 people; 71 
per cent of these employees are of Aboriginal heritage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although there are always challenges when 
creating something new, SIGA represents something very 
special to First Nations people. SIGA has supported many 
recreational, cultural, and social events. As an example, I 
recently recorded a visit to Grandmother’s Bay in my 
constituency in the Churchill River area. The First Nation was 
having great pride in building a brand new community hall. I 
asked them where they got their money from. They said part of 
it, the money came from SIGA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Mr. Edmund Bellgarde and 
SIGA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

Invitation to Cross the Floor 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I know 
how disappointed members opposite were when I resigned from 
cabinet and crossed the floor to sit in opposition. I understand 
their feelings of hurt and loneliness. Since then many of my 
former colleagues have been dumped from cabinet, cast into the 
wilderness where no manna falls from heaven — or at least not 
from former United Church ministers. 
 
I say to my former colleagues, they need not be disconsolate. 
We can be together again over here. They can join me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my proposal is best summed up in the words of 
one of the sonnets of Will Shakespeare: 
 

Let . . . (us) not to the marriage of true minds 
Admit impediments. Love is not love 
Which alters when it alternation finds, 
Or bends with the remover to remove: 
O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark, 
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; 
. . . (I am) the star to every wandering . . . (bard), 
Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken. 

 
Mr. Speaker, time is running short so I’ll simply say I’m 
prepared to continue this with members opposite after the 
adjournment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For those Saskatchewan 
taxpayers who by sheer strength of character or maybe therapy 
have forgotten about the NDP mess with the automation of the 
land titles, a quick reminder would go as follows. 
 
The NDP government chose to automate our land titles system 
by creating a new Crown corporation. They estimated the cost 
of that to be significantly less than $30 million. A few short 
years later, the bill they’ve run up is over $80 million. 
 
In this year’s budget, the Finance minister indicated ISC’s 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) borrowing 
. . . ISC’s debt would climb to 60 million from 30 million only 
one year ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: how much 
more money will the NDP pour into their failing land titles 
system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me just correct, let 
me just correct one error in the member’s statement. There were 
many but let me correct one. And that is that the LAND (Land 
Titles Automated Network Development project) system is not 
working. 
 
Let me tell the member that he will know that the LAND 

system is working; that the LAND system is working in Regina 
at the present time; that it will be expanded to Saskatoon 
shortly. And that since August, Mr. Speaker, of last year over 
20,000 title transfers, set-ups, and so on have been successfully 
processed. And more than 229,000 paper titles have been 
converted to electronic form. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a system that works and don’t . . . Perhaps 
the member doesn’t have to take my word for it, Mr. Speaker, 
he can talk to the president of the Law Society. He can talk to 
the president of the land surveyor’s organization, Mr. Speaker. 
He can talk to IT (information technology) experts across this 
province, across this country, in the United States. And he will 
know it works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of people 
across the province — business people across the province and 
homeowners — who would disagree with the minister. There’s 
many lawyers, as well, that would disagree with the minister 
that it’s working. 
 
You know last year, a year ago, the minister said there would be 
two basic activities of the Crown corporation over this year, 
over this last year. And they were, and I quote from Hansard, 
the minister said: “they intended to get the LAND project up 
and running.” 
 
And they also said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, order. Order, please. Order, 
please. I just ask the members, I just ask the members to refrain 
from hollering out during the question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government said that they may 
do . . . the minister said in the House he was going to get the 
LAND project up and running and he was going to market that 
and other high-tech projects around the world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on the first count we know that the system is 
not yet up and running around this province. And so the 
question to the minister is, how is he doing on the second 
count? Has ISC made any international sales over the past year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
member said that the system is working — a minute ago he said 
it isn’t working. We know that there’s — even he knows, we all 
know — there’s a schedule at implementation which is in place 
across the province, and we know that that schedule is being 
followed through. 
 
Let me just remind the member too about the costs of this 
system. Mr. Speaker, since the system has been introduced the 
cost, the cost for somebody registering a house . . . $100,000 
house with a $75,000 mortgage, Mr. Speaker, has been cut in 
half in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, the cost now is fully a 
third of what it is in Manitoba and fully, Mr. Speaker, a fifth of 
what it is in Vancouver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that goes for commercial enterprises, it goes for 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

 

the vast majority of homes in this province, Mr. Speaker. This 
system is working, this system is said to work by those across 
the province, across the world, and, Mr. Speaker, just look at 
the deals we’re making with EDS (Electronic Data Systems) 
and other people who know how good this system is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was listening carefully 
to the minister’s answer. I didn’t hear him talk of one single 
sale that they’ve made, that ISC has made of their software, you 
know, Mr. Speaker, but that hasn’t stopped ISC officials from 
travelling around the world. 
 
They have driven . . . travelled to places like Albania, the 
Ukraine, Germany, Hong Kong, Australia, Orlando, Fort 
Lauderdale, San Francisco, New York — in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
ISC’s travel bill just over this past year is up at around 
$200,000. 
 
To the minister: after all of that globe-trotting has ISC made 
any international sales? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, we should also bear in 
mind that the kinds of people who come to Saskatchewan to 
look at this land titles system, Mr. Speaker. We have officials 
from Scotland, Mr. Speaker. We have officials from Australia. 
We have officials from Ukraine, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — So, Mr. Speaker, we have people 
coming from all over the world to look at this system. And an 
expert in New Brunswick, in fact one the key players in the 
New Brunswick system says, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing on 
the market with ISC’s LAND project capabilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is why people are coming to this province to look at this 
project and, Mr. Speaker, to date we’ve got consulting contracts 
around the world which are precursors to selling the system 
across North America and indeed, Mr. Speaker, in other 
countries too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a stroke of political 
genius for this Premier to give this file to his chief leadership 
rival. What better way to make his chief leadership rival look 
bad than hand him this $80 million NDP boondoggle, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s what this is. They’ve taken the taxpayers’ 
credit card, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers’ credit card, they’ve ran 
up $62 billion in debt, they’ve taken 20 million more dollars 
from the taxpayers with nothing to show for it. They have 
promised that the panacea . . . for ISC, the panacea, would be 
the coming international sales. 
 
Once again, we’ll give the minister . . . 

The Speaker: — I do appreciate the exuberance but I would 
like to be able to hear the question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve ran up $62 million on the 
taxpayers’ credit card. They spent an additional 20 million 
taxpayers’ dollars on a system that isn’t working right. All 
along — all along — saying that they would be able to recover 
the money for the taxpayers by their international sales. It’s 
been several years; how many international sales have the NDP 
made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we now seem to 
be back to the system not working again. That’s three changes 
in about 10 minutes, Mr. Speaker. Let me tell the member that 
the system is working. Let me just quote one, one reference, 
from the Moose Jaw Credit Union, Mr. Speaker. The lending 
services clerk there says, “we couldn’t be more pleased with 
how this system is working.” 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, on the theme of the member’s 
questions, it seems to me that the issue is more likely to be that 
the Leader of the Opposition is setting this member up with 
stupid questions because he doesn’t like him either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, last year 
when we asked these questions in the Assembly, when we 
asked why they had spent all of this money and made no sales, 
the minister, the minister that was just on his feet said, and I 
quote, “Well this is the way business works.” That’s what he 
said. “This is the way business works.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe that’s the way NDP business works — you 
can spend $80 million and you make no sales — but it’s not 
how the real world business works. Although, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s one similarity between the two: in the real world, when 
the board of directors of a corporation wastes millions of dollars 
with nothing to show for it, the shareholders of that corporation 
fire the board of directors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That is what the taxpayers of this province are 
going to do to the government. I’m going to give the minister 
one more chance. Tell us, after $80 million and all of these 
years, can you please give us an indication of a sale, a lead, or a 
projected lead for a sale that ISC has made internationally? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, we knew that the 
member opposite didn’t know how to run a country hall music 
. . . Country Music Hall of Fame. We knew, Mr. Speaker, he 
knew nothing about gas prices and how you set gas prices. And, 
Mr. Speaker, now we know he knows nothing about ISC either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, this is a business that 
requires investment, it requires personal contact, it requires 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

consulting contracts up front. Mr. Speaker, this company is 
doing work around the world. Mr. Speaker, it is linked with 
EDS, one of the largest IT marketing companies in the world, 
Mr. Speaker. Everybody recognizes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 
Minister of Environment. Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that 
members of the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund steering 
committee are not happy with the Minister of the Environment 
and the NDP about the government’s plan to raid their fund for 
other Environment department programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, committee members say they weren’t consulted, 
but the minister told this House that she had spoken to Lorne 
Scott, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, about this very 
issue on budget day. Well guess what? Lorne Scott doesn’t 
agree with that . . . that the NDP should be using the fund 
either. He told CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
Radio this morning that the surplus is needed for large 
purchases and programs, such as to buy land to protect wildlife 
habitat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister not listening to members of 
the fund steering committee and insists on draining the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, we are not draining the Fish 
and Wildlife Development Fund. Mr. Speaker, as I have tried to 
say over the last couple of days — I will try it one more time so 
that perhaps the member opposite can understand it — there 
was a surplus in that fund. We are using that surplus on a 
one-time-only basis to fund certain staff in the Environment 
department who do environmental and habitat protection. The 
work they do conforms to the mandate of the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also transferring money from the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund into the Saskatchewan Wetlands 
Conservation Corporation to do habitat protection and 
development — habitat stewardship, that’s the purpose of the 
fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, would this 
fund not be . . . be not something like a rainy day fund? 
 
This fund has been in operation for about 20 years and is 
mandated to use a percentage of fish and hunting . . . the 
hunting licence sales to protect wildlife and habitat resources. It 
has a separate advisory board made up of Saskatchewan people 
who deeply care about protecting these resources, who are 
experts in their own right, and who will work outside the 
political realm toward fulfilling that mandate. 
 

Mr. Speaker, an editorial in The Leader-Post this morning says 
that this move by the NDP, and I quote: 
 

. . . might be permissible, in . . . legal terms, but opens the 
door to taking money from other funds. 
 
Maybe this is legal. But it doesn’t seem right. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Lorne Scott says he and other steering committee 
members will meet with the government next week and try to 
convince them not to drain the fund and not to force the fund to 
pay the half million dollar grant to the wetland conservation 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today to reverse the 
decision of her NDP government to drain the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m going to try it again, Mr. Speaker. We 
are not draining the fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 17.8 FTEs (full-time equivalents) are being 
funded through the Fish and Wildlife Fund surplus, the 
accumulated surplus, this year on a one-time-only basis. The 
Fish and Wildlife Fund remains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps a little history lesson is in order. Mr. 
Speaker, this fund has existed for many, many years and this 
government feels very passionately about working in concert 
with our partners to ensure we have adequate wildlife habitat, 
adequate wildlife habitat protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $10 million comes in through hunting and fishing 
licence fees; 3 million of that, 30 per cent, goes to the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund. Mr. Speaker, in total for resource 
management for hunting and fishing, this province budgets $15 
million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, more 
and more organizations are raising concerns about the NDP’s 
fudge-it budget. In a letter to the editor in today’s Leader-Post 
under the heading, “Concerned about deficit budgeting,” 
Manley McLachlan of the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association writes, and I quote: 
 

. . . we are . . . concerned that the province is slipping into 
deficit budgeting. 
 
While the Minister of Finance may choose to describe his 
budget in other terms, when your expenditures exceed your 
income that is a deficit regardless of whether you have a 
line of credit to cover the shortfall. 

 
Is this . . . clear and transparent accounting or does it reflect 
some of the practices that Enron employed? 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP using Enron accounting tactics to 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

 

try to hide a deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to say to the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, that I think the letter of Mr. McLachlan 
indicates that he has a concern about the tendering policies with 
respect to the work that we’re going to have done at schools and 
universities. 
 
And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. The tendering will be done 
by the school boards and the universities according to their 
policies, and that work will be available to construction 
industries in Saskatchewan. I think that should clarify Mr. 
McLachlan’s concern. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. If 
there are any construction companies in this province that find 
it morally objectionable to do mortgage financing of schools 
and universities, they do not have to bid on the work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I predict that, notwithstanding Mr. McLachlan’s expressed 
concern, that work will be tendered, Mr. Speaker, construction 
companies will bid on that work, and that work will be done. 
Because we are going to build schools and build universities in 
this province over the objections of that opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the Construction 
Association that is concerned about this government hiding a 
deficit. Here’s what the Regina Chamber . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Here’s what the Regina Chamber had to say 
in their recent newsletter. And I quote: 
 

The government touts that this is their 9th consecutive 
balanced budget. Nevertheless, we are of the view that the 
budget (is not Mr. Speaker, it says the budget) is not a true 
balanced budget given the fact that revenues do not match 
expenditures and the government’s reliance . . . on the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund and tapping into Crown profits. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor says the NDP is hiding a deficit; the 
bond rating agencies say the NDP is hiding a deficit; the 
Construction Association says the NDP is hiding a deficit; and 
the Regina Chamber of Commerce says the NDP is hiding a 
deficit. Everyone in Saskatchewan says the NDP is hiding a 
deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP hiding that deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be clearer than 
what we are doing in terms of drawing from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. I stood in this legislature on budget day and 
said, Mr. Speaker, that our expenditures would exceed our 
revenues and we would draw down the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund. 
 
And what this opposition has to answer, Mr. Speaker, is this: if 
they do not believe that the schools should be built and the 
roads should be fixed, Mr. Speaker, and the health care system 
should have more money, if they truly believe that we should 
not be drawing on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to meet the 
needs of the people of this province, they should come clean 
with the people of the province and tell us what they would cut 
out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Because day after day they stand in their 
places and say we should spend more money on crop insurance, 
more money on this, more money on water, more money on 
that. It’s a bunch of phony-baloney, Mr. Speaker, and the 
people know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there is one way. There is one 
way to resolve this debate. The NDP could follow the auditor’s 
recommendation. They could follows the lead of seven — 
seven — other provincial governments and give us the complete 
picture of the government’s finances. They could present their 
budget based on summary financial statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immediately after question period, I will introduce 
The Government Accountability Act, which would require the 
government to present a budget based on the complete picture 
of provincial finances, so it would never again be possible for 
the government to fudge the budget and hide a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP really believes in open, accountable 
government will they support this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, putting those people in 
charge of financial accountability would be a little bit like 
putting Colonel Saunders in charge of the chicken coop. 
 
I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, because this is how phony the 
opposition really is. 
 
When that member who was just up, Mr. Speaker, was asked on 
CJME radio, well, doesn’t the government really publish 
summary financial statements and give the whole picture, this is 
what he said, Mr. Speaker. He said, I believe so, yes; when you 
look at the two together that is the public accounts, I think you 
get a complete understanding of the province’s financial 
picture. Now that’s what he says on . . . (inaudible) . . . Then he 
comes in and tries to tell the people that we’re hiding 
something, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the real point is this. If this opposition believes that we 
should not drive down the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, money that 
has been saved to pay for programs — $225 this year — they 
should say what they would cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

SaskEnergy Rates 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for SaskEnergy. In the NDP’s own 2002-2003 
budget documents, they forecast to earn revenues from the sale 
of natural gas in the amount of $3 per gigajoule. They forecast 
that amount will remain stable through this year and the next 
two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is presently charging Saskatchewan 
families $5.44 per gigajoule for the energy they use in their 
homes and businesses. My question to the minister: when will 
SaskEnergy lower its prices to Saskatchewan consumers to 
better reflect their actual costs of energy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new. And I 
want to remind the House and the people of the province that 
last year at this time the opposition looked at the budget figure 
and they said, oh, the government has underestimated the price 
of natural gas because, they said, the government is saying the 
price of natural gas will go down. That’s what they said, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I said, look, this is the information that we get from the 
Department of Energy and Mines. This is what we believe will 
happen. As it turned out, we were right. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as they talk about natural gas prices, then 
they went on and advised the people of the province that what 
we should do last year is lock everybody in at 5 or $6 for five 
years — something that would have cost the people of 
Saskatchewan tens of millions of dollars each and every year, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to knowing who’s more accurate, clearly we 
have been more accurate on this file, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, this government and this 
minister have stated repeatedly that SaskEnergy natural gas 
rates are set on a cost/recovery basis only and that any profits 
generated to SaskEnergy will be derived from the distribution 
of natural gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this minister now admitting that a large 
component of SaskEnergy’s gas rate is nothing more than a tax 
imposed upon natural gas users in this province for no other 
purpose than to pad, to pad the profits of SaskEnergy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that that 
member could say that would be further from the truth. The 
truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that last year not only did 
SaskEnergy not charge the customers what it cost to get the gas, 
SaskEnergy subsidized the customers to the tune of, I think 
about 70 to $80 million, Mr. Speaker, which is one of the 
reasons why SaskEnergy’s profits are down this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy has the best record in Canada — with 

the possible exception of Medicine Hat, which owns its own gas 
utility also — in providing people with natural gas at very 
competitive rates, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going . . . even 
though the opposition wants to privatize SaskEnergy and 
privatize SaskTel, we’re going to keep owning those Crown 
corporations and providing that service to the people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
(10:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 202 — The Government Accountability Act 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill No. 
202, The Government Accountability Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
Bill No. 25, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Will the members come to 
order, please. 
 
Yesterday, the Opposition House Leader raised a point of order 
concerning the use of unparliamentary language by the Minister 
of Agriculture and Food during question period. In particular, 
the minister was accused of using the word “misuse” in 
reference to the member for Saltcoats. 
 
Having reviewed the verbatim of yesterday’s question period, I 
can find no instance of the word “misuse” being used in any 
context. Therefore I find the point of order not well taken. 
 
But before closing on this point of order, I would like to clarify 
the issue of what does and what doesn’t constitute 
unparliamentary language. In making his point of order the 
Opposition House Leader made reference to a list of words at 
paragraph 489 of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms 
6th Edition which have been ruled as unparliamentary when 
used in reference to a member. 
 
I would like to direct all members to paragraph 491 of the same 
authority which states, and I quote: 
 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

 

No language is, by virtue of any list, acceptable or 
unacceptable. A word which is parliamentary in one 
context may cause disorder in another context, and 
therefore be unparliamentary. 

 
By way of illustration, if members wish to make reference to 
the lists published in Beauchesne’s, they will find some words 
on both the lists of parliamentary and unparliamentary 
expression. 
 
I hope this clarifies practice in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly 
to move a motion in regards to the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Standing Committee on Agriculture Meetings 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Watrous, this motion: 
 

That the Standing Committee on Agriculture be authorized 
as follows: 
 
To receive a representation on behalf of the Legislative 
Assembly from the Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy regarding its final report, and further, to this 
purpose; that the said standing committee be authorized to 
conduct its proceedings in the Legislative Chamber, except 
when the Assembly is sitting, and that the committee 
proceedings be televised by the Legislative Assembly on 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Network, and further that the 
Legislative Assembly do also broadcast the audio of the 
proceedings on the Internet via the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan web site, and; 
 
That upon receiving the final report of the ACRE 
Committee, the standing committee shall both make a 
report to the Assembly to the effect and table a copy of the 
ACRE Committee’s Final report as soon as is practicable. 
 
and, 
 
To examine and make recommendations to the Assembly 
with respect to the agricultural land holding provisions as 
set out in The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, and; 
 
That, for the purpose of this examination, the said standing 
committee shall have the authority to engage such advisors 
and assistants as are required and, in accordance with the 
provisions set out in Rule 94(4), permit membership on the 
committee to be transferable. 

 
Dated April 12, today, Mr. Speaker, we move the motion . . . 
motion moved by the member from Yorkton, seconded by the 
member from Watrous. We move the motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I request 
permission to table written responses for questions 89 through 
98. And as well as per our commitment last week and those 
questions ordered, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to table those 
questions this morning as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d just like to point out to the members of the House that we 
have to date had with the subquestions asked and individual 
questions 6 or 700 questions asked, and I would like to thank all 
of those civil servants who have worked literally hundreds of 
hours to put forward the answers to these questions. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they have worked very, very hard. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 
96, 97, 98 have been tabled. Also the responses to questions of 
last week have been tabled as well, earlier this week. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 – The Speech-Language Pathologists 
and Audiologists Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Speech-Language 
Pathologists and Audiologists Amendment Act. 
 
The government has over the past year worked closely on these 
amendments with the Saskatchewan Association of 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists. I wish to 
thank Orlene Martens, the association president, and her 
colleagues for all their dedicated hard work in developing these 
amendments. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge the vital role speech-language 
pathologists and audiologists play in our health care system and 
in serving the health needs of Saskatchewan people. As part of 
a comprehensive team of rehabilitation specialists they evaluate 
and treat people who have speech-language or hearing 
disorders. 
 
Their experience, insight, and professionalism are essential to 
building the health care system we want for this province. I 
applaud them for their energy, enthusiasm, and commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments I put before the Assembly today 
are proposed to give the public a greater voice within the 
Saskatchewan Association of Speech-Language Pathologists 
and Audiologists. The changes to the Act, though small, are 
significant in several ways. 
 
First, this Bill proposes increasing the number of public 
representatives on the council of the Saskatchewan Association 
of Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists. The 
proposed amendments will increase the number of public 
representatives from one to three. 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

This increase in public involvement will allow for one public 
representative to sit on the council’s complaints and 
investigation committee and another public representative to sit 
on the discipline committee. 
 
This amendment will also extend the representatives’ term of 
office from two years to three years. 
 
Increasing the number of public representatives will enrich and 
enhance the way speech-language pathologists and audiologists 
serve the people of this province. 
 
These amendments, along with others concerning 
administrative details, such as their annual report and 
membership list, are proposed to make the Act consistent with 
other Saskatchewan health profession legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
quality, accessible, and responsible health care services for the 
people of Saskatchewan, we believe it is important to bring 
these amendments to the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists Amendment 
Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 13, The Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists 
Act, which is a mouthful, is an Act that, after a little bit of 
reviewing is, is more or less a housekeeping Bill. 
 
Some of the ideas that, just listening to the minister mention 
about increasing the number of public representatives on the 
board and extending their term — from all the comments that 
we’ve heard is the right direction to go — is received with no 
hesitation from the groups that we have talked to, the few 
groups that we have talked to. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we would like to just have another look 
at this Bill and make sure everything is according to the . . . 
what the people in that area are interested in and it goes in the 
right direction. So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Consumer 
Protection Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main purpose of this Bill is to update and 
harmonize Saskatchewan’s consumer protection legislation in 
the area of electronic commerce. With electronic commerce 
becoming an increasingly important part of the economy, 
adequate consumer protection for transactions taking place over 
the Internet requires that current consumer protection legislation 
be updated. As Internet shopping comes with ambiguities that 
do not exist in other forms of commerce, additional parameters 

are needed to ensure that on-line customers are protected. 
 
On May 25, 2001, federal, provincial, and territorial ministers 
responsible for consumer affairs endorsed an Internet sales 
contract harmonization template. The template is to become 
part of consumer protection legislation throughout Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill implements the provisions of the 
Internet sales contract harmonization template and will put in 
place the legislative framework to do a number of things: to 
require Internet sellers to disclose certain basic information to 
consumers to ensure that consumers can make informed 
decisions before they make Internet purchases; to require 
Internet sellers to provide consumers with an express 
opportunity to accept or decline the contract; and to correct any 
errors immediately before entering into the contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’ll also require Internet sellers to disclose 
information in a clear and comprehensible manner and make it 
accessible in a manner that ensures that consumers have access 
. . . that the consumer has access to the information and is able 
to retain and print the information. Also, Mr. Speaker, it will 
require Internet sellers to provide a copy of the contract 
containing required information within 15 days after the 
consumer enters into the contract. 
 
Also allow consumers to exercise cancellation rights in certain 
circumstances; for example, if a seller fails to disclose the 
required information or to deliver the goods or services on time. 
 
And finally, allow a customer who makes a purchasing . . . who 
makes a purchase using his or her credit card, to obtain a refund 
from the credit card company if an Internet seller fails to 
provide a refund after the consumer has cancelled the purchase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments also provide penalties 
for non-compliance with these provisions. The penalty 
provisions will allow for effective regulation and improve 
enforcement of the harmonized provisions. 
 
Today’s Bill also includes provisions which limit a consumer’s 
liability for transactions where a credit card is lost or stolen. 
And it also provides protection against unauthorized use of 
credit card information. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of this Bill is another important 
step towards harmonizing consumer protection legislation 
across Canada. And these proposed amendments will provide 
Saskatchewan consumers with additional protection when 
making purchases on the Internet and will eliminate some of the 
uncertainties that both consumers and businesses encounter 
when buying and selling on-line. 
 
The proposed amendments will also ensure that Saskatchewan 
consumers will have the same level of protection as consumers 
in other provinces and territories. Mr. Speaker, these 
amendments have been the subject of widespread national 
consultations. The Saskatchewan branch of the Consumers 
Association of Canada has indicated its support for the 
proposed amendments. 
 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d also note that valuable consumer 
information, including information about shopping safety 
on-line, is available on the Saskatchewan Justice Web site at 
www.saskjustice.gov.sk.ca, Mr. Speaker. And a copy of the 
pamphlet, Shopping Safely Online, is also available by 
contacting the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Consumer Protection Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to just take a few moments to respond to the movement of 
The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2002, and make a 
few comments. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you as well that our 
caucus will be adjourning this, this . . . for the time being so that 
we can take a further look at it. 
 
But the comments I want to make in regards to protecting 
consumers regarding electronic trade is . . . no doubt that over 
the past number of years there’s been a significant move 
amongst consumers to move into the electronic trade . . . trading 
field with the advent of the computer and the technology that 
we now have available to us; and the ability to access programs 
by the Net and the fact that — as we have seen over the past 
number of years — the ability of unscrupulous individuals to 
abuse the rights and privileges of individuals who might be 
accessing a lot of the electronic mail that is available to us 
today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think I can say, and the minister might 
even agree with this as we get into further debate, that while 
protecting measures are being put in place, and this piece of 
legislation is hoping to address some of the concerns that have 
brought . . . been brought to the government’s attention to date, 
the ability of individuals to access computer programs and to 
access individual files, pieces of legislation may not necessarily 
address all of the problems we have out there. And I think the 
government’s quite well aware of it. 
 
But it’s important that governments take some leadership and 
that legislators take some leadership to try and bring into focus 
protective measures that would protect the consumer. And it’s 
imperative that these protective measures be brought in also at a 
national level as well. 
 
It’s not simply that easy for one province, if other provinces 
don’t act and the federal government doesn’t take the point of 
acting to protect the consumer in regards to the electronic trade 
area and the ability of individuals to abuse those privileges that 
they have, and accessing the electronic area of commerce so 
that the consumers are treated fairly. And when a consumer 
signs on to a sales pitch that the consumer knows exactly what 
they’re going to have, or has some very solid information that 
they can access before they sign on or . . . to enter into a 
contractual agreement with an individual by the electronic 
medium. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that there are a number of areas 
that need to be looked at very carefully, very closely, and this is 

a piece of legislation that certainly is welcome, that is 
necessary. However I think we need to take the time to review 
what the legislation hopes to accomplish, intends to accomplish, 
and see whether or not there are other areas that we could even 
bring forward to government as we move through the total 
debate to guarantee the safety of the consumer in regards to 
electronic commerce. 
 
And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
morning I have with me a number of officials. And seated to my 
immediate right is the deputy minister, Mr. Gord Nystuen. 
Directly behind Mr. Nystuen is Mr. Jack Zepp, who is the 
director of administrative services branch. Behind me, Mr. 
Chair, is Mr. Hal Cushon, who is the assistant deputy minister 
of policy and financial services division; seated directly to my 
left is Mr. Ross Johnson, who is the budget officer with the 
administrative services branch. 
 
And then in the back row, Mr. Speaker, behind the bar, is Ms. 
Mary Ellen Carlson, who is the assistant deputy minister of 
Agriculture; Louise Greenberg, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of programming and services division; and Mr. Doug 
Matthies, who is the general manager for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation; Mr. Greg Haase, who is the director of 
the lands branch; and Mr. Dave Boehm, who is the director of 
financial programs branch, Mr. Chair. 
 
All of my officials are here; my department is all here today, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’d like to join the Minister of Agriculture in 
welcoming his officials here today. And today most of our 
focus on this side of the House is going to be on crop insurance. 
There’s no doubt that’s what we’re getting more of the phone 
calls from in our offices. 
 
And this year more than ever, these are not particularly happy 
phone calls. The producers of the province are somewhat upset 
with the crop insurance program once they got their forms and 
did the mathematics and what it’s going to cost them. 
 
And there’s no doubt, Mr. Chair, that on both sides of the 
House that we agree that the farm families in this province are 
facing more severe challenges than ever before. The commodity 
prices are remaining low and the input costs are continuing to 
rise on an ongoing basis. 
 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

And the federal government for all intents and purposes appears 
to have all but abandoned the producers in the province and 
their safety net programs. And I’m referring to AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), which was followed 
by CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program), are flawed to say 
the least and they’ve failed to meet the needs of the producers 
of the province. 
 
And along with the depressed commodity prices, the farmers of 
Saskatchewan have experienced the worst drought in the history 
of the province, and they fear that they are going to be facing 
yet another drought. And in spite of all that, the federal 
government is not going to extend their C-SAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Assistance Program) program. 
 
And although it wasn’t really adequate to meet the needs that 
we have in our province, at least it was money in the farmers’ 
pockets in the spring before seeding, and they needed it the 
most. And we always appreciate any assistance that we can get 
from the federal government. 
 
But you know there’s no doubt the industry is reaching a peak 
of desperation and we need extra assistance now more than 
ever. And it’s unfortunate, but along with the federal 
government, it appears as though the provincial government in 
all realistic terms has also abandoned the producers of the 
province. 
 
The elusive safety net program that the NDP has promised in 
the last number of budgets has never ever materialized. And 
now at a time when agriculture is struggling, there may be 
another drought, the input costs are high, commodity prices are 
low, the NDP have basically gutted their insurance program. 
 
And they promised repeatedly . . . the minister has promised a 
number of times in a number of formats around the province 
that he’s going to enhance the crop insurance program. So could 
the minister please tell myself and the producers of the province 
here, today, how the 2002-2003 crop insurance program has 
been enhanced and how it’s identified the needs of the 
producers in this province. 
 
And I’m sure everyone would like to hear today how the new 
premium structure of the 2002 and 2003 crop insurance 
program recognizes the fact that these are particularly difficult 
times and the producers can hardly withstand increases in their 
input costs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I very much 
appreciate the comments that you have made and your 
coverage, sort of, of the waterfront as I would suggest reflects 
somewhat accurately the kinds of pressures that Saskatchewan 
farmers have been facing now for several years. 
 
And on this side of the House, we’ve attempted — not only 
through the efforts of the Government of Saskatchewan but in 
partnership with farm organizations and producer groups and 
also with our colleagues both to the east and west; particularly 
Manitoba and Alberta and, to a large degree, with our friends in 
Ontario — to work collectively . . . and for that matter, even our 
friends in Quebec — to work collectively in trying to move a 
new strategy as it relates to what we’re going to do with 
agriculture in Saskatchewan and in Canada over the next 

decade. 
 
Now I know that there has been some criticism from that side of 
the House from time to time that asked the question about what 
is it that has happened and what kind of work have we done in 
terms of trying to capture some stability and security for 
farmers across the province. And I want to just say . . . and I 
think important for the record and the question that you asked, 
what will Saskatchewan farmers . . . what are Saskatchewan 
farmers thinking and expecting over the next little while. 
 
Well over the last two years and given, for sure, last year when 
in fact we recognized that we had a significant drought coming 
in this province, we made a representation to the federal 
government with farm organizations and said, way back in 
November of the year 2000, just before the . . . just after the 
federal government had completed its election campaign. And 
we said to them, we needed to have an additional $200 million 
for farmers or additional billion dollars for Saskatchewan and 
Canadian farmers to assist us with emergency planning, because 
we did not have and we’re working on a national strategy in 
terms of a national agricultural policy. 
 
And the federal government said to us, not just to me but to 
provincial ministers across the nation, that there wasn’t any 
ability for them to provide any more new dollars. 
 
And as the member will recall, I called a meeting in 
Saskatchewan of which five provincial ministers attended 
directly: ministers from Quebec, Alberta, Ontario, and 
Manitoba, and myself. And the deputy ministers, also from 
various different provinces, were at this meeting. And our 
approach, Mr. Chair and Madam Member, was to encourage the 
federal government to look at the billion dollars that we were 
looking at. 
 
And clearly, what we were successful in doing as a collective 
group of ministers is to ensure that the federal government not 
only heard us, but then, through the work of the Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture and farm organization and groups and 
leaders here, we were successful last year in levering out a half 
a million dollars . . . or half a billion dollars for Canadian 
farmers. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Now from time to time I hear people on that side of the House 
— I’ve not heard you on this yet, Madam Member — but on 
that side of the House that people say to us, well you didn’t get 
the billion dollars that you were looking for for Saskatchewan. 
Well we were looking for a billion dollars, we were looking for 
a billion dollars, yes, we were looking for a billion dollars for 
all of Canada. And we were only successful in getting as a 
group of ministers only the 500 million. So we’re able then to 
add to the C-SAP program last year about $200 million. 
 
At the same time we talked a lot last year about the importance 
of water, the need for water. We in this province did a couple of 
things as it relates to the livestock industry. We made through 
. . . we made assertions through our department with the folks 
from Ducks Unlimited and we met with the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation to see whether or not we could get some of 
their lands across the province for grazing for livestock 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

 

producers and were successful in securing some of those 
arrangements. Took some of our own Crown land, opened it up 
for producers last year so that in fact they could graze on it to 
assist them with the drought piece. 
 
And there was continued concern about whether or not the 
province would be putting any money into the drought file. And 
we said that we would try and match or try to provide some 
additional funding, Madam Member, to the . . . to farmers. And 
so as we lobbied the federal government for additional money 
for water, the federal government said to us that there wasn’t 
any money that they were going to put in. 
 
But through our persistence efforts, Madam Member and Mr. 
Chair, we were able to lever out of the federal government $1.5 
million for drought last year. And some would say that wasn’t 
enough and we would agree that wasn’t enough. We asked for 
$5 million but they only provided to us a million and a half. 
 
And in an unprecedented way we also contributed by putting a 
million and a half dollars in as well. And so we were able to put 
into the water fund last year, to PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration), an additional $3 million. So 
when you look at sort of hardship that farmers faced last year, 
we were able to come to their support on a variety of different 
fronts. 
 
Now the member asks me this year about what we did with the 
crop insurance fund and the crop insurance program. Well, as 
the member will recognize that in the fall of last year I 
suggested to the federal government that we should have in 
Saskatchewan an additional $200 million injection from the 
federal government to assist us with safety nets, of which our 
intent was to take the money and put it into the crop insurance 
fund to grow the crop insurance in such a way of which we 
described it in our package, which is the package that we 
delivered to Ottawa back in February. 
 
Now as the member knows we were not successful in getting 
the $200 million. And the rationale from the federal 
government was that when you look at net incomes in Canada 
last year for farmers across the country and take a look at what 
Saskatchewan’s net farm incomes were at the end December of 
2001, they were projecting . . . they’re recorded at somewhere 
in neighbourhood of 1.2, $1.3 billion dollars; given what they 
usually are around $500 million. 
 
So the federal government’s response to us was no more new 
money for Saskatchewan farmers or for the provincial 
government to try to match. And accordingly, we didn’t get the 
$200 million, leaving us then with having to make some 
decisions about what you do with the crop insurance program in 
a year where you don’t get the up . . . where you don’t get the 
uplift in the money. 
 
Now I’ve listened carefully over the last several weeks here in 
the House where members have stood on their feet, your side of 
the House, and have said that somehow the spot loss hail 
insurance which we de-insured this year or removed from the 
program and made it available for private sector to sell the 
product — and through the course of our questioning I’ll share 
with you a letter that I have from the Canadian Crop Hail 
Association which I know that you’ll be interested in hearing — 

and so we took the spot loss hail portion out and took that 
money, which was about $35 million, seventeen and a half 
federal/provincial match, and we reinvested it back into the crop 
insurance program. 
 
I have, on record here today, the member from Kindersley when 
he was here, Mr. Boyd, make a speech during the budget 
presentation saying that the $17 million that we had of 
Saskatchewan money we sent back to Ottawa. And then I had, a 
couple of days ago, the member from Saltcoats stand in his 
place and talk about how we took the money and sent it back to 
the good folks in Ottawa. 
 
Well the reality is, Mr. Chair, is that we didn’t send any money 
back. We didn’t send Saskatchewan’s share back and we didn’t 
send the federal share back. That $35 million or $34 million, 
Mr. Chair, was reinvested right back into the crop insurance 
program. 
 
And we shouldn’t be out talking to Saskatchewan producers 
about things that are not factual. Because the facts are that the 
money was reinvested back into the crop insurance program. 
 
Now the question is, that the member asks, is the crop insurance 
program adequate this year for producers in our province? Well 
clearly, from the position that we’ve taken for the last 18 
months, that the crop insurance program is not adequate; that 
we wanted to enhance the crop insurance program. And that our 
efforts over the last several months have been to enhance that, 
in partnership with our Alberta and Manitoba friends, to build a 
made-in-Saskatchewan package. 
 
And today we . . . in order for us to meet the obligations, at least 
of our existing crop insurance program, we’ve had to de-insure 
or remove the spot loss hail, take those revenues and apply 
them to the sustenance of the current program. And we rolled 
that program out now about two weeks ago and are waiting to 
see what the outcome at the end of the day will be in terms of 
the numbers. 
 
My expectation will be — or assumption is — that we’ll see a 
crop insurance program that will be similar in terms of uptake 
to what it was last year. You’ll have as many producers who 
will buy that. I know some members on your side of the House 
don’t believe that. But I can tell you that to date, as we monitor 
what’s happening on the crop insurance file, the numbers of the 
people who are applying to the program are unchanged in terms 
of what they were last year. 
 
So the levels . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’m telling 
you what I’m, what I’m getting from my crop insurance 
officials — that the numbers are consistent with what they were 
last year at this time of the day. 
 
And further, I can tell you that on the spot loss . . . on the forage 
program, it’s now fully enrolled in and on the pilot project as it 
relates to the crop sector, we’re at about three-quarters filled 
now. 
 
So I know that the program doesn’t meet the kinds of 
expectations that we hoped it would have this year. It’s part of 
our national strategy and my interest will be to try to build a 
stronger crop insurance program as we move ahead. 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
your officials, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you talked about the 
numbers being very similar to last year in crop insurance, but 
you must remember that in order to get the cash advance you 
have to be in crop insurance. So many farmers — in fact, most 
farmers — out there that are relying on the cash advance have 
no choice but to take crop insurance, so I think that’s a very 
deceptive number. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked a few minutes about that we were 
deceiving the public, and you were talking about the share that 
the federal government puts into crop insurance in the spot loss 
hail and what the provincial . . . Could you give me a 
breakdown of how many dollars the federal government put in, 
in 2001, the provincial government put in, in 2001, and what 
the farmers share was in 2001, just for spot loss hail we’re 
talking here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . to the member. This was one of the 
questions that the member had asked and we provided the 
information, I think, about a week or so ago. And the 
producers’ portion was — to the Saskatchewan . . . spot loss 
hail for 201 — was the producers paid $23,000,313. And the 
Saskatchewan portion was 17.484 million. And the Canada 
portion was 17.484 million. So when you look at what the 
producers paid, it was at 40 per cent. And the governments of 
both Saskatchewan and Canada put in 30 per cent in 2001. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So my numbers 
were right. That was the numbers I had. I just wanted to 
confirm that. 
 
You said yesterday in one of your responses, Mr. Minister, that 
the provincial share would be reinvested in Saskatchewan 
agriculture, but you didn’t go far enough to tell us as to where 
that is being reinvested. 
 
Could you now today tell us where you’re putting that money 
and where, actually whether the farmers of Saskatchewan will 
ever receive any benefit from it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the 35 million 
— if that’s the number we could use because it’s almost 
rounded to that — the 35 million, the federal and the provincial 
share, went directly into the crop insurance program. 
 
So what you see today in terms of our Saskatchewan crop 
insurance program — which includes the risk management of 
the entire package, which includes the crop sector, includes the 
forage sector, includes now the new rainfall program, and 
includes the administration of the crop insurance program — so 
when you take a look at what the entire cost to the crop 
insurance program is today, that $35 million that came out of 
the spot loss hail sector went directly into the provisions as it 
applies to the entire package of the crop insurance program. 
 
It didn’t go to one. The question is, did it . . . was it directed to 
one particular sector of the program? It was not. The $35 
million would have made its way across the entire piece of the 
crop insurance program. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I find 
something really odd here. You needed an extra $35 million this 

year to put forth our crop insurance program that we have this 
year, and yet . . . I’ll just give you an example, Mr. Minister, of 
the crop insurance premium comparison in risk area 11, where 
the rates have all gone up for many of the crops. The premiums 
have gone up for the farmers. And I’ll just list some of them for 
you. 
 
Hard red spring, increase in premium of 32.9 per cent. It goes 
on and on. In fact it even up here for lentils on stubble, the cost 
has gone up 64 per cent. And all of these numbers have gone 
up. 
 
Why is it that all of sudden this year it takes so many more 
dollars to administer crop insurance when actually you haven’t 
got spot loss hail, the premiums are higher, and I certainly 
haven’t seen too many farmers out say there that the coverage 
has improved a whole lot. 
 
I’d like to know where the extra cost has come from and why it 
needs this extra influx of money at a time when there’s a 
drought coming in this province and farmers need this plan 
more than they’ve ever needed it before probably. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. Not only did we 
take a portion of the 35 million or take the 35 million and 
transplant it fully into the delivery of the crop insurance 
program this year, the provincial government also added 14 
million brand new dollars of its own to the program. 
 
Now the member makes the case, and I tried to reiterate this 
yesterday or ensure that the member understood this yesterday 
and will again today. When you take a look at what the 
liabilities coverage per acre is — 201 versus 202 — and I’ll just 
take some of the grains and oil seeds because those are the ones 
that I think are important for us to talk about here because 
there’s some assumption here that the level of coverage has not 
gone up. 
 
But the level of coverage, for example, on the hard spring wheat 
has gone from $83 — and this is, I’m using the 70 per cent level 
now — from $83.54, it’s gone to $90.01. So that’s what the 
coverage is. On durum it’s gone from $79.80 to $96.55 is what 
the coverage is per acre. The barley has gone from 66 to 79. 
Oats has gone from 49 to 67, and the flax has gone from $61 
per acre to $90 per acre, and canola has gone from $81 to $119. 
So you see that the level of the coverage per acre has gone up. 
 
Now the member makes the point that so has the premium. The 
premium has also gone up. And of course the premiums reflects 
the fact that you have an increased coverage per acre. And 
secondly, the value of the commodity today is better than it was 
a year ago. And thirdly, what’s happened here is that the federal 
share of the funding has not been incorporated here because 
what the federal government has done is that it has not put in its 
level of funding that they should have this year. 
 
On the national formula, as the member will know, because we 
were together when we made the presentations to the federal 
ministry back a year and a half ago or so, where we said that we 
want the formula from 60/40 to change. And the federal 
government has said to us, no, the 60/40 portion will stay. 
 
So for the safety net package we have today I believe about 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

 

$195 million. When you take a look at the share that the federal 
government puts in this year, our share is around 130 million 
. . . or the federal share is around the 130 million. And what 
we’ve done, Mr. Chair, is that we’ve grown our proportionate 
share from $130 million — Saskatchewan’s share — from $130 
million this year; we’re now at $145 million in this year, given 
that we recognized the kinds of pressures that we’re going to 
have in the crop sector. 
 
(11:30) 
 
But the federal share hasn’t moved at all. They’ve left their 60 
per cent level exactly where it’s been. And so accordingly, 
what’s happened here is that the federal government has 
reduced its portion of its commitment . . . or not met its portion 
of the commitment and accordingly, what we’ve done is we’ve 
added an additional 14 million. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
would ask the minister then . . . I understand what you’re 
saying, that the costs or the payout on these commodities has 
risen. But I look, for an example, at lentils here and the 
premium has jumped sixty-four and a half or sixty-four point 
three per cent. And I find farmers will have a hard time 
justifying how that is when lentils haven’t gone anywheres near 
that increase in the money that farmers get for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to back for a minute to yesterday, and I 
asked you questions on a certain farmer in my area and I’m sure 
there’s many other examples across the province. And this is a 
larger farmer, in fact . . . Although if you divide that down as a 
son and his dad farming 5,400 acres — you divide that between 
two families — it’s about 2,600, 2,700 acres which is not an 
abnormally large farm right now in the province. 
 
But I told you yesterday the numbers that he had wrote in and 
told me about, and he lost the $4,150 because of the education 
tax rebate that was dropped. But he also now, with the new 
costs in crop insurance, is going to have to pick up another 
$17,710. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you to tell me how I explain or how 
you would explain to that farmer, in a year where there might 
be a drought like this — or even in an average year — where on 
earth does that farm family, or two farm families, come up with 
that extra money and still stay solvent and stay farming for 
another year? Can you tell me that, Mr. Minister? Because I’d 
love to go home and explain to this farmer how he’s supposed 
to do that with these new costs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think the way I’ve explained it, Mr. 
Chair, and Mr. Member, is in a variety of ways. When you take 
a look at the pressures today on the budget, on the 
Saskatchewan budget . . . And clearly you’ve had a voice over 
the last several days here and weeks talking about how in fact 
the expenditures in this, in this budget are ones that need to be 
explained in a far more significant way. And you talk about the 
fact that today we may be — your words, not mine — that 
we’re overspending in this province and that we should be 
spending less money in the delivery of programs and services 
across the province. 
 
Well that isn’t the case when it comes to Agriculture because in 

Agriculture this year we took our budget and put an additional 
$14 million — and this is how I’d explain it to the farmer that 
you’re speaking of — took our additional $14 million and 
added it to our operations to ensure that we could protect as best 
we could, in a situation where dollars are tight, the farming 
economy. 
 
Now having said that, I would also talk about who isn’t 
contributing to their commitment because today in 
Saskatchewan we spend about 5 per cent of our entire operating 
budget on agriculture. And when you take a look at what’s 
happening not only in Canada but you look at what’s happening 
nationally or in North America, there is only one other 
jurisdiction in North America that’s putting the same amount of 
money into their farm economy, into their budget processes as 
we are, and that’s the United States. 
 
You’ll find no other province in Canada per capita who’s 
putting in the same kind of money into their agricultural 
community. So I’d say that to our farmer. 
 
Thirdly, what I’d say to the farmer is we needed to make some 
very difficult choices this year and so spot loss hail was one of 
those areas in which we needed to make a decision — not 
unlike what’s happening with our partners in government to the 
east of us, who today don’t have the spot loss hail program 
covered within their program; not unlike what happened in 
Alberta when they reduced their budget this year. I mean you 
just need to look at the agricultural budget in Alberta and take a 
look at what they’ve done and the kind of coverage they’ve 
reduced. 
 
And I would say to our farmer from our area of the province 
from which you and I come, I would take this letter with me 
that I got from the Canadian Crop Hail Association and I would 
quote this letter to him, Mr. Chair. And I would say this, and 
this is signed by Mr. Neil McQueen who is the chairperson of 
the Canadian Crop Hail Association, who represents the hail 
industry in the province. And he said this, and I quote this. He 
said: 
 

The removal of the spot loss hail subsidy from the 
government crop insurance program puts businesses on a 
level playing field to do what they do best, sell our product 
competitively (is what he goes on to say). 

 
And then he goes on to say: 
 

This is also good news for farmers (is what Mr. McQueen 
says here). 

 
He says that it puts scarce government dollars to the best use 
possible. He goes on to say: 
 

As Saskatchewan farmers face the driest conditions in our 
history, it makes a lot of sense to use government dollars to 
alleviate the risk of no grass for cattle and low yields in 
field crops. 

 
And then goes on in his final paragraph to say: 
 

The subsidies of more than $20 million annually to the 
government’s spot loss hail program in recent years has 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

seriously undermined the crop hail industry in 
Saskatchewan. The removal of this unfair competition will 
create a stronger private sector for Saskatchewan and that’s 
good news for every farmer and every Main Street and 
every village and every town in Saskatchewan. 

 
is what Mr. McQueen writes. 
 
Now I know the member’s views and positions as it relates to 
the competitive environment and private sector in this province 
and so the decision to remove the spot loss hail didn’t come 
lightly. It came after considerable consultation with the 
industry; it came with considerable consultation with the farm 
review support committee . . . the Farm Support Review 
Committee, and at the end of the day this was the decision that 
we needed to take, that we took very seriously and required a 
great deal of debate and understanding. And it didn’t come 
lightly that we removed it. 
 
But given the notion that we didn’t get the kind of money that 
we had anticipated we would get or needed to get from the 
federal government, put in our own new money this year over 
and above the 60/40 percentage, we needed to take and reduce 
the spot loss hail. And that’s the kinds of things that I would say 
to . . . that I’m saying to Saskatchewan farmers across the 
province. 
 
And I know that on an individual basis, depending on what part 
of the province you farm, what kinds of crops you grow, the 
number of years that you’ve been in the crop insurance 
program, the kinds of premium discounts that you’ve had, from 
whom you’ve bought hail insurance in the past and are going to 
buy it into the future, they all have a bearing today on what the 
annual operating costs of your farm are going to be. And I 
understand very clearly the kinds of pressures that we have on 
the farm. 
 
I too am a Saskatchewan farmer. I know what this . . . I know 
what this will do to our farm this year. This will be an 
additional cost, not only for the person from whom you’re 
quoting, but my hail insurance costs this year on our farm are 
going to be greater as well. 
 
But given the kinds of resources that we had to work with and 
the kinds of decisions we needed to make, spot loss hail has 
now been removed from the program and we’ve tried to 
enhance other parts of it. We put some money into the grass 
program because we believe that we need to ensure that the 
livestock industry is secured this year. 
 
If we have a drought in Saskatchewan this year, it seems to me 
that the priority has to be to try to provide a stronger crop 
insurance program as opposed to the anticipations of what 
might happen through hail. And that’s why we made the 
decisions that we made and that’s the kind of response that I 
would make — that I’m making, actually — to farmers across 
the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. 
I’ll try and remember everything you said and I’ll take that out 
to them and I’ll tell them that word for word. I hope I can 
remember it all. 
 

Mr. Minister, yesterday in one of your comments to the media 
— and correct me if I’m wrong — but I understand you had 
said to the media that the example I used was a very large 
farmer. And this is a large farm although, as we both know, 
farms are growing dramatically. 
 
But I believe you went on to say that smaller farms such as 
maybe — and I don’t know if these are your words exactly, but 
I think this was the intent — that 1,000 acres or 1,500 acres 
wouldn’t be hit near as hard as the farmer I had in my example. 
 
And I just wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could explain that to me 
how you differentiate between a smaller farm and a farm of this 
size, the effects of what the new changes in crop insurance have 
actually meant for the farmers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I don’t 
believe that anywhere I had delineated between large and small 
farmers and wouldn’t in many cases do that. So if there’s some 
sense here that I made a comment in relationship to that, I did 
not. It may have been made by one of the people who were 
working in around trying to get the appropriate kinds of 
messaging out, but they would not been my comments. 
 
What I would say however, though, is that the expectation for 
sure and the reality is, is that if you’re a larger farmer today in 
Saskatchewan and you’re requiring to insure a larger number of 
acres and your premium costs this year which are up for 
producers in the crop insurance file — the larger your farm, the 
larger the amount of premium that you’re going to pay this 
year. 
 
And some of that will vary dependent on the kind of crop that 
you’re growing. Now if you’re in the chickpea belt, clearly, 
your comments earlier — and I respect them because they’re 
accurate — people who are growing chickpeas in Saskatchewan 
and kabulis this year, their premiums will be significantly 
higher than what they were last year. Those farmers who are 
growing wheat and barley and oats and flax — and I’m not sure 
what kind of combination of crops this particular individual that 
we’re talking about grows — but it will depend on the kinds of 
commodities that you’re growing this year, what your level of 
payments will be. 
 
So I would close by saying that the reality is, is that the larger 
the farmer you are today, and depending on the kind of mix of 
crop that you have, will depend on how large your premium 
costs will be. But in all cases across the province this year — 
doesn’t matter if you’re big or small — as a farmer today 
you’re going to be paying more for your crop insurance 
premium. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I 
apologize if I misunderstood what you had said yesterday. And 
I agree with you that doesn’t matter what size your farm is, the 
increase in cost will go along with the same thing. 
 
Right now, Mr. Minister, I have other questions, but the 
member for Watrous has a number of questions. And I just want 
to thank you and your officials for your time. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to 
follow up further with what the minister said to the question by 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

 

the member from Saltcoats. He said that this will definitely hit 
larger farmers; it’ll impact them far worse. And I agree. 
 
He mentioned that he knows that the premiums went up 
considerably in chickpea areas, and he wasn’t too sure about 
what Saskatchewan considers is their core crops, which is 
wheat, barley, canola, etc. 
 
And I would just like to tell him that I have a crop insurance 
application form from what would be an average farmer, so a 
smaller farm around 1,000 acres. And by average I mean the 
number of acres, I don’t mean his age. He’s a 35-year-old 
farmer, which is quite considerably younger than the average 
farmer in Saskatchewan, and these are the farmers at the age 
that we should look at trying to retain in our province. And he’s 
chosen to, last year, to put 50 per cent coverage on his canola. 
And in looking at the forms this year, to put 50 per cent 
coverage on his canola, it’ll be an increase of 300 per cent. Last 
year, his premium was 36 cents an acre; this year it’s $1.04. 
 
So I would like to point out that it’s going to quite, quite 
significantly impact any and all the farmers in the province. 
And with that, the minister has implied quite strongly that the 
reason why this has all happened is because they had some 
clawback from the federal government, or the federal 
government was not going to give them as much money for the 
program, and yet there’s some understanding that they 
borrowed money from the federal government last year in order 
to cover program costs. 
 
So could the minister please tell us again here today how much 
money the federal government put into programs last year that 
was extra, over and above what they were required to put in; 
and what program that money was applied to when it was given 
to the province of Saskatchewan; and what agreement was 
made between the minister and the federal government in how 
we were going to repay those funds that the federal government 
was allowing us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam 
Member, for the question because this is one that we’ve had the 
considerable discussion about around the province. And 
certainly, as you can appreciate, Mr. Vanclief and I have been 
in a bit of a head-bunt on this as well, given that we don’t agree 
on the way in which the federal government has been 
accounting for the way in which it’s made its investment. 
 
And I want to just put these numbers out for the member, 
because I think they’ll be useful in your conversations. In the 
agreement with the federal government over three years, their 
portion of commitment is $190 million a year and our 
commitment is $130 million a year to the 60/40 formula that we 
used with the federal government. 
 
When you take the last three years of the investment into the 
programming, what you’ll find is that when you add the 1990 
. . . the 2000 . . . the 1999 number — or sorry — the 2000 
number, the 2001 number, and the 2002 number, federally, 
you’ll get to their portion of $190 million per year. 
 
(11:45) 
 
When you take the Saskatchewan portion over that same period 

of time, you’ll find that when you get to the third year of the 
program, which is this year, we have added an additional $14 
million to our $130 million requirement. 
 
So we’ve met our commitments in each of those years, except 
this year we’ve put in an additional $14 million. And why we 
put the additional $14 million in is because we saw the kinds of 
difficulties that we were having in the crop insurance program. 
 
Now the member will say that the federal government has said 
that we borrowed the money from the crop insurance fund 
somehow and we applied it somewhere else. 
 
Well it’s true that of the $190 million that the federal 
government had last year, they didn’t use it all in the crop 
insurance program — they didn’t use it all. So they took their 
portion of their . . . which was about $20 million and they put it 
into the C-SAP II program. So they just took their money and 
transferred it into a different account. 
 
And Saskatchewan producers still got the share of the 190 of 
which the federal government committed itself to. But we left 
our money in there and continued to provide it in the, in the 
crop insurance fund and also made the kinds of matches that 
were required to do the C-SAP II, which is the emergency 
one-off funding. 
 
So when the federal government says to us that, well they 
borrowed the money out of the account and now this year 
they’re not . . . they’re needing to put it back, clearly the case is, 
is that they simply took their money and applied it into the 
safety nets where it should have been and are making it useful 
for Saskatchewan producers today. 
 
And what we did of course, is we went and said because we’ve 
spent our entire $130 million and met our obligations last year 
on C-SAP II, we think you should add an additional match to 
our $14 million into the crop insurance program, so now the 
formula is no longer . . . and to maintain it at the 60/40. Rather 
than yours being at 190 million — because ours is now gone to 
145 — you should be jacking yours up by an additional $14 
million. 
 
Well the federal government didn’t agree to that because what 
they say is that we had a deal; the deal is a three-year package; 
we put in 180 . . . $190 million a year and that’s all we’re 
putting in; we did our budget in, in November or December of 
2001; Canadian farmers and you, Saskatchewan, are expected to 
live within that financial package for now, 18 months. 
 
And we said, and I said, we don’t operate our province on that 
basis. Every year we have a budget and every year we make 
allocations to the funding that’s required for all departments 
including Agriculture. 
 
And this year, when we saw there being a special . . . or needing 
to address the kinds of issues as it relates to drought, we put 14 
million more dollars in. And you tell us that you’re not growing 
your base 60/40 arrangement by the additional $14 million 
because we have a deal. And we say, that’s not fair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m looking 
at a April 4, 2002 article in The Western Producer where I 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

believe this article discusses your meeting with Minister 
Vanclief. And I’ll just quote from that article. And the article is 
quoting you, Mr. Minister: 
 

“We both acknowledge that they’ve put in their $195 
million,” . . . (it says) (Serby is) referring to the amount 
Ottawa contributes each year to crop insurance, Net Income 
Stabilization Accounts, and . . . Canada Farm Income 
Program. 

 
So I listened with interest as you explained that you have a 
three-year agreement with the federal government and you 
mentioned 190 million. First of all, is it a hundred . . . that the 
feds put in, is it 190 or is it 195? I’d like some clarification on 
that. The provincial share is 130. 
 
Could you tell us when this agreement first came into effect and 
outline the payments by . . . And what does it cover? Does it 
cover crop insurance or does it cover all the farm income 
programs as indicated in this news item? And give us the 
payments by both levels of governments for each year that the 
program is in effect please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I should just make sure that I 
have the right number for the federal government. I’ve given 
them credit for $5 million; it’s right. It’s really 195 million. I 
thought it was 190. Really is 195 is what their share is of the 
formula. Our share is 130 million. 
 
This is now the third year of the agreement, so the agreement 
would have been captured, I expect, in June of, likely, 2000, I 
think is when it was signed off. I believe the previous minister 
of Agriculture was in Ottawa in June, I believe, the end of June 
of 2000. And when he returned home he decided no longer to 
be a member. That’s how I think I remember this exercise. So 
would have been then that the agreement would have been 
signed and it was on the basis of the 60/40 which was the 195 
and the 130. 
 
What I will provide for the member is the actual breakdown of 
every year, because I think that’s the question that the member 
asked, Mr. Chair. And we’ll provide that detail for you so that 
you’ll be able to see the kinds of commitments that were made 
in each of those three years, both by the federal government and 
the provincial government. 
 
Where I make the case about this year, is that this year they 
have put their 195 is what my article says, they have put their 
$195 million in every year over the last three years. So they 
haven’t . . . they have not deviated or, in fact, not met the 
responsibilities of the agreement. Mr. Vanclief is right about 
that. 
 
However, and so have we. Not only have we met our 
commitment of 130, this year we increased our commitment by 
an additional $14 million because we saw the kinds of pressures 
that we’re going to have in the crop insurance sector this year. 
And that’s why we made the adjustment. 
 
And so when we asked our federal friends, as we’ll show you, 
to put additional money into the program, they said they were 
not in the position to increase the level from the 190 because 
that was the deal that we had set with them over a three-year 

period, and we’re not flexible at all in terms of growing the 190 
to the level of which we thought they needed to grow it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I find it somewhat interesting that the 
minister is contending that the . . . there’s been a debate in the 
media and in this House that whether the federal government 
paid more in a particular year, and now we’re paying less in this 
year, and those sorts of things. And the minister is saying that 
the federal people haven’t stepped up to the plate as they should 
and so on. He’s got his officials here and he doesn’t have the 
figures as to how much each level of government has put in the 
last couple of years? I find that somewhat incredulous, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
If you’re going to make the argument that . . . and we bought 
the argument, we on this side of the House, and all we’re doing 
is repeating what the federal people have told us. If you’re 
going to . . . and you’re saying that the feds aren’t giving the 
true picture, and now you come in Ag estimates and you don’t 
have those figures as to what, how much each level of 
government has put in. Mr. Minister, I find that amazing. 
 
I would ask . . . and then the other question is, I had asked what 
programs does the 195 million and the 130 million, what 
programs do they cover. Could the minister please answer what 
programs, and also I’d give him some opportunity to rethink his 
answer as far as the level of funding from each level of 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I didn’t say that 
we wouldn’t provide you with the information. I don’t think 
you’re asking me or telling me that we’re not going to provide 
the information. You’re saying do we have the detailed 
information today because in your earlier question, I believe 
you asked what makes up the $195 million? And what makes 
up the $195 million will be cash advance money will be in there 
federally. And crop insurance makes up a portion of that and 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) makes up a portion 
of that. 
 
And so what I don’t have at my disposal immediately here 
today is the detail on each one of those because you’re asking 
me now about the last three years. 
 
So I give the undertaking today that we’ll provide that 
information for you in detail so that you’ll have it. I don’t have 
it at my disposal immediately and I expect that we’ll have 
another opportunity to talk about the agricultural estimates. 
 
But because there is so much . . . because this arrangement is so 
detailed with the federal government, we want to make sure that 
we provide that for you in a full and extensive fashion. And I 
give that undertaking this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, I realize there may be some 
detail. But surely when you’re talking in round numbers of the 
federal contribution and the provincial contribution, perhaps 
you should have, for the past years when this program first 
came into effect, you should have those numbers. And really I 
think the citizens of this province really have no way of really 
evaluating the true picture in this whole argument, Mr. 
Minister. 
 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

 

Now you mentioned . . . or it was mentioned in this news item 
that the federal CFIP contributions are also part of that 195. Is 
that, is that . . . You mentioned in your reply that the cash 
advance program is part of that 195. Could you clarify is CFIP 
in that 195? Is it not? And could you tell us when you will have 
the answers to my questions, Mr. Minister? Could you give us a 
date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I think what I 
just said earlier is important that we take . . . to take the time 
that we need to make sure that you have all the information 
because if you heard me say that CFIP was in this 195 — it’s 
not in the 195. And I don’t think my article says that CFIP is in 
there either. 
 
And so what we need to show you is what the 195 covers off, 
which is cash advance, crop insurance, and NISA is in the 195, 
and then the CFIP is a different package. And so we’ll provide 
that for you, and we will have this for you in very short order, 
within the next day, we’ll have this information for you. It’s just 
a matter of going and putting it together in a fashion which 
would be appropriate, I think for you to see it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned that you’re putting 
in $14 million more into the crop insurance program and that 
the federal people . . . you’ve upped your government’s 
contribution from 130 to 144, 145 million this year. But you’re 
also saying that that’s not enough to sustain the spot loss hail. 
And you asked the federal government to also put in their 
additional 14 million. 
 
So if the feds would have come up with the $14 million would 
have you been able to operate and offer the spot loss hail 
program? I’m wondering about that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think one could speculate that had we 
received the federal money, the choice would have been then, 
do you leave the money in the spot loss hail program, which 
certainly would have been an option in my view. Or what we 
could have done is taken that additional money and still taken 
the spot loss hail out in the way in which we did and applied 
that to the program and then seen a reduction in what the level 
of premiums for producers would have been. I think that option 
would have been there. So there would have been two options 
for us to entertain. 
 
But we never had the opportunity to entertain either one of 
those options because we didn’t get the additional dollars that 
we were looking for. 
 
I can say that the Farm Support Review Committee I expect 
would have been on side to leave the spot loss hail in place and 
to take the money that we might have got from the federal 
government and put it into the package so that the premiums of 
farmers wouldn’t have gone up to the same level. 
 
But given the fact that you have increased levels today of acre 
coverage, even with the federal funding had we received it this 
year, you would have likely seen, in my view — and we can get 
certainly a better appreciation of this through the department 
folks — I think you would have seen anyway some increases in 
the premiums this year particularly on the grains and oilseeds 
side given the fact that your coverage and the price of the 

commodity is a little better off than it was, say, a year ago. So 
you’d likely seen some increases anyway. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering and I guess I’m a 
little bit confused. I realize you don’t have some of the numbers 
right at your disposal at the moment. But let me summarize 
what you’ve presented here. 
 
Last year you said the federal government put in their $195 
million and the province put in their $130 million to cover the 
programs as listed, correct? Under last year’s program each . . . 
you were able to offer the spot loss hail at a cost of 
approximately $17.4 million to each level of government; the 
producers picked up the remaining 23 million and some dollars. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Now this year you’ve said the federal people have put in the 
$195 million for this year, you’re upping yours to 145, and you 
can’t offer the spot loss hail. Something doesn’t quite jive here, 
Mr. Minister. Actually you should have more money available 
to run the program and yet you’ve gutted the program. You’ve 
taken an option out of the program that many farmers will pay 
huge increased costs just to replace what you’ve taken out of 
the program. How do you explain this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the member 
should know that last year in order to sustain the crop insurance 
program last year we put additional money into the program as 
well, to ensure that we could meet the kinds of obligations that 
we did in the crop insurance file. 
 
So this year we recognized again that we needed to put 
additional funding in and that’s from the perspective that we put 
the 14 million brand new dollars in. 
 
And the member’s right, in his interpretation of what I’ve said, 
and that is that the federal government and we have met our 
obligations to the agreement of 195 and 130. Now that’s 
absolutely correct. But we took and put additional funding in 
this year into our formula portion and we’ll show that to you in 
the next day. 
 
What also is important here, when the member asks about the 
kinds of options that we were looking at this year, I’m on record 
and so is my partners, my colleagues in Alberta, and Manitoba, 
and British Columbia, and in Ontario, to remove the bonus 
interest portion of NISA. 
 
And what we wanted to do with the bonus portion of interest of 
NISA is to take that chunk of money and put it into the crop 
insurance program to try and make sure that we could provide 
the same package this year so that producers . . . and that leaves 
some money of course, given what the federal government had 
said to us, would have covered off a portion of that spot loss 
hail that we were talking about a bit earlier. So we had yet 
another option about things that we want to do. 
 
Now, the member opposite and other producers across the 
province might say that NISA is an extremely popular program; 
people would like to remain in it. And for us it’s worth about $9 
million is what we put in annually now, on the interest side. The 
federal government puts in exactly the same amount, so it’s 18 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

million. So one of the options would have been for us to take a 
portion of that money and put it into the crop insurance 
program. 
 
But we enriched it last year with money, and we enriched it 
again this year with money. And this year, had we been able to 
get a bit more, the answer might be that we’d been able to offer 
a similar product. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that last year you had 
to put in some additional money into the crop insurance 
program. The question is how much additional money did you 
put in, and where did it come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, last year we put in $13 million. 
 
Mr. Hart: — And, Mr. Minister, I presume that came from the 
General Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, all the money comes from the 
General Revenue Fund, and it comes from the department’s 
budget. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d explain 
then in . . . I’m looking at the 2000-2001 annual report of the 
Crop Insurance Corporation. And I’m looking at page 37 of the 
balance sheet. And there it states that due from the province of 
Saskatchewan General Revenue Fund there’s $102,959,289. 
 
Is this money that the General Revenue Fund owes to the crop 
insurance program? How do you . . . can you explain this 
amount of money, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I’m told that the 
Department of Finance holds the cash, and that this is just a 
bookkeeping entry. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’re going in a 
little bit different direction, a little more general direction in the 
question, and that is I think that perhaps the officials and the 
minister can’t appreciate the in-depth amount of planning that 
goes into a farming operation prior to being able to seed in the 
spring. 
 
A seeding plan has to be made, and the seed needs to be 
cleaned, and the financial . . . finances necessary for the input 
costs needs to be put into place. And the ability for the 
producers to secure this financing is often quite dependent on 
the insurance that the producer plans to purchase for the year. 
 
And this year the crop insurance forms were quite delayed. And 
even though some deadlines were extended, the time frame 
given to the producers was — and we’re talking especially the 
cattle producers, but producers in general — was quite 
unacceptable. And I had sent to me an application that was 
dated March 21, and the due date for the coverage that the 
producer was interested in was April 1. And now assuming that 
Canada Post was at its finest and the producer picked up his 
mail quite regularly, he probably would have received his 
application approximately March 25, or sorry, 23 or 24, but that 
was a weekend so he may not have received it until March 26. 
So that only gives him five working days in which to make 
some major decisions for his farming operation. And I find that 

rather unacceptable. 
 
So could the minister please explain to us today why there was 
such a delay in the crop insurance applications getting into the 
hands of the producers — and yes, I agree, the deadlines were 
extended somewhat — but why they weren’t extended a little 
bit farther than they were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member . . . or, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, to the member, the previous question that was 
asked of me by the member from Last Mountain . . . Sorry, I 
should know that; I should know that. Given the astuteness of 
the member from Last Mountain, I should have remembered 
that. 
 
I want to say that the reason why we waited is because we were 
hoping that we might get a decision on the NISA program. And 
as I said earlier, our interest was to try nationally, our interest 
nationally was to try to see whether or not the federal 
government would agree on us taking the portion of the interest 
bonus to use within the crop safety net sector. 
 
And all of us were waiting for it. In fact, if you were to have 
this conversation with our friends in Manitoba, they had hoped 
that they would have had a decision by now on the NISA bonus 
interest — which, by the way, we still don’t have from the 
federal government. And our interest was to try and see whether 
or not we could take that bonus NISA interest and then apply it 
to the crop insurance fund. And that’s the reason for the delay 
in the rollout of the crop insurance program because we wanted 
to take that money and use it in the crop insurance side. 
 
Now when you go to roll out a crop insurance program of this 
magnitude, I understand fully about how important it is for 
farmers to be able to know what they’re working with in a 
given year and the crop insurance program is essential. And on 
our farm, we know how important that is as well. And so I 
recognize that there were some inconvenience, without any 
doubt, for provincial farmers across the province. 
 
Now we extended the deadline to April 19 and this creates some 
pressure as you will probably appreciate with the reinsurance 
agencies across the country who reinsure crop insurance, 
because what happens is that it weights the advantage to the 
producer and any time . . . or to the customer, and any time that 
an insurance agency is experiencing an advantage to their 
customer, there may be an additional premium here. 
 
Why I say that is that you have now an additional 19 days into 
the cropping year actually, to make a decision about what you 
want to do, particularly people in the Southwest. They have 19 
more days into their cropping year to make a decision about 
what they are going to do with their crop insurance program. 
And so it gives the advantage then to the producer and the 
insurance agencies . . . or insurance companies, reinsurance 
companies are most concerned about that — but we did it 
anyway. 
 
We extended the crop insurance program on the crop sector to 
April 19 and left the forage program to the end of March, I 
believe is the deadline that we had on that. 
 
And to date, as I’ve said to you earlier in my comments, our 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

 

forage program will be at capacity I expect. I don’t have the full 
accounting on it yet, but our new forage program that we rolled 
out this year will be captured fully I expect here by the 
producers of the province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would caution 
the minister from equating the number of applications that are 
being submitted to the success of the program. The fact is that 
all-risk crop insurance has a monopoly here in the province and 
we’re in a drought situation. So it could be a matter of 
desperation and the farmers simply have no other choice on 
what kind of insurance they can purchase. 
 
But you mentioned that the pressure was greater this year from 
the reinsurers and that’s why the deadline, although extended, is 
still earlier than it has been in the past. 
 
What has changed with the reinsurer that you . . . A one time it 
was as late as April 30, was the deadline for resubmitting your 
application forms. What’s changed that needs to be so much 
earlier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, just to say that 
we would have tried . . . we would have had the deadline at the 
end of March again if we could have got a decision on the 
NISA program a bit earlier. But because that was stretched out 
over a longer period of time and we didn’t get the decision, and 
when we finally rolled out the program, we felt that it was 
imperative here to give farmers the same kind of timetable that 
they had in the past — give them the same kind of timetable 
where, in fact, they would be able to make a decision about 
their crop insurance program over a same period of time. 
 
Now having made that decision to extend the deadline into the 
cropping year — because there aren’t many places in 
Saskatchewan that you usually get to seed on April 1, but there 
have, on occasion in given years in this province, were actually 
people start to put seed in the ground in April 1. Now what 
insurance companies want you to do is to try and minimize the 
risk both to you and them. And accordingly, when you stretch 
out this . . . the application date into seeding year, this year, as 
we have taking it to April 19, there will be a premium that the 
. . . that will need to be paid here too for that risk that 
reinsurance companies will be exposed to. 
 
Now are we appreciative of the fact that that exists in the 
insurance agencies? No, no, but it’s the fact. Doesn’t matter 
whether or not you’re insuring crops or you’re insuring ships or 
you’re insuring buildings. There are periods of time in which 
reinsurance companies expect you to set and establish timeline. 
And in the crop sector, with the crop insurance program, it was 
set for the end of March. 
 
This year we’ve exceeded that timetable, as I’ve said to you, 
only because we had not got the decision on the NISA program, 
or the NISA bonus interest, and I can say to you we still don’t 
have that decision from the federal government today — still 
don’t have it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you Mr. Minister. It would appear as 
if the line companies have more influence when negotiating 
with the reinsurers than the provincial government, because you 
can buy your hail insurance, virtually at any time during the 

crop year. 
 
But when you say that you’ve had a good number of 
applications that are coming in and that people are receiving 
this program, at what level are you looking at these applications 
buying into? Are they buying at the 50 per cent coverage, 60 or 
70 per cent? Because many producers are telling me that they’re 
bound to buy some coverage through Crop Insurance in order to 
access the spring cash advance program and that is the sole 
reason why they’re buying it, not because they feel it’s a good 
program. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, we 
won’t know yet exactly what the full uptake on the crop 
insurance program will be but the early indications are that 
people are buying the higher level of the insurance from what 
they did last year. 
 
Now what’s happened here . . . And I have a little note here that 
was provided to me by my officials that says that we had 26 
million acres insured in 2001 and that’s up by over 5 million 
over the last two years. And I expect that this year we may very 
well see enhancements or even more growth in the crop 
insurance program. 
 
And I know that the member has said that we, last year . . . or 
maybe one of the other members had indicated to me that last 
year, there are other programs of course that require you . . . in 
order to access them, that you have to be in the crop insurance 
program. Well in order to get your cash advance last year, you 
had to be in the crop insurance program as well. So there hasn’t 
been a change in the methodology there at all. 
 
I think the other thing that will be important here is that prices 
are up significantly too. And when you take a look at some of 
the crops — I mean, when you take a look at the oilseeds, take a 
look at canola and flax — those crops are up by almost 40 per 
cent and that will of course have a reflection on what, at the end 
of the day, your premium costs are going to be. 
 
So my sense is that in the next short while we’ll have a better 
appreciation of what the full uptake across the province will be, 
but expect that we’ll see continued growth in the crop insurance 
program. And I’m hoping that that’s the case because, on this 
side of the House and our strategy . . . At least the Western 
Canadian agricultural ministers want to try and build a 
made-in-Western-Canada crop insurance program. We think it 
works. We think it’s the one of which farmers appreciate the 
most. We need to strengthen it over the next several months as 
we talk with our federal friends and see if we can make it our 
lead program in terms of safety net funding. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m going to head 
into a little bit different direction again and that is to go on that 
only too often the agriculture programs that are put into place 
for the producers of the province don’t address or answer the 
actual needs of the producers. And both sides of this House 
have been quite critical of the federal government programs — 
and with that I’m referring to AIDA and then followed by CFIP 
— because they don’t get the money into the hands of the 
producers that need it the most. 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

So could the minister please explain to us today his rainfall 
coverage program and explain how it isolates and identifies 
where there is a need and how it addresses that need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member I want to 
say that it would be fair to say that, particularly in Western 
Canada with the provinces of Alberta and Manitoba, whom we 
have been working very closely over the last 18 months, we’re 
interested in developing a new method or model in terms of 
managing and overseeing the way in which the crop insurance 
program is delivered. 
 
And a year ago we rolled out in this province a forage program 
of which . . . a rainfall forage program which is a pilot. And we 
also had an opportunity to meet with our friends in Alberta who 
did something very similar to what we did, but they piloted 
most of it in the Taber area and Lethbridge area where they 
were focusing on the corn production, where they were 
measuring the amount of rainfall. 
 
At the same time, they also had had a satellite imaging package 
that they were using. And the satellite imaging package was 
really measuring heat units. So what we’re looking at . . . what 
we looked at last year in Saskatchewan is to do a small, little 
pilot project using some weather stations in the area, allowing 
producers to buy up their premium costs or their coverage costs, 
and then at the end of the day sort of measuring to see what 
kind of success that would provide. 
 
And at the end of the day last year, I think we had about 
200,000 acres that were insured in that forage rainfall program 
and met with tremendous success by producers. We had 
enrolment in that in almost no time, in that program, of which 
producers at the end of that last year said to us, we’d like to see 
you take that program and see whether or not you can establish 
it as a . . . as part of the major program of crop insurance — of 
which we did this year. 
 
Now what we don’t have in place in an effective way — and we 
say that openly and are . . . and leaves us with one of the 
initiatives that we want to build towards — we need to have 
more weather monitoring stations in Saskatchewan. Today 
we’re using the weather monitoring stations of the federal 
government. They become our source of information in terms 
of measuring the amount of rainfall in the province. Manitoba, 
on the other hand, has far more of the weather stations that they 
have across the province. 
 
Some would argue that in order for a program of this to be fully 
effective if it were to be fully implemented, should have 
probably two or three rainfall stations in an RM (rural 
municipality). So if you were to take the number of RMs in 
Saskatchewan, you’re probably looking at somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 900 monitoring stations that we should have 
in our province if we’re going to move in that direction in the 
full way. 
 
Now we only have in Saskatchewan today just the federal 
monitoring stations. There are 83; a couple of them are outside 
our borders. But we use them as our method for measuring the 
rainfall forage. 
 
Now the question is, are we intending to move in that direction? 

And my answer to you is that we are intending to move in that 
direction. 
 
And we’re moving in that direction with our partners from both 
Alberta and Manitoba because we think we need to get away 
from the subjective measurement that we use today to 
determine what a producer’s eligibility should be. Because 
really what producers are insuring against is the weather. That’s 
what they’re insuring against. 
 
And so if we could start to measure — as Alberta’s doing with 
the number of heat units — in a scientific way, and if we can 
start to measure the amount of rainfall that happens in an area, 
then the rest of the responsibility lies with the producer. 
 
Because today often when we get a crop insurance claim and a 
crop insurance adjuster arrives at the field or the farm, they 
have to go through a whole series of questions, like: at what 
time of the year did you actually put this crop in; which week 
did you put in; and how deep was it seeded; and how much 
fertilizer did you put into this crop; and was it a crop that you 
had last year that was similar to the one that you had this year; 
and was there disease in the area? 
 
So there are a whole host of subjective issues that need to be 
observed here and also evaluated. 
 
If we can get to a place into the future where we can use a more 
scientific method of measuring heat units and rainfall, of which 
this program this year is doing — it’s gone I believe from 
200,000 acres in Saskatchewan this year to over 1 million acres 
this year of what we’re going to be insuring in this program. 
 
And producers across the province, livestock producers across 
the province, I hear from regularly who tell me that they are 
very pleased that we were . . . be able to do this. And I have 
sitting around my table every six weeks or seven weeks the 
Saskatchewan Feeder Association and the Saskatchewan Stock 
Growers Association. I meet with them every six or seven 
weeks — in fact I’m meeting with them again next this week or 
next week — and they have endorsed this program fully. 
 
So it will be my intention into the future, as we have the idea of 
growing the livestock industry in Saskatchewan, to continue to 
provide a good forage rainfall program for livestock producers. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I think 
perhaps they should discuss moving that into the Liquor and 
Gaming department. I’m quite surprised to hear that the 
producers were sitting around your table appraising this 
program and that Manitoba’s on the board. I talked to some 
Manitoba producer groups and they couldn’t believe that 
Saskatchewan put together such a program, and asked who the 
heck planned it in the first place. 
 
But I’ve heard the Minister of Agriculture and I’ve heard other 
members from the NDP government talk about how we need to 
isolate the need and meet the need. And I still fail to see how 
this program meets the need where the need is. 
 
But could the minister please tell me what is the estimated cost 
of this option, what the maximum acres that each separate 
producer can bet on, on any particular rain station. What’s the 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

 

maximum amount that any one producer could make on his bet 
on a rain station? And could a producer collect on his bet on a 
rain station even though he had a bumper crop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, I 
recognize the concern that the member has about the future of 
the livestock industry in Saskatchewan. And clearly on this side 
of the House, and within our department, and this minister, 
believe that the future of this province is in growing a livestock 
industry. 
 
And so what we want to do here is try to protect it as best we 
can at a time when there is a fair bit of vulnerability based on 
what the moisture levels are and the year which we came out of. 
 
Last year I said to you that we had 200,000 acres insured of 
grassland in the province. And I said to you, this year we have 1 
million. I was wrong. This year we have 3 million acres of 
grassland that’s insured in Saskatchewan — grassland that we 
have insured in the province. And that to me doesn’t resonate as 
being that farmers aren’t appreciative of the opportunity. That 
doesn’t resonate to me that way at all. 
 
In fact on that side of the House last year . . . And I’d hoped I 
wouldn’t get here but you’ve taken me there now when you say 
to me that what this is, is this is an opportunity to bet on your 
future. 
 
Well I can tell you what I’m doing on this side of the House. I 
want to make sure that we can insure grassland in this province 
so that livestock producers today in fact will have an 
opportunity to grow their herd. That’s what I’m doing. 
 
I’m betting on the notion that we’re going to be able to support 
a livestock industry in Saskatchewan. And I know what you — 
not you personally, Madam Member — said last year about the 
forage program, where we’re going to seed into this province, 
last year, over a period of four years, land that should be into 
forage. 
 
And over there on your side of the House — and I remember 
the member from Kindersley standing up and making a 
mockery of the forage program seed-down last year — and not 
you, Madam Member, but others in that side of the House 
laughed fervourously about the notion that we were doing it. 
 
And last year in the forage grass program we anticipated that 
we would have about 5,000 applications. And we had over 
10,000 applications last year from farmers across the province 
to seed their grass down — land to grass. And they used 
$500,000 . . . 500,000 acres were seeded with cost-shared 
money, and then they seeded above that another 150,000 acres 
on their own without cost share. 
 
(12:30) 
 
And so when I hear from that side of the House from time to 
time — and I have not heard this from you yet, Madam Member 
— that the changes that we’re making today to the crop 
insurance program to enhance the benefits for producers, 
livestock producers in the province, I’m troubled by it. I’m 
troubled by it. Because when we take the grass program today, 
or last year, the pilot program from 200,000 acres to 3 million 

acres, it seems to me the producers and livestock producers in 
the province are speaking. 
 
And I kind of like what they hear. They’re endorsing the 
program, and they didn’t need to do this. They didn’t need to 
take this. We should remember this. Producers have an option 
not to buy this program. They don’t need to buy it. They buy 
this on a voluntary basis and are saying that we will . . . are 
prepared to pay or receive in compensation somewhere between 
7 or $9 per acre, is what they’ll get in return. 
 
And livestock organizations and producers say to me that if we 
have a wreck, if we have a wreck, then what we’ll do is we’ll 
take that money and we’ll use it for some of the things that we 
need to do — to buy feed for our livestock, to transport our 
livestock, or to transport feed. That’s what our producers are 
saying. 
 
And I happen to support the notion that we should be putting 
insurance programs together that support and enhance the 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan. And forage protection in 
my view, and grass protection in my view, is one of the ways of 
doing that. 
 
And you might argue that it’s not enough, and I won’t disagree 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if you haven’t said that yet, 
you might. And I’ll say to you, we should do more. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I did not say it 
was not enough, nor did I say . . . I didn’t mention the amount at 
all, actually. I asked you what the option was going to cost. And 
I asked you what was the maximum that any one producer 
could get. And you said that they love it because if they have a 
wreck, there is some coverage. 
 
But how do you explain . . . And the other question I asked you 
— if they could have a bumper crop, or a bumper year in their 
forage, and if they could still collect. Now how does that 
address the need, where it is? How does that address the need if 
there is a wreck on a particular farm operation if basically what 
they’re going to do is they’re going to buy premiums on a 
weather station where they’re hoping that that area has a wreck, 
and they’re hoping that they themselves don’t? 
 
But along with that question, I want to add one more because 
we’re running out of time quite quickly here. And the other area 
that I would really like to talk about today is that the Estimates 
book says that the crop insurance program also delivers 
programs which compensate producers for crop damage caused 
by big game and migratory waterfowl. And the member from 
Humboldt had asked a written question of: will the waterfowl 
and wildlife damage compensation program continue to be 
offered to farmers in 2003 or 2002-2003? The answer was yes, 
and yet the budget has no money allocated for that program. 
 
And I realize that there are fewer ducks when we don’t have 
rain and we are in a drought situation but no less, there probably 
will be some waterfowl damage and you will have a claim, and 
yet you’re going to pay it with zero dollars. 
 
So could the minister explain both of those areas? If there is a 
wreck how does this rainfall program help that producer if he 
has a wreck and he’s bought premiums on a different weather 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

station out of the area or if his own local weather station has 
already been completely bought up and he can’t buy, so how 
does that address his wreck? And what money are you going to 
do or what money do you have that will cover the claims for the 
wildlife damage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, or Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
the member, being a farmer as you are, I expect that when 
you’re going to buy an insurance product and you have a 
measuring stick of which you’re going to be choosing, that 
you’re going to choose one that is applicable to you. You’re not 
going to choose one that is applicable to your friend that’s on 
the other side of the province or that you’re going to choose a 
measuring stick in some other country. 
 
I think what you’ll do as a farmer, and this is what we do on our 
farm, and I expect that 99 per cent of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan today are going to pick a weather station that’s 
most appropriate and one that is reflective of what’s happening 
to them in their own region of the province because crop 
insurance is based on area averages and individual averages. So 
you would think that most of the producers would practice the 
same kind of experience when they’re making choices in forage 
or in crops reflective to the weather station of which is 
reflective of where they live. 
 
Now when the member says to me, if we have . . . I’m not sure 
if the question was directed to the crop sector or whether it was 
directed to the forage sector. And I spent some time talking 
about the forage sector. And on the crop sector, of course, 
producers today can buy up . . . buy $10 an acre if they choose 
to do that. It’s a voluntary program and so they can choose to 
do that. 
 
And in many cases, and I think we’ll report when the program 
is complete, that we’ll have producers today who will have 
bought up the additional crop insurance on the pilot project 
crop. I think you’ll find that they’ll have taken it in the same 
way that they took last year on the pilot project on forage. 
 
This year we have some producers in the forage program who 
are insuring as much as 30,000 acres. Huge acreages that they 
are insuring today. 
 
So on the crop program, if the debate here, or the concern is 
whether or not people . . . This is voluntary. And so people buy 
this on their own. And at the end of the day, I expect that we’ll 
see when we roll this program into a larger piece . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . rainfall program, not the forage 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The crop sector rainfall program is what 
I’m talking about. This is now. This is about . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You can only insure . . . That’s correct. You 
can insure up to a maximum of 500 acres because it’s a pilot. 
And so what we’re going to do is we’re going to experiment 
with it. We’ve allowed people to put . . . pay an extra premium 
for their coverage. It’s strictly voluntary. 
 
And if we had three or four weather stations in every RM, 
which I said earlier . . . which would be ideal, we would try to 
get there at the end of the day. But today the only way in which 

we can manage a rainfall project is by using the federal weather 
stations. 
 
Now I ask the question, if the federal weather stations worked 
for the grass program last year on a pilot, and this year we make 
it a full-blown program using the same criteria, and my acreage 
has gone . . . or Saskatchewan’s acreage has gone from 200,000 
to 3 million, how do you make the argument, how do you make 
the argument that producers don’t like it? How do you make 
that argument? 
 
And how do you make the argument that when you offer a pilot 
crop program, which is only pilot . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes. The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood says 
they don’t have a choice. They do have a choice. They don’t 
have to buy the pilot crop sector rainfall program. They don’t 
need to do it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you see, you 
see, Mr. Chair . . . 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, my question also deals with the 
new grass insurance program. The weather stations closest to 
my constituency . . . In fact, I only have one — it’s Tugaske. 
The rest are outside . . . I believe the next closest one in the 
Bladworth-Girvin-Davidson area is Watrous. You’re looking at 
50, 60, 70 miles away. 
 
So you’re saying, basically, it is a crapshoot. If you’re going to 
choose something 60 miles away you might as well choose 
something 120 miles away. The producers, basically their 
pastures are black, they have no other option but to insure. This 
is the only program in town. 
 
Some of things that was raised to me was there was an old 
insurance program, and I think it was Saskatchewan years ago, 
where you insured your pasture, you fenced off a little piece of 
an area. I can remember using a round-bale feeder. You went 
out. You staked it down. You threw some page wire around it 
and the insurance adjuster came out in August and checked the 
grass in it. So you were insured for your pasture. 
 
The producers right now want to be insured. If they’re dried out 
this year on their particular pasture, their pasture here, they 
want to be paid for it. If they have a lot of rain, they don’t 
expect maybe to get paid for it. 
 
And that’s what you’re asking even me as producer of my 
pasture. The closest thing I’m insuring for is 60 miles away. I 
could be dried out here. They could have rain at that station 60 
miles away, have grass up to here. They’re going . . . I’m not 
going to get paid. And if they choose some other area, they’ll 
get paid. So I can’t see how that program is helping me. 
 
Insurance programs should be if you, as a producer or your 
piece of property is damaged, whether it’s a house fire or 
whatever, you’re insuring that house. You’re not insuring your 
neighbour’s house. And that’s what we’re looking at with this 
program and that’s a concern that was raised to me in the cattle 
industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member. I think 
you make two very important points. First of all, you make the 
point that there was no program before and now we have a 
program. 



April 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

 

Well we had . . . We had, we had last year a pilot project on 
rainfall pilot. That’s what we had last year. And this year we’ve 
taken . . . Because of the kind of demand we had last year, we 
take that program, we take that program, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
we provide it to every . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the answers to the questions and would hon. 
members please take turn and when it’s their turn to speak, they 
can speak and then, when it’s not their turn, they should listen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to respond to my colleague 
who asked the question a moment ago. Last year we had a pilot 
rainfall forage program of which we had 200,000 acres insured, 
that we permitted to insure. This year we opened it up to the 
entire province. 
 
And you can say to me that the producers don’t have a choice. 
They do have a choice. Yes. The producers have a choice. They 
have a choice about not taking it at all. But that’s not the choice 
they made. 
 
What producers did is they said in volumes, we’re going to take 
the 200,000 acres, and we now have 3 million acres insured — 
a comprehensive, full program for Saskatchewan today. 
 
Now certainly you can make the case that we should have more 
rainfall stations in the province. Of course we should. And these 
are exactly . . . this is exactly the . . . It’s the same kind of 
programs that they are doing today in Alberta and Manitoba. 
We’re not unique here; they’re moving down this path. 
 
And what we’re doing today . . . And your point is well made. 
Of course we don’t have enough rainfall stations in 
Saskatchewan today. And so you’re going to pick the one I 
think who’s going to be closest to you because that’s what we 
as reasonable farmers do all the time. We take advantage of 
what’s most closest to us and then use those resources. 
 
We do it in the grain industry when we haul our grains. We do 
it when we buy our fuels, when we buy our fertilizers. We buy 
it from people who are closest to us. I mean we don’t buy them 
from all over the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well and you 
buy the cheapest. Well and this is a cheap program is what 
farmers tell us. 
 
And so at the end of the day . . . I mean what we have here 
today, what we have here today is an opportunity for farmers to 
engage into a program that we didn’t have before. Will our 
challenge be to try and get a broader extended rainfall program 
measurement? Absolutely it will. And we’re going to work with 
our neighbours in Alberta and Manitoba to try to achieve that. 
 
But it will require additional resources. It will require also 
improved technology, because Alberta last year tried to do a full 
measurement on the heat units and they weren’t all that 
successful. So they’re now revisiting that again and we’ll work 
together with them in partnership so that at the end of the day 
we might have a far better measuring stick. And that’s the 
process that we’re on today. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m looking 
at the 2000-2001 annual report of the Crop Insurance 

Corporation. And on page 50 . . . page 6 near the bottom, 
there’s a listing or a paragraph that tells us who the members of 
the Crop Insurance Board were for that particular fiscal year. 
And one of the names that I notice is a Wilson Olive, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Also the part of that same report — it’s the 2000-2001 annual 
report supplementary information — I noticed that under the 
heading, suppliers’ payments, there’s a firm, Olive, Waller, 
Zinkhan & Waller, and they were paid $229,424. 
 
Now my question, Mr. Minister: is the Wilson Olive the same 
Olive that’s . . . is he part of this firm that I had . . . that’s listed 
here in this supplier payment? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I expect . . . I mean the Crop 
Insurance Corporation would require from time to time, not 
unlike any other business or industry or corporation in the 
province, legal advice. And so they, they in fact would then 
determine . . . I expect the, the executive of the crop insurance 
agency would bring to the board, through the process of . . . that 
they use to determine who their legal counsels will be across the 
province, will determine through their process. 
 
And I’m not sure whether or not the member’s implying here 
that there’s some untoward processes that are going on at the 
board level, at the board level. And I would be troubled if he’s 
suggesting that. I think he’s not asking that question. 
 
I think the member is asking whether or not there’s been due 
diligence done here in terms of finding out or tendering the . . . 
or soliciting the services of a legal firm; I think that the member 
opposite would be suggesting that there is due diligence that is 
done there. And I have, I have tremendous confidence in the 
employees who work within the corporation of crop insurance, 
and I’m sure that they would make those recommendations 
accordingly. 
 
And if in fact you have from time to time an individual who 
might serve on a board of directors and they happen to be 
involved in the delivery of the kind of service that an 
individual’s being required or a corporation’s required, that that 
decision would be made at the corporate level. And so I don’t 
read anything more into that. 
 
If the member opposite has some concern about the way in 
which decisions are made at the executive or board level, then I 
think he should put that in writing to me and I would be very 
pleased to explore then with the corporation. I’d be very pleased 
in corporation . . . in consul, in consul with my . . . in counsel 
with my officials and the president of the corporation to pursue 
whether or not there is something untoward here that the 
member might be suggesting. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I listened very closely to the minister’s 
answer and it’s a very simple question. Wilson Olive is listed as 
being a board member of the Crown . . . board of directors of 
the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. Now is this the 
same Wilson Olive that’s a member of this firm that was paid 
200 . . . over $229,000 in that fiscal year? Is it the same person? 
A simple yes or no answer, Mr. Chair. 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Olive is a member 
of the firm, is a member of the firm that did the billing. Mr. Wil 
Olive is the, is the individual who is on the board, but his firm 
did the billing — the firm did the billing. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I would ask if, did any other board 
members that are listed on page 6 of the annual report receive 
any payments other than payments due to them as . . . in the 
form of honorariums and expenses that would be associated 
with their duties as a board member? Did any other board 
member receive any payment other than honorariums and 
expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the members on the 
board who are not civil servants receive a per diem and a 
stipend. The members who are on the board who are public 
servants do not. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, we’ll exclude the civil servants and 
you just said that they didn’t get anything other than their per 
diems and so on or whatever they had coming to them. 
 
Now those members that aren’t civil servants, you’ve already 
said that Mr. Olive’s firm received the $229,000. Now were 
there any other board members who aren’t civil servants, did 
any of them get any . . . were they paid for any services 
rendered to the corporation other than in the role of their . . . as 
being a director of the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There are no other members who received 
a per diem other than those who are not public servants. They 
all receive . . . Those who are non-public servants all receive 
per diems. And any business or corporation that did work for 
the corporation — for the crop insurance agency — would be 
listed in the crop insurance report, highlighting what 
remunerations each of those businesses who did services for the 
crop insurance agency received. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying then is that 
those board members who aren’t civil servants, the only one 
that got paid for supplying a service or supplies to the crop 
insurance was Mr. Olive’s firm. No other board member was 
associated with any other firm or as an individual received any 
payment for services or supplies. 
 
Mr. Minister, does the crop insurance board have a set of 
guidelines dealing with conflict of interest and, if so, would you 
be prepared to table those guidelines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m told by my staff 
and by the president of the corporation that the conflict of 
interest guidelines that apply under the rules that we have 
established through the Legislative Assembly, throughout the 
course of the operations of government, apply equally not only 
to the staff but would apply equally to the members of the board 
in the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance agency. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to wish everyone a pleasant 
weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55. 

 


	Fish and Wildlife Development Fund
	Fish and Wildlife Development Fund

