















































Hansard: March 21, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 159 
 March 21, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present today 
regarding the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 34 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina 
Beach, Mistatim, Christopher Lake, Choiceland, Spalding, and 
nearly everyone in Englefeld, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
initiatives. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the community of 
Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The communities the signators are from, Mr. Speaker, are 
Yorkton and Regina. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of those Saskatchewan 
citizens that are concerned about the SGI deductible policy. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to work with SGI to develop more fair 
guidelines for deductibles on vehicles that are damaged as 
the result of an attempted car theft. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks at Allan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition today on behalf of citizens of the province. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people . . . I would say 
every person in the town of Vibank. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise on 
behalf of people in my hometown concerned about tobacco 
control issues. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
are hereby received: 
 

A petition concerning repair to Highway 339; 
 
A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 35; 
 
A petition concerning SGI’s guidelines for deductible on 
vehicles; and finally 
 
A petition concerning a resolution to the Lake of the 
Prairies situation. 

 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister for Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: which Saskatchewan communities 
are currently under a precautionary boil water order, and/or 
boil water advisory; in each instance what is the reason for 
the advisory or order? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of 
other questions. I give notice that I shall on day no. 11 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: in the current fiscal year, which 
Saskatchewan municipal drinking water supplies have 
failed to meet the provincial standards; and what are the 
compliance rates of all municipalities required to provide 
water samples for testing? 

 
I also give notice that I shall on day no. 11 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: how many times in the past year 
did any municipality report discharges of raw sewage into 
any water body to Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management, as required by provincial 
regulation; and what were the dates of these reported 
discharges? 

 
And finally the last question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: what are the names 
of the 10 communities ahead of Perdue for funding under 
the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: how many square feet does 
SPMC lease at 1084 Central Avenue in Prince Albert on 
behalf of Saskatchewan Economic and Co-operative 
Development; and further to that, what does SPMC pay for 
this lease on a square foot basis? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall on 
day no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: will the minister please provide an updated 
status report of SaskTel’s investment and equity position 
in tappedinto.com; how many staff are currently 
employed by tappedinto.com outside of the province as 
well as in Saskatchewan? 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 11 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: will the minister please provide the detailed 
breakdown of the $157 million that SaskTel investments 
have returned since 1992, including a breakdown of all 
SaskTel investments made since 1992 and their cumulative 
profit or loss? 

 
And I give notice that I shall on day no. 11 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: will the minister please provide an updated 
status report of the number of employees, contract or 
otherwise, and where these staff are currently located for 
the US-based company Retx.com? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw to 
your attention and that of the members a distinguished visitor to 
our Assembly. He’s seated in your gallery. He was first elected 
to the House of Commons in 1979 and elected successively 
until his retirement in 1997. Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask 
you and the members to please welcome Simon de Jong. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, the board of directors of the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association. Firstly, seated on the floor of the 
Assembly, we have George Belchamber, vice-president. George 
is from Nipawin and he’s joined by his wife, Wendy. Also on 
the floor of the chamber, Mr. Speaker, we have Debra Budan; 
and Debra is joined by her husband, Fred, who is a director as 
well. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of other 
directors: Emily Grimes, Ron Raynard, Ron Tulik, Bill Ziegler; 
and we have Chris Brewer, the chief executive officer of the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association, and the office 
manager, Jeannie Brewer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association 
represents a $90 million a year industry in this province and that 
industry is represented by a membership around the entire 
province. And some of that membership is here, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would like to introduce them as well. 
 
We have Amy Bulgis of the lower Fishing Lake cottage owners, 
representing a snowmobile club in that area; and we have Stan 
Bulgis — and I hope I’m pronouncing that correctly — Esker 
Bear, and is the Co-Chairperson. We have Bill Radke 
representing the Candle Lake Sno-Drifters and is the president 
of the Sno-Drifters, and is also representing the Whelan Bay 
Snow Hawks Club. We have Elmer Mauthe representing the 
Candle Lake Sno-Drifters and the Prince Albert Snowrunners. 
 
Len McDonald, representing the Prairie Prowlers of Regina, 
and he is the secretary of that club, Mr. Speaker. Mark Watson, 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

 

representing the Last Mountain Lake Drifters Club. Wendy 
Belchamber, representing the Twin Lakes Trailblazers. Ingrid 
Conway, representing the Mistatim Snopackers, and is the 
secretary of that club and also representing Prairie Women on 
Snow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ray Conway, the president of the Mistatim Snowmobile Club. 
Cliff Grimes, representing the Whiteswan Snow Hawks, the 
zone representative for the snowmobile association. Emily 
Grimes, as I indicated, representing the Forest Fringe Trail 
Association. Bill Ziegler, representing the Saskatoon 
Snowmobile Club and the Big River Snowmobile Club. 
 
Fred Budan, previously introduced, representing the Forest 
Fringe Trail and representing 14 member clubs in that area. Deb 
Budan, representing the Lakeland Snowmobile Club. Gerald 
Gaulton, representing the Prairie & Pine Club in Norquay. Ray 
Johnston, the zone 3 rep, representing Moose Mountain. Bart 
Tanahill, representing the Calling Lakes Cruisers out of Lipton. 
 
Cory Matkowski, Calling Lakes Cruisers, Fort Qu’Appelle. 
Larry Beaulieu, Calling Lakes Cruisers, Fort Qu’Appelle. Ron 
Tulik, Calling Lakes. Ervin Hahn, Melville. Ron Raynard, 
Moose Mountain Snowmobile Club; Lloyd and Brent Glass, 
representing the Regina Prairie Prowlers; and Nolan Thompson 
of Yamaha Motor Canada Ltd.; and Steve Rootman of Rootman 
Agencies. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming the 
representatives of these snowmobile clubs from across the 
province here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the government members, I too would 
like to join the member from Carrot River Valley in welcoming 
the Snowmobile Association and the members from the 
different clubs around the province. 
 
Snowmobiling as we all know is a very well-participated-in 
sport across Saskatchewan. And I want to recognize the 
members who are here today and give them all a warm 
welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly, 
Mr. Mervin Tweed, the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Turtle Mountain in Manitoba, who is seated 
behind the bar. Accompanying Mr. Tweed today is Shannon 
Martin who is a researcher with his staff. 
 
They’re here visiting Saskatchewan to see how things are done 
in our Assembly, and if there’s anything that they can learn. 
And I’m sure that there is very much that they can learn from 
the opposition, Mr. Speaker. And we’re very pleased to have 
him here today. I’d ask everyone to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Legislative Assembly a group of 18 young 
students — grade 3 students — from École Monsieur de Laval 
here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. They are accompanied by their 
instructors France Bedard and Celine Derosiers and Soeur 
Claudette Lemyre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although École Monsieur de Laval is in the 
constituency of my colleague the hon. member for Regina 
South, he’s unable to meet with them a little later and he’s 
asked me to meet on their behalf. And I’ve considered to do so 
as long he gave me his credit card so that I could entertain them 
well and so . . . anyway. 
 
Monsieur le Président, au nom de tous les députés ici, il me fait 
plaisir de souhaiter ces jeunes élèves de l’École Monsieur de 
Laval. 
 
(Translation: Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members here, it 
gives me pleasure to welcome these young students from École 
Monsieur de Laval.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 
take this opportunity as my colleague, the member from Carrot 
River Valley, did to welcome the members of the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
As a dealer myself, a snowmobile dealer in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and from the town of Spiritwood for 20 years, 
and also my wife who is the secretary of the Spiritwood 
Snowmobile Club and president Blair Heibert, who is the 
president, we know what it’s like to be a snowmobile club in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We know what it’s like to put up 
with all the problems that we have, including no snow, which 
we’ve experienced this year. 
 
And I just want to send a special thank you to Chris Brewer and 
his staff for all the work that they have done over the years to 
make sure that snowmobiling is a thriving business in the 
province of Saskatchewan. So all members welcome here. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the legislature some 
special guests who are here because it’s World Poetry Day. And 
we’re very pleased to have in your gallery Mr. Glen Sorestad, 
who is the Poet Laureate of Saskatchewan — welcome Glen. 
And also with him are Louise Halfe, who is a well-known 
Saskatchewan poet; and Dave Margoshes, who is a well-known 
poet as well. 
 
Dave Margoshes is head of the Saskatchewan branch of the 
League of Canadian Poets and they organized the event this 
morning to celebrate World Poetry Day. So we’re very happy 
they’re here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

just wish to join my colleague from Carrot River Valley in 
welcoming the snowmobilers here, and most specifically the 
two people from my constituency of Christopher Lake, Fred 
and Deborah Budan. Mr. Speaker, it’s not often that from our 
area of the world, God’s country up in the parkland, that we get 
the opportunity to have people come down and spend some 
time with us in the legislature and we certainly want to 
appreciate it and provide an extra welcome. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d ask that all members . . . so everybody please join me again 
in welcoming Fred and Deborah Budan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a 
moment to introduce in the west gallery this afternoon an 
individual by the name of Conrad Hnatiuk, who we know very 
well. Con is from my part of the world. He’s from the thriving 
metropolis of Insinger, Saskatchewan and he and I go back a lot 
of years where we played ball together. And I’ve got to tell you 
that he spent a lot of time in left field, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to say that his career has served us well in this government over 
the years. He’s deputy minister of Social Services, used to be 
the deputy minister of Health, and also used to hit . . . now that 
the member from Invermay reminds me, he also used to hit the 
odd home run off the pitcher from Invermay, which is the 
member from Invermay . . . the member from Canora. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Hnatiuk is working for SAIC 
(Science Applications International Canada), a private 
corporation in Saskatchewan, doing some work on the SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network) file, and I’d like 
all members of the Assembly to welcome Mr. Hnatiuk . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome 
to this Assembly one of the members of the snowmobiling 
clubs, a man that I’ve known since I was probably about six or 
seven years old. And I was pleasantly surprised to see him 
sitting up here. 
 
A man who has done a lot to contribute to the development of 
Candle Lake, the enjoyment of Candle Lake, for those of us 
who were tourists went up there in our early years, and that is 
Bill Radke, who is up in your gallery. 
 
We spent hours fishing, playing cards, and recently he’s 
developed a golf — I guess it’s been quite a while now — he’s 
developed a golf course up there and does a lot to help promote 
the community. 
 
So I’d like you to join me in welcoming Bill here to this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am very, very pleased to 
introduce some special guests from the international 
community. We have up on the east gallery there, Mr. Speaker, 
a special group of people from Mexico. They are from Chiapas. 
They have been accomplished by of course our world-class 
institution of Saskatchewan Federated Indian College. Leonard 
Hardlotte and Leonzo is with them. 

Over here we have a person who works in the field of justice. 
You know, we started our Cree court program in the province 
and they are doing a similar sort of approach over there — 
Armando Montoyo Cameras. 
 
We have also the head of the . . . we also have at the head of the 
university there, the autonomous university of Chiapas, we have 
Rafael Burgos. And we also have Dora Guadalupe Castillo 
Hernandez. 
 
I haven’t got the names from the rest, Mr. Speaker, but I also 
ask them to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, to give them an official welcome 
in this House is very important in English. To give them an 
official welcome in Cree is also extremely important for me, so 
I would say in welcoming: Ta wow to our guests. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Louise Halfe is here. She is also an excellent Cree speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, and Louise Halfe writes about poetry, about the 
challenges, you know, in such a creative fashion. I’d like to 
recognize Louise Halfe, as well, who is here on the fight to 
eliminate racism on this very important day . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome all 
the international guests in our galleries today. And I’d just like 
to extend to them our best wishes, and we hope that they enjoy 
their stay in Saskatchewan. And it is a little cold out there, but 
spring arrived yesterday and it is going to warm up. So 
welcome, I hope you enjoy your stay. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
recognition of the effort of the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast, I want to get up and welcome, along with my 
colleague from Cumberland, our very special international 
guests. And as a result of the inspiration we received in her 
attempt at Cree, I’m going to try the attempt at Spanish. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Spanish). 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day for the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, today commemorates the 
1960 massacre in Sharpeville, South Africa. Forty-two years 
ago, peaceful demonstrators were mercilessly slaughtered by 
the security forces of an oppressive apartheid regime. In 1966, 
the United Nations declared March 21 to be the International 
Day for the Elimination of Racism and called upon all nations 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

 

to join together to achieve that goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although we have made some progress, racism 
survives. Witness the massacre in Rwanda, ethnic cleansing 
during the recent Balkan conflict, and the conflicts in many 
parts of the world. As our society has evolved to a higher 
standard, we become more aware of the evils of the exclusion, 
isolation, and aggression based on racial criteria. Mr. Speaker, 
racism is forged in the smiths of ignorance and fear. Through 
our society’s continued effort and education, we have built a 
province that is more tolerant. Instead of recoiling, we embrace 
and celebrate the cultural diversity of this province. 
 
Saskatchewan history is a shining example of how our diversity 
has enriched this province, a diversity celebrated in our motto, 
“From many peoples, strength.” 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today, March 21, is International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination. 
 
In a society that often takes its freedom and democracy for 
granted, Mr. Speaker, we must remember that the foundation 
for both are built upon respect and responsibility. The respect, 
Mr. Speaker, is for each other. We are all unique and amazing 
individuals. We all have much to contribute to society. We must 
not let our own personal fears, ignorance, and hatred colour the 
way we treat one another. 
 
The responsibility, Mr. Speaker, is to ourselves. It is up to each 
of us to take the responsibility for the kind of people or kind of 
person we are now, and more importantly, the kind of person 
we want to be. 
 
As individuals we each must take the necessary changes that 
will help us become a better person, one who is free from fear 
and prejudice. No one can do this for us. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, our world has seen racism spill over from 
one generation to the next. It has cut across our ages, our 
cultures, our religions, and our nationalities. It has destroyed 
lives and decimated populations. It must stop. 
 
As one who has personally suffered from racial discrimination, 
I can tell you that the pain inflicted is deep and the wounds are 
slow to heal. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly today to 
join with me in recognition of March 21 as the International 
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Poetry Day 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the 19th century English 
poet, Shelley, one of the godfathers of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party), once said that poets are the, quote, 
“unacknowledged legislators of the world.” 

Today, in conjunction with the Day for the Elimination of 
Racism, I am happy to announce to the Assembly that it’s also 
World Poetry Day. A day perhaps when we can correct the 
oversight mentioned by Shelley. 
 
The League of Canadian Poets has organized this day across 
Canada. Dave Margoshes, who was here earlier, has organized 
this for Saskatchewan. There are readings on Parliament Hill 
and in every provincial and territorial legislature, as there was 
this morning in the Cumberland Gallery. 
 
The Saskatchewan poets who read this morning were first, our 
Poet Laureate Glen Sorestad, who wrote of Saskatchewan, 
quote: “In the beginning there was always the wind/ wind and 
the sound/ . . . later you learn the language.” Also, Brenda 
Niskala was there; Ven Begamudre; Louise Halfe; and the 
winner of the youth poetry contest, Taylor Leedahl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to read these and other poets more, and 
argue about religion and politics less. If we did so, we would 
notice a new clarity in our voices, an uplifting in our spirits, and 
a deeper understanding of the harmony of all human beings on 
this day to eliminate racial discrimination, and on every day. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Statement Regarding Equality of Women 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday in 
this Assembly the NDP member from Regina Centre made a 
derogatory statement: that the Saskatchewan Party’s attitude 
towards women is that they should be kept barefoot and in the 
kitchen. 
 
Well as a member of the Saskatchewan Party caucus, I would 
like to inform the hon. member that nothing could be further 
from the truth. In the 1999 election the Saskatchewan Party had 
13 female candidates; the NDP had 14 — a marginal difference. 
 
The suggested tokenism that the member from Regina Centre 
referred to simply does not exist among the ranks of the 
Saskatchewan Party. The women of our caucus share the 
decision making with our male colleagues and have equal and 
valued input on all issues. The Saskatchewan Party has female 
staff members who have equal input and shoulder responsibility 
alongside their male colleagues. We have thousands of strong 
female supporters. And I am offended by the comments by the 
member from Regina Centre and I’m sure the thousands of 
women who have been involved in the Saskatchewan Party 
from the beginning would be offended as well. 
 
I would like to point out to the member from Regina Centre that 
these kind of erroneous comments do nothing to engage or 
further women’s interests and participation in politics, 
regardless of what party they belong to. In fact, it is a shame to 
hear another female politician try to discourage other women 
from entering the political arena with such inappropriate and 
inaccurate comments. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party supports the involvement of women in 
every aspect of society, especially the political process. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask that that member from Regina Centre do the right 
thing and apologize for these derogatory comments. 
 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Harper Wins Leadership of Alliance Party 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this is quite a day for days: 
anti-racial discrimination Day, World Poetry Day, Johann 
Sebastian Bach’s birthday, and the end of Day. Or rather, Mr. 
Speaker, in tune with the other themes: poetic justice day. 
 
Day is done, Harper is in, and on behalf of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) caucus, I wish to congratulate the new leader 
of the Alliance Party. Or to correct myself once again, Mr. 
Speaker, the leader of the day of the Alliance Party. Mr. Harper 
won a decisive victory on the first ballot, receiving 55 per cent 
of the votes cast. Mr. Day — the previous leader du jour — 
garnered 37 per cent. The same leader, Mr. Speaker, who ousted 
the former leader and founder of his party, Mr. Manning. 
 
The former leader of the current leader of the Sask Party. And I 
believe this makes three leaders in two years, Mr. Speaker, 
which is a remarkable accomplishment for any political party. 
We look forward to Mr. Harper’s replacement when his 
one-year term is up. There is one consolation for Stockwell Day 
though: thanks no doubt to the efforts of the members opposite, 
he did win the support of Alliance voters in one province — 
ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rather than composing a poem on this day as a 
eulogy for the ousted leader, perhaps we should simply sing the 
lovely old gospel hymn, “Day is Dying in the West.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nipawin Journal Survivor Contest 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to extend my congratulations to Mavis Shapansky of 
Carrot River on winning The Nipawin Journal Survivor contest. 
The Survivor contest required readers of The Nipawin Journal 
to vote off two castaways each week with the sole survivor 
receiving $300 for the charity of their choice. The castaways 
were also asked two questions each week. 
 
When asked if she thought she could compete on the real TV 
game version, Mavis was certain she would be willing and 
would give it her best shot. 
 
Rick Colburn, RM (rural municipality) administrator, and also a 
castaway was quite sure he would go for the paid vacation, 
fantastic location, and scenic beaches until that was brought to 
the attention of his wife. And then it was decided that their 
answer was he would not go. 
 
When asked what luxury items would she bring to a deserted 
island, Mavis thought she would bring a Swiss Army knife, 
fishnet, and a sleeping bag. 
 
Fred Bradshaw, another castaway, really put some thought into 
this one, Mr. Speaker. He thought, being a male, he would 
require a TV remote and a TV. It wouldn’t matter there was no 
signal; he would just flip back and forth through the channels 

anyway. The last item would be a deck of cards to play 
solitaire. The idea being that all you would have to do is start 
playing and someone would show up and start trying to tell him 
how to play, the island would no longer be deserted, and he 
would be saved. 
 
With logic such as this, we are certainly happy that Mavis 
agreed to participate. The Pasqua Regional Park swimming pool 
benefited from Mavis’ participation and contest prize . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry. Member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Possible Effects of Budget on Prescription Drug Plan 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
received information about the upcoming budget. It is our 
understanding the NDP government is making changes to the 
prescription drug plan, including raising the drug plan 
deductible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the government raising the prescription drug 
plan deductible in next week’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know that many people are 
interested in what the budget will say next week. Our Minister 
of Finance will be providing all of that information next week, 
and I would ask the member to wait until that time to get the 
information that is available. 
 
What I would also say is that we are working with the resources 
that we have to provide the best health care and the best 
programs that we can for all the people of Saskatchewan and we 
will continue to do that in an appropriate, balanced way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
take that as a yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears the NDP is prepared to pay for its fiscal 
mismanagement on the backs of the sick and the elderly. Many 
people are already struggling to pay high drug costs and now it 
appears the NDP is only going to make things worse. 
 
Is the NDP going to raise the drug plan deductible and what 
other changes are they making to reduce the prescription drug 
plan coverage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, I find this curious, Mr. Speaker, 
because usually what we hear from the opposition is why don’t 
you do what they’re doing in the province of Alberta. And we 
haven’t heard that this week. You know why, Mr. Speaker? 
Medicare premiums up 30 per cent. If they want to talk about 
charging people for health care, Mr. Speaker, all they have to do 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

 

is look at their darling cousins in Alberta. 
 
And if they want to look further, they can look at their cousins 
in BC (British Columbia). They’re always saying, do what they 
do in BC. What are they doing there, Mr. Speaker? Medicare 
premiums up 50 per cent. That’s what they’re doing. 
 
What else is Alberta doing? They’re making changes to their 
drug coverage and Blue Cross and we’ll see what they’re doing 
there. Education property taxes up $45 million, Mr. Speaker. 
Vehicle registration fees up more than 20 per cent. And there’s 
64 — 64 increases to fees and charges in Alberta. For a change, 
Mr. Speaker, at least we don’t have to listen to them gripe and 
complain about Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I asked a very simple question 
about the intentions of this government to change the drug plan 
in Saskatchewan. Instead the Minister of Finance goes into a 
tirade about the situation in Alberta. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is extremely simple. Are the . . . is 
the NDP government prepared to raise the prescription drug 
plan deductible and to make other changes to the Saskatchewan 
drug plan that is going to fall on the backs of the sick and the 
elderly in this province? Yes or no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition and the people 
of the province will find out what is in the budget on the 27th 
when the budget is delivered. That’s when they’ll find out, Mr. 
Speaker. But I want to say to the members opposite that the jig 
is up in terms of what they’ve been saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan about the way things should be done, Mr. 
Speaker, because we have the Leader of the Opposition telling 
everybody that this government should do exactly what they’re 
doing in British Columbia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve had all of them saying for years we should be doing 
exactly what they’re doing in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. What are 
their cousins doing in British Columbia? Raising taxes and 
cutting services and running up debt, Mr. Speaker. What are 
their cousins in Alberta doing, Mr. Speaker? They’re raising 
taxes and cutting services. Isn’t it strange, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
all right for their cousins in BC to raise revenues; it’s all right 
for their cousins in Alberta to raise revenues; but God forbid if 
revenues were ever raised by the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Snowmobile Trails in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Economic Development. The Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association has been lobbying the provincial government for 
$300,000 a year to help their clubs with the costs of grooming 
and maintaining almost 10,000 kilometres of trails throughout 
the province. 
 
These clubs have been doing the work themselves at the cost of 

about $800,000. The costs have been offset somewhat by the 
revenues from the trail permit program. But the association was 
told that your government had no money. Then in December the 
association learned that the NDP spent $380,000 to purchase 
just three trail groomers for three provincial parks for . . . in 
about 300 kilometres of trail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP would 
spend that much money to purchase trail groomers to maintain a 
small portion of the trails in the province when, for less money, 
the snowmobile clubs could do the whole province with their 
own equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank the member for the question. A little 
history with respect to the relationship between the Government 
of Saskatchewan and the Snowmobile Association. They have 
indeed made a request for $386,000 a year for five years — 
almost $2 million — in the past. 
 
We have supported the efforts of the Snowmobile Association 
through SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). In ’97 
they provided 100,000. In ’98 they provided 176,000. There is 
money that comes through Saskatchewan Lotteries — 32,000 
every year — and through the REDAs (regional economic 
development authority) to local associations. The REDA of 
Eden by the . . . created some . . . provided something in the 
neighbourhood of 16,000 — an aggregate of 32,300. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the association asked for legislation to 
allow for mandatory permitting to allow the funds available to 
groom the trails. We enacted that legislation. It’s true, Mr. 
Speaker, we denied funding this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this government still decided to 
spend $380,000 on just three groomers that are going to work 
on three parks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, snowmobiling in Saskatchewan is a $90 million a 
year industry. It involves tourism, recreation, the hospitality 
industry, and the retail industry. But because of this 
government’s lack of support, snowmobile clubs in the province 
have decided they can’t maintain their trails any more. And 
they’re advertising all their equipment for sale. A total of $1.3 
million worth of equipment is now being advertised for sale in 
The Edmonton Sun. 
 
In a letter to the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association dated 
January 10, the Minister of Economic Development said, and I 
quote: 
 

In times of fiscal restraint the funding of education, health 
care, and highways is a higher priority than supporting an 
admittedly popular recreational activity like snowmobiling. 

 
Okay, but on February 4, the NDP contributed $300,000 to the 
Trans Canada Trail network. Mr. Speaker, will the minister 
explain this double standard? On one hand he’s saying that 
there is no money for recreational facilities and yet less than a 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

month later he’s got the same amount of money for another 
recreational facility. Why the double standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by 
saying there is no double standard. We’ve been very supportive 
with respect to funding for the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association in an effort to make permitting mandatory to allow 
for the trails to be funded by those who use it or else user pay. 
Members opposite might recognize that concept. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we’re very much on parallel with 
other jurisdictions in terms of support; Manitoba is an example. 
And I want to say that the three machines that were replaced 
were an average of 26 years old. We have a responsibility to 
maintain the park trails for snowmobilers, for cross-country 
skiers and we’ll do that. 
 
What I also want to say, but the member opposite refuses to 
indicate, is that SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management), the department, has wanted, and will, 
enter into discussions and has been entering into discussions 
with respect to utilization of those machines on the other trails 
outside of the park. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we have been working in 
co-operation with the association. They asked for $2 million of 
funding; we didn’t feel that it was in the list of our priorities the 
appropriate expenditure in this year and we denied the request. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the minister obviously doesn’t 
get it. The private clubs already had the groomers. You could 
have rented them . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order for a minute. I’ll just ask the 
member to proceed with her question and direct all her remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the minister could have 
contracted through the private clubs for this work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, winter recreation like snowmobiling is an 
important industry in our province. Hundreds of thousands of 
dollars are raised every year by snowmobile enthusiasts like 
Snowarama and the ride for breast cancer. 
 
Communities right across the province know that there is a 
benefit from having a trail close to their own community. But 
now these economic benefits will be lost if the whole 
snowmobile trail network in Saskatchewan is lost because this 
government made yet another illogical decision. Mr. Speaker, 
the sale of all the grooming equipment will decimate the 
snowmobiling industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister explain why the NDP has chosen to let this 
industry die instead of supporting the private snowmobile clubs 
in their efforts to maintain every trail in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that 
across this province there are a number of different sports and 
different sporting venues; and I recognize the enthusiasm that 
snowmobilers have for their sport across this province and we 
attempt to support that. We also attempt to support minor 
sports. We attempt to support Special Olympics. We attempt to 
support First Nations Olympics, Winter/Summer Games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we get many requests for funding every year. The 
sad part of our circumstance is that we don’t have the funding 
to be able to match all of the requests and sometimes difficult 
decisions have to be made. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, these folks here who come to 
this House every day parading opportunities for more 
expenditures are doing little to help us manage the fiscal 
situation and circumstance in this province. 
 
And I tell you, I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker. They 
have promised over $3 billion from every corner of this 
province to every person they could lay their fingers on. They 
hope to be government, Mr. Speaker, without understanding 
that you’ve got to have the revenue to be able to commit the 
expenditures, otherwise you deficit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time’s up. 
 

Funding for Water Quality Improvements 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
asked this question of the Minister of Environment yesterday 
and did not get an answer. Hopefully we’ll get some better 
results today. 
 
Last May the Environment department handed out a fact sheet 
listing the Saskatchewan communities with drinking 
water-related concerns. At that time the fact sheet said there 
were 37 municipalities in the province that lacked minimum 
treatment. There were also 82 municipalities whose water 
monitoring results showed an excess of various water quality 
concentrations or were deemed at low risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this House today how many 
communities lack minimum water treatment facilities and how 
many municipalities are deemed low risk or have excess water 
quality objective concentrations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that list is available. We 
have made that list available time and time again. 
 
And I point out as I pointed out yesterday, there is incredible 
challenges with our water systems in the province of 
Saskatchewan and that we’ve said it in this Assembly, we’ve 
said it out in the media, we’ve said it all throughout the land 
that we have water challenge in the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made incredible progress over the past 
number of years to meet these challenges, Mr. Speaker. And 
there are going to be other challenges as we go down this path. 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

 

There is no question this is a tremendous challenge. 
 
But what we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is we want to stand here 
as the Government of Saskatchewan and ask all the local town 
councils, ask the federal government, ask the First Nations 
government to stand with us and together we’ll find a solution 
to meet not only the challenges of the 40 or 50 communities 
now but to meet the challenge in the many years ahead that we 
all have to work together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government recognizes . . . (inaudible) . . . and that 
opposition recognizes and stop voting against any budget that 
we have that’s going to improve the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well perhaps 
we’ll try again tomorrow because I don’t think we did get an 
answer to the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my next question is for the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs. Yesterday the minister told this Assembly that if there 
are specific communities that are having water infrastructure 
problems, they should just call and the issue would be resolved. 
 
Well the village of Perdue did contact the minister and they also 
contacted the Premier. They did get a review of their 
infrastructure application by the minister and his officials, but 
they were turned down because Sask Water says there are 10 
other communities whose water problems are worse than those 
in Perdue. Well the Perdue water treatment system has now 
collapsed completely. So it’s alarming to think that 10 other 
communities are in worse shape. 
 
Will the minister tell this House the names of the 10 other 
communities who are also not receiving any help from the NDP 
to address their water problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to clarify once more for the members opposite and 
for the people of Saskatchewan. This government is committed 
— and it’s a high priority — for good quality drinking water 
and improving our water systems. We had made a commitment 
to fund all the communities that were under a boil-water 
advisory under the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program. We did that. In 2001-2002, Mr. Speaker, funding was 
approved for 42 water supply projects and 15 waste water 
projects under that program. 
 
You know something, Mr. Speaker? With the partnership 
between the federal government, the provincial government, 
and the municipalities, who need to consider partnerships, we 
were able to pump $30 million into these kind of projects. And 
we continue to do that under the current Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that answer was no 
clearer than the water in Perdue. The Minister of Municipal 
Affairs told the media yesterday that the village of Perdue is to 

blame for their failing infrastructure. That was after he blamed 
the federal government, and I think at one point, was even 
attempting to blame inanimate objects. He said, and I quote: 
 

Why do infrastructures deteriorate? Because they are 
neglected. 

 
That is . . . it’s unbelievable. Mr. Speaker, why do municipal 
infrastructures deteriorate? Because the NDP would rather 
spend $80 million on infrastructure in Australia, because the 
NDP would rather risk 20 million of taxpayers’ dollars on an 
Internet company in Georgia, because the NDP has cut 
revenue-sharing grants to municipalities. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the 
members please stop yelling across the room. Would the 
member proceed to his question, please. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — At the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
failed because they have put all of these issues ahead of their 
own selfish interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to the people of Perdue, 
and other Saskatchewan communities, how they are the ones to 
blame for their water supply difficulties. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you. And I guess 
the opposition still doesn’t understand that you invest money to 
make money to pay for these kinds of projects in our province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just explain. There are a number . . . there are a number 
of Saskatchewan communities, and let me name some of them, 
Mr. Speaker. Rosetown, Wawota, Imperial, who have 
successfully addressed their water quality and infrastructures 
challenges, Mr. Speaker; Indian Head, several communities like 
Gravelbourg, Kinistino, Pierceland. Communities — 43 
communities in all — have worked with Sask Water, and in 
some cases have worked in partnership with one another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, they recognized that partnership, 
mergers, and you know, coalition can work . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Grants from provincial or federal 
governments can be part of the solution, Mr. Speaker, but it 
takes co-operation and partnership to address all these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation for Northerners 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has done an excellent 
job of chasing people and jobs out of Saskatchewan. Under the 
NDP, Saskatchewan has posted the worst job creation record in 
Canada. Over the past three years, Saskatchewan has suffered 
its worst population loss since World War II. 
 
And just when we thought the NDP couldn’t do much worse, 
they came up with a new scheme. Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago, 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

the NDP government signed an agreement to create jobs for 
Saskatchewan people in Alberta. It’s called Northern Neighbors 
— A Partnership for Jobs. Mr. Speaker, the agreement paves 
the way for northerners to move to Fort McMurray, Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible for Northern Affairs 
explain why the NDP government is signing agreements that 
result in even more people moving to Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Northern 
Affairs, I want to point out to the entire Assembly and to the 
millions of people gathered today that it has been 133 weeks, 
Mr. Speaker, it has been 34 months or well over 1,000 days 
since that opposition asked a question about northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I will point out, Mr. Speaker, one 
question in three years does not make a provincial party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, if that member would have 
researched this project, Mr. Speaker, he would have known that 
Revenue Canada says that you do not pay income tax in the 
place where you work but rather where you live. 
 
And if we are going to create jobs in northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, what’s . . . that member complains about steady, 
Mr. Speaker. Then I’m going to tell him today that those jobs 
will create a great future for the people of the North. And 
maybe we can wait another 1,000 days before we get another 
question from that opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been more than 1,000 days 
since we got an answer from that side of the House on any 
questions that we’ve asked. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, the plan the NDP have come up 
with that assists people from northern Saskatchewan to move to 
Fort McMurray, Alberta, to work in the Alberta oil patch, here’s 
how it’ll work, according to the NDP’s agreement. First, the 
Saskatchewan government pays for training. Then once the 
eligible northerners are trained, the agreement assists them in 
moving to Alberta to go to work. 
 
If the minister doesn’t believe me, maybe he should have read 
the agreement that he signed. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ll table a 
copy of this agreement just in the case the minister has lost his. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta doesn’t need our help. That province is 
already getting more than its fair share of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government in Saskatchewan 
negotiating agreements that result in Saskatchewan people 
moving to Alberta to work? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again to answer that 
1,000-day question, I’m going to point out to that member that 
on this side of the House we believe in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — We are going to continue, Mr. Speaker, 
we are going to continue to work with the northern 
Saskatchewan people. And that’s why they will never, ever win 
any of those northern seats, because they never care about the 
North, Mr. Speaker. And the only time that they get up, Mr. 
Speaker, to complain about the North, Mr. Speaker, is when 
we’re in this job of trying to find jobs for northerners, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have no problem with Albertans coming to Saskatchewan to 
work in the oil patch. Why can’t we send Saskatchewan people 
to work in the oil patch over there, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And second, Mr. Speaker, his Leader of the Opposition says, 
we want to cut $50 million in Social Services benefits. Well we 
on this side want to train our northern people. We want to 
employ our northern people so we can cut those $50 million in 
those costs in a good, compassionate, sound way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Employees of Community Agencies 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
just the nurses who are threatening to go on strike. Right across 
this province we have community-based organizations 
operating group homes, women’s shelters, mental health 
centres, sheltered workshops, recycling centres. Oftentimes they 
are paid half what public sector workers doing the same jobs are 
given. 
 
Now there’s a real possibility of job action by these workers. 
Those who have family members in a group home are being 
notified that they may have to come and pick up their relatives 
and take them home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised last year there would be 
parity. The government has long promised parity for public 
service workers and for community agency employees. Why is 
the government . . . what is the government going to do to avert 
a strike? What is the government going to do if there is a strike? 
When will community-based employees get the same wages 
that they have been promised for many years and the 
government continues to pay these community-based 
employees half what the public service is given for the same 
work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 
the question, and I know that he will be interested in waiting till 
budget day to hear what the government will be doing in 
response to this issue and a whole host of other issues that 
affect the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is very clear to the Department of Social 
Services and other departments in this government, the 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

 

community-based organization workers do an important job in 
delivering important services to the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are aware that the community-based 
organizations in many cases have challenges in the recruitment 
and retention of workers. We’ve been talking with those 
community-based organizations, Mr. Speaker, and we will be 
doing the absolute best that we possibly can, and I think they’ll 
understand that very clearly when it comes to budget day. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think it only goes to say that 
when it . . . when we look at commitment to support of 
community-based organizations to deliver important services to 
Saskatchewan people, there is a very, very clear difference 
between the commitment on this side and the commitment on 
that side, which is led by a leader, Mr. Speaker, who has said if 
he had his way, he would take $50 million out of the 
Department of Social Services. Heaven forbid that 
Saskatchewan should ever go in that direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Ethanol Production Proposals 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. We’ll just pause for a minute 
here. Once again I recognize the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ethanol is a 
subject that many people in Saskatchewan are excited about 
today. Indeed many communities and individuals right across 
the province already understand the benefits of an expanded 
ethanol industry here in Saskatchewan. And they want to see 
this industry grow. Mr. Speaker, so do we. 
 
That’s why I’m very pleased to tell you today, our government 
has announced a plan that will create an investment climate 
required for the private sector . . . for the private sector to build 
a vibrant ethanol industry in the province. Our plan is the 
greenprint for ethanol production, which will result in extensive 
consultations with business, industry, and the people of this 
province. Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear, the ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan will be built upon the strengths of 
sound business plans and direct private sector investment. 
 
To that end our government will, first, later today, introduce 
legislation in this Assembly that will provide the legal 
framework for us to establish a mandate to sell ethanol-blended 
gasoline in Saskatchewan. Once this legislation is passed, 
Saskatchewan will be the first jurisdiction in Canada to 
establish a renewable fuels mandate — something we should all 
be very proud of. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, as of April 1 of this year, we will 
effectively eliminate the 15-cent- a-litre gas tax on ethanol. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This measure will provide direct 
support to help bring the price of ethanol-blended gasoline in 
line with that of regular unleaded. 
 
Third, we will work with the federal and provincial 
governments across Canada to remove the barriers for ethanol 
exports and we will call on the federal government to follow 
Saskatchewan’s lead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We will call on them to follow our 
lead and to introduce a national mandate that will level the 
playing field for wholesalers and retailers across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, we will continue 
to work . . . we will continue to work with communities, 
proponents, and investors to establish ethanol plants here in this 
province. And that will include establishing a single access 
point for proponents to begin the process of securing the 
necessary environmental and operating permits to bring these 
plants into production. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, in short, this policy 
addresses what people have told us as we’ve consulted them 
over the past several months. It helps secure a market, it helps 
provide money to secure the price, and it provides for a 
management model that’s based on private sector investment 
and sound business practices. 
 
What this policy does not do, Mr. Speaker, is it does not pick 
winners and losers, nor does it dictate the size and locations of 
these facilities. I believe that this policy will provide a 
foundation for a good mix of plants of various sizes across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you very much to my 
colleague, the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for the 
work that he has done in helping to develop this policy and the 
leadership of the Premier of this province in making sure this 
has come to be. Our greenprint for ethanol production will 
support the private sector’s efforts to create jobs, it will 
capitalize on opportunities, and it will grow an ethanol industry 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of this Assembly to set 
aside their partisan biases and support this government’s 
strategy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly my pleasure to 
respond to the ministerial statement here this afternoon. And we 
would to congratulate the minister for following the greenprint 
for developing the industry the official opposition presented in 
April . . . in September of last year. This announcement today 
pretty much mirrors exactly what the official opposition leader 
said in September 27, 2001. 
 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

And we hope we can count on the minister’s word that when he 
says he wants this industry to be developed with private capital 
by private developers here in Saskatchewan and not try and 
pick the winners and losers. Because if there’s anything the 
NDP are good at, it’s picking losers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Now if we can just convince this government, 
Mr. Speaker, to take a couple more steps forward in terms of 
this development to do something in the budget with a capital 
tax, we’ll see the development fully realize its potential right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And the next step is we fully expect, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government will do all it can to lobby the 
federal government to put in a national standard for ethanol so 
that we can develop the industry fully to its potential, again 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And we thank the minister once again, Mr. 
Speaker, for allowing farmers the opportunity to market their 
grain outside of the Canadian Wheat Board . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — . . . and allow them more marketing choices — 
something the official opposition has been saying for a long 
time in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, this announcement this afternoon 
just goes to show you when the government opposite takes the 
advice of the Saskatchewan Party we finally see positive 
developments here in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — In anticipation . . . (inaudible) . . . Pardon me. 
 
Member for North Battleford. Why . . . my question is why is 
the member from North Battleford on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — As the hon. member for Kindersley has already 
pointed out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Does the member have leave to make a 
response to the statement? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 – The Ethanol Fuel Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 1, The Ethanol Fuel Act, be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order, order. 
 

Bill No. 10 – The Tax Enforcement Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 10, The Tax Enforcement Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 11 – The Urban Municipal Administrators 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, the 
Urban Municipal Administrators Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Toth. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my 
introductory comments of yesterday, I’d like to get into the 
main part of my speech today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the province of opportunity. We 
are going to face many challenges in the future with regards to 
the drought, with regards to oil and natural gas prices, softwood 
lumber dispute, a whole host of issues there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government is poised to live within our 
means and to take advantage of the unique position that 
Saskatchewan has with our resources. Saskatchewan is able to 
look forward to the future with confidence knowing the wealth 
of human and natural resources that we possess. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to that end I will be opposing the 
opposition’s motion and supporting the motion put forward by 
the member for Greystone seconded by the member for 
Idylwyld. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to stand today and give my report as to the 
Throne Speech that was given here a couple of days ago. But 
before I go into that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a special 
welcome to all members of the Legislative Assembly, to be 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

 

back here today, and to join in with the legislature of the . . . 
24th legislature, I should say. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate you. As the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland said yesterday, this is one 
year for you. Congratulations. 
 
I also would like to take this time to congratulate another 
member to the legislature, and that being the newly elected 
member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. Congratulations and 
welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it just seems like today is the day that I get 
to stand most of the day. It seems like I’m always on my feet 
today, speaking. I want to first of all say, as representation of 
the constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, a constituency in 
the north central area, there’s a few people I would like to 
thank. 
 
And first and foremost, and that is my wife, Sheila, and my 
family, for all the support they have given me in my quest to be 
an MLA, and the three years that I’ve experienced being an 
MLA in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I also would like to take this time and opportunity to thank all 
the good citizens of the constituency themselves, who have 
given me their time and support for the job I’m trying to do for 
them. 
 
I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that as an MLA I always have, and 
always will, take my job very serious. And there are days, Mr. 
Speaker, as many of the people here are probably recognizing 
with me, there are days when you say to yourself, just what the 
heck did I get into this job for. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, after the rowdy reception today, you’re 
probably saying that yourself. 
 
But I know, Mr. Speaker, that there is a light at the end of the 
tunnel. It’s a glim light, but it is there. And that light is and will 
be brighter as time goes when this government, opposition 
government, on this side, becomes seated on that side, and we 
become the new government of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have always led to believe and follow on the morals of my 
dad. And my dad’s morals are, there is a difference between yes 
and no. And there is a huge difference between right and wrong. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to be here to 
represent the concerns and a voice to the people and the 
constituents of Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members in this House today —on this side 
especially — are glad to be back. After all, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
almost nine months since we were last here. And the people are 
saying, isn’t it time for you to go back to work, isn’t holidays 
over? That’s why the opposition government kept saying for a 
fall session. We repeated last fall that the government sit. It’s 
the only way as we can show accountability to our citizens and 
our ratepayers. 
 

I have always maintained there should be, number one, an 
election every four years and that there should be a spring and a 
fall session. Most provinces in the province of . . . the country 
of Canada have this. Why are we so different? 
 
When we talk about a fall session, we are dealing with issues 
like health, economy, and the agricultural problem that occurred 
to Saskatchewan over the drought last year. The ongoing 
problem of job loss and out-migration was another concern. 
Health care and government response to the Fyke report was a 
serious concern last fall. Agriculture and drought situations 
facing many families was serious, as was the need to lower 
SaskEnergy rates before the winter. The urgent need to protect 
people from implementing more of the recommendations in the 
all-party committee on child sex trade was also another issue. 
 
But did this government decide to sit in the fall to discuss these 
issues? No, they did not. That’s why the people in my 
constituency and all over Saskatchewan feel we’re only doing 
part of a job. There should be a fall session and there should be 
a spring session. 
 
The role, Mr. Speaker, of good opposition party is to hold the 
government accountable, but also to propose constructive 
alternatives. The opposition party does this on a regular basis, 
as we did today in the announcement of the ethanol. And we 
look forward to the opportunity to present more of these 
alternatives in this legislature as days go on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency in north central Saskatchewan 
starts at the southern tip of Duck Lake and goes north past the 
centre of Big River, almost to Green Lake. It continues to the 
west past Fairholme about probably 10 miles to the road going 
south to Edam. And it goes east, Mr. Speaker, almost to the 
town . . . or the city, pardon me, of Prince Albert. 
 
My constituency contains various towns, villages, hamlets, 
resort villages and seven Native reserves. Some of the bigger 
centres in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is my hometown of 
Spiritwood, a little larger town known as Shellbrook, and the 
lumber capital of Saskatchewan known as Big River. 
 
Now for comments on the Throne Speech that was delivered 
here a few days ago. Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed in the 
Throne Speech that was presented to us by the Premier. It had 
no vision. It had no plan for growth in Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP called the Throne Speech province of opportunity. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a lot of opportunity. What 
it needs is a new government to show the people that 
opportunity. That government is sitting on this side, soon to be 
on that side. Mr. Speaker, we have so many advantages here in 
Saskatchewan. We have hard-working, well-educated people. 
We have an abundance of natural resources. 
 
Saskatchewan should be booming, but it’s not, Mr. Speaker. We 
need to give people more reasons to stay instead of more 
reasons to leave. Today’s NDP Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 
did nothing to address this problem. Pardon me, not today’s 
Throne Speech, last week’s Throne Speech. And even today, it 
did less. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, a few days ago our party, the 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

opposition party, came out with an economic plan to grow 
Saskatchewan. Our leader says, and I quote — it’s fine print: 
 

A growing population means a stronger economy, more 
jobs and a larger tax base to support essential services like 
health and education. Most importantly it means we are 
creating the type of opportunities that will keep our 
provinces here and bring home our families who have left 
Saskatchewan. 

 
I was fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have two of the Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings in my constituency. One in Debden, 
where there wasn’t just four; there wasn’t just 20; there was 
almost 30 people at that meeting. 
 
I also had another meeting, Mr. Speaker, in Medstead. And at 
that meeting, Mr. Speaker, there was over 30. It was well 
represented, Mr. Speaker, and there was a lot of good ideas 
came out of there. Some of the more appropriate ideas that 
came out was: when is there going to be an election? When are 
we going to get rid of this NDP government? 
 
I noticed in the last speaker remarks yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland and he referred to us as, 
two years ago the Sask-a-Tories. He referred to us last year as 
the Saskatchewan Alliance. Well one member from my meeting 
in Medstead said, you know something, here’s something for 
the NDP. The letters NDP stand for no darn plans. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, plans to grow 
Saskatchewan by 100,000 people over the next 10 years. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a bold goal that we are going to try to do — 
a bold goal. But as a businessman, or I was before I became an 
MLA, I was a businessman in the town of Spiritwood, 
snowmobile dealer, and every year the wife and I and my 
family drew up a plan of how we’re going to grow our business. 
 
It’s common in the business practice. Maybe the NDP should 
do the same. We did. The Saskatchewan Party did. That’s why 
we’re going to grow the province by 10,000 people in 10 . . . 
100,000 people in 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, how are we going to do it? 
Well this is how we’re going to do it. 
 
Number one, we’re going to target tax reduction for 
Saskatchewan families, raising the personal and family tax 
exemptions, allowing families to keep more of the money they 
earn before they start paying tax. This will help people just 
completing their education, getting their first job, or raising 
their children. 
 
The second point, Mr. Speaker, is helping business grow and 
create jobs for young people; making Saskatchewan a 
small-business tax-free zone, with . . . help small business grow, 
creating jobs and opportunities for all people. The 
Saskatchewan Party government will cut the corporate tax in 
half to encourage new business development and new 
investment. 
 
The third point, Mr. Speaker, building on Saskatchewan’s 
natural strengths. The Saskatchewan Party government will 
focus economic expansion on our areas of natural advantage, 

such as value-added manufacturing and processing, intensive 
livestock, the eco and tourism industry, technological and 
natural resource industries for forestry, mining, and energy. 
 
The number four point, Mr. Speaker, providing more efficient 
government; something the NDP should take note of. The 
Saskatchewan Party government will deliver smarter and 
smaller government by making sure that every part of 
government is operating in the most effective, productive way 
possible. 
 
And number five, Mr. Speaker, stopping the expansion of the 
Crown Corporations that compete with the private sector 
business. Today our Crown Corporations are competing against 
existing tax . . . Saskatchewan businesses and are investing 
hundreds of millions of your tax dollars outside the province. 
We would stop the expansion of our Crowns in areas that are 
not directly related to the provision of the core services of 
power, natural gas, telecommunications, and insurance. 
 
And speaking, Mr. Speaker, of Crowns, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would like to know . . . Mr. Speaker, you, as a 
taxpayer, and I’m quoting from the Regina Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker. You, as a Saskatchewan taxpayer now own shares in 
Moose Jaw Temple Gardens and Spa, Saskatoon Centennial 
Foods, Yorkton’s Premium Brands, Regina’s Minds-Eye 
Pictures, Meadow Lake Tolko Industries oriented strand board 
plant, Rama and omega Big Sky pork operations, and in Regina, 
FarmGro organic milling and marketing operations. 
 
And the above is actually just a small section of the in-province 
Crown Investment Corporation’s taxpayers. That doesn’t 
include the home security business, or investment in digital 
cable television that is now, or will be soon, be competing with 
the private sector companies or co-operatives attempting to 
provide the same service. 
 
Add to the expensive portfolio of non-Saskatchewan-based 
investments. There’s an Ag Dealer . . . a farm equipment 
magazine called Ag Dealer. There’s also a rent-a-television 
service for hospitals throughout Canada, called Hospitality 
Network Canada Ltd., a cable television service in 
Newfoundland, environmental monitoring equipment service 
companies, and insurance companies in Prince Edward Island 
called Coachman Insurance. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you reading them all? 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Well I’ve got quite a few to read. And the 
Insurance Company of Prince Edward Island. 
 
The bulk of the money the NDP government has made in the 
investment portfolio have come from two sources, Mr. Speaker. 
The first is a 131 billion sale of a British cable company called 
LCL, and the other is through its Cameco share sales, including 
the most recent 111.5 billion profit made from the sale of those 
remaining shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is just a few of the investments that our NDP 
government is using our taxpaying dollars to invest outside the 
province. They have money for investment outside of the 
province. What about the people in Saskatchewan? What about 
the taxpayers that pay this province to keep going? What about 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

 

them? 
 
Our NDP government is putting people and citizens outside the 
province first, and Saskatchewan citizens second. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, for every other success story the 
government loves to boast about, there are at least as many 
clunkers like the 16 million loss at NST (NST Network 
Services of Chicago), SaskTel US (United States) cable 
investment, the $8.1 million loss in Channel Lake Petroleum, 
and the most recent $28 million loss in the potato industry, Mr. 
Speaker. More common sense needs to be directed to these 
investments. These dollars should be staying within the 
province of Saskatchewan, not going outside. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned before about the Saskatchewan Party 
had a plan to grow Saskatchewan. The NDP has none. It has no 
plan for the economy, it has no plan for health, and it has 
definitely no plan for agriculture. 
 
I’d like to bring you up to staff on a point about the NDP 
broken promises and there’s a list of them, but I know with the 
time allotted by me I can only go over a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP said we’ll help create 30,000 new jobs. 
The NDP record, Mr. Speaker, 12,000 jobs lost over the past 
two years. The NDP promised we’ll keep the balanced budget. 
The NDP record, 478 million deficit in the 2001-2002 budget. 
The NDP promised surgical waiting lists will be cut in at least 
30 per cent. The NDP promise . . . the NDP record, surgical 
waiting lists have increased over 50 per cent. Saskatchewan has 
the longest waiting lists in Canada. 
 
The NDP promised less crime. Well the NDP record, Regina is 
the car theft capital of North America, not just Saskatchewan 
but North America. The NDP promised, Mr. Speaker, to hire 
200 more police officers. The NDP record, 45 more officers 
hired but police officers have told us these hirings have been 
more than . . . will more than offset their retirements. 
 
And the NDP promised we will have 500 new health care 
providers. And the NDP record, Mr. Speaker, 1,192 fewer 
nurses than in 1999 and this according to SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses). That’s the NDP record — dismal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is at a pivotal point in our 
provincial . . . in the province’s history. The future of our 
province is at stake. Last year Saskatchewan lost almost 15,000 
jobs — the worst annual job loss record since the Great 
Depression. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1999 Saskatchewan lost more than 
22,000 people who left to seek job and opportunities in other 
provinces. Since 1997 the government has hired 1,100 new 
servants. But yet last year they hired 570 and now this year they 
got to claw them back because of the deficit. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan had 
an $840 million surplus. That’s the highest surplus as recorded 
for decades. And what do we have now in a short period of 
time? A deficit of more than $480 million. Where did all that 

money go, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We are losing jobs; we are losing people; we are losing 
investment. The NDP is growing the government instead, Mr. 
Speaker, of growing the economy. Something is wrong. 
Something has to change. 
 
I would now like to focus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on agriculture, 
and agriculture within my constituency. My constituency is 
made up of half the constituency is agricultural, the northern 
half being forest-related area. And in the South, in the 
agricultural area where we have had no snow, it poses a huge 
problem for the cattle people — the cattle industry in itself. 
There is no snow for runoff; the cattle operation is going to be 
in trouble. 
 
And yet the government is doing nothing. The government has 
no safety net program, something that we have asked for for the 
three years we’ve been here, and still the Minister of 
Agriculture says we’re going to wait and see. We’re going to 
study it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the farmers of today can’t wait for the 
NDP government to wait and see. They need some assistance 
now — this year — in light of the no snow. 
 
Some of the good news about my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is 
the hog and the cattle operations that exist. I would like to say a 
thank you to some of the cattle feedlots in my area: the Rask 
feedlot from Shellbrook, Parkside area; the Diesen feedlot from 
Shell Lake; and the 5,000 head of cattle operation in the 
Canwood area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are only three feedlots in my area that are up 
and running. Yes, they’re small but they will in turn go to big 
ones. But you know something, Mr. Speaker? The nice thing 
about these feedlots is that they’re privately owned feedlots. 
They don’t have any money from the government. It’s all 
private. 
 
Another one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the hog operations in this 
province. I would like to take my hat off to Harold and Marjorie 
Fast from my hometown of Spiritwood who started a hog 
operation here some 10 years ago. They saw that a hog 
operation in that area would be beneficial to the town of 
Spiritwood because it would create jobs, and it has. Last year 
the Fast family amalgamated with the Seidle farm and the 
Casson family, and together they built two more barns. And this 
year they’re expanding their operation to produce some more 
barns. 
 
And what Mr. Harold Fast says is, you know what’s good about 
this program? You know what’s good about this operation is? 
It’s all private money. There is no help from the government. 
No money from the government. That’s how Saskatchewan 
grows. That’s how rural Saskatchewan grows, all with the 
community spirit. 
 
I’d now like to talk about the northern part of my constituency, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is with the lumber companies. 
Now as you know and I’ve mentioned before, Big River, which 
is the capital of our forestry industry in Saskatchewan, it has the 
largest mill in Saskatchewan, and it is a Weyerhaeuser mill — 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

and hats off to Weyerhaeuser. 
 
That mill produces a number of jobs that keeps Big River alive. 
But as you know, Mr. Speaker, for some time now the embargo 
between Canada and the United States in the softwood lumber 
industry has dampened their future. But more importantly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it has dampened the many operations in the 
forestry industry that are the smaller people. They don’t go to 
work any more because their jobs are not there. It’s affected the 
small operations worse than anybody else. 
 
Two of the larger companies, Mistik and Weyerhaeuser, still are 
allowed to keep their doors open. But soon, if this softwood 
embargo agreement doesn’t end, it will hurt them to a point 
where they will have to close. I’m not saying it’s the 
government across the way’s fault. All I’m saying is that we 
need their co-operation to work with the federal minister, Pierre 
Pettigrew, to get this problem resolved and get it resolved soon. 
 
I would now like to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, go into health care. 
And just the other day, I received a letter from a lady from my 
constituency and she has some concerns about our health care 
and I would like to read that letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it 
starts out: 
 

Dear Sir or Madame, 
 

I am writing this letter on behalf of Laura Herzog who is an 
Alzheimer’s victim. Until two years ago her family was 
caring for Laura in her home. She now requires a very high 
level of care and has been admitted into Mont St. Joseph 
Nursing Home in Prince Albert. The staff at Mont St. 
Joseph have . . . (worked) their very best . . . (to provide) 
the care she requires but they are working under some very 
difficult circumstances. Residents who are suffering from 
. . . (those types of disease) are presently being housed in 
the same ward. Some of these residents display very 
aggressive and violent types of behaviour and the staff have 
great difficulty (caring) . . . to control them. The other 
residents, including Laura, are, of course, exposed to the 
violent behaviour. Since she is unable to communicate 
effectively, Laura is unable to express her fears and her 
anxieties. By observing her behaviour, however, it is clear 
that this . . . (has) causing her some extreme fear and stress. 
Laura cannot even feel safe in her own room because (of) 
these violent residents, who all happen to be men at this 
time. (Men) will enter her room, lay on her bed and go 
through her (privately owned) possessions. Since Laura has 
a fear of men . . . the fact that this violent and aggressive 
behaviour is coming from . . . men makes her . . . more 
afraid and (more) anxious. Our family members have seen 
examples of this behaviour and fear for the(ir) safety of the 
residents as well as . . . the employees. These men strike 
out, (they) kick, they push people around as well as actually 
doing extensive damage to the ward. 
 
Some of these violent citizens have been admitted to the 
(medical) . . . Health Centre in hopes of (ridding the) . . . 
behaviour (problem) . . . The Centre will not accept these 
residents on a long-term basis so they are returned to the 
Home. The staff at Mont St. Joseph are not properly trained 
to look after this type of resident. When the resident returns 
so do the problems. 

We have observed Laura hiding in her bathroom with the 
door open just . . . enough to peek out, watching these men 
ransack her room. I’m sure you can understand how 
horrible this would (feel to) . . . anyone, even more so for 
someone who is confused and lost because of her (illness) 
. . . 
 
I am hoping (Mr. Deputy Speaker) that (someone) 
something can be done to separate the residents so the 
violent ones would not be with the general population. I 
would suggest a ward that is reserved (specifically) for 
(those type of) . . . residents with a well-trained and 
sufficient staff (component) . . . who will be (able to deal) 
. . . with this type of behaviour (problems). 
 
(And) In closing, I would like to (recommend that) . . . the 
Mont . . . Joseph staff . . . the care and concern they show 
for the residents. I am sure, that given the proper direction 
and funding, they would co-operate in making whatever 
changes are necessary to ensure the safety and well-being 
of all the residents. Please consider this letter as a request 
for help in whatever direction would alleviate these 
problems. 
 
P.S.: . . . While I do realize the expense associated with 
health care, I certainly hope something can be done to ease 
the situation at Mont St. Joseph . . . thank you for your 
time. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that letter is very concerning. And this you 
find in all centres, the same type of problems. I can understand 
where this person is coming from. Surely to God that in the 
upcoming discussions regarding the health care that we have in 
our province, problems like this can and will be addressed. 
 
In finishing up, Mr. Speaker, I read in Hansard some of the 
comments made by the member from Athabasca. And in those 
comments, it is stated that we are doing good for the country 
. . . or for the province I should say. One of the things we’ve 
done good in last year’s budget was we created The Métis Act, 
the recognition of the Métis veterans. 

 
(15:15) 
 
And that is true. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it showed recognition of: 
 

. . . the flag, the cart, and of course the historical 
communities of Cumberland House, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Green 
Lake, and (also Duck Lake and Macdowall). 

 
I want to say to the member from Athabasca: when he says the 
members on this side went against it, they went against what we 
wanted on this side as a hoist. Mr. Speaker, the hoist that was 
asked upon by the member from Humboldt and myself was so 
that the members on that side — and specifically the minister 
— would take into account that when The Métis Act was 
brought in, that there was a handful of people that recognized 
The Métis Act. 
 
Now as you know, there was 45,000 potentially Métis people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Yet in the last election of The 
Métis Act, there was only roughly 4,000 that were allowed to 
vote. Well 4,000 versus 45,000 is quite a different. The reason 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

 

we brought in for a hoist was that . . . so that the members 
opposite could get all the people to get together and come out 
with one plan for a Métis Act. 
 
And I say again, and I’ll say last year, it wasn’t that we don’t 
agree with The Métis Act. What we don’t agree with is what 
was in The Métis Act. The members on this side knew that, and 
that’s why we voted the way we did. 
 
It also goes on by the member from Athabasca to say: 
 

. . . that (The) Métis Act is a good Act . . . It has a lot of 
challenges ahead of it . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of challenges ahead regarding 
this Métis Act. I have a list of letters from Métis people that 
say, the first and foremost thing that should have been done — 
and it should have been done when the hoist was brought in — 
was that . . . to look at the Métis people and come up with a 
proper election Act. That was not done. And the letters that I 
have in my office today state that that’s what should have been 
done. 
 
So when the member from Athabasca states that we objected to 
The Métis Act, that is totally wrong. We wanted the hoist so 
that the people, the Métis people, could get all the things that 
should be done in an Act before it was brought into power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other members on my side that would 
like to speak, and therefore I will end with that. 
 
Therefore, I say, I will be supporting the amendment but I will 
not be supporting the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure 
today and my honour indeed to stand up and speak in support of 
the Speech from the Throne — this speech that recognizes 
Saskatchewan as a province of opportunity. And indeed what a 
province of opportunity it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got close to 1 million people that are dedicated to 
making this province go forward, to making it work better. 
There is a number primarily centred on the opposition benches 
that seem to be masters of doom and seem to be determined that 
this is a . . . sort of the last place in the world in which one 
would want to live. 
 
But that’s not who I represent, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 
tell you about the constituency of Regina Coronation Park 
which is, if you’re coming in from the north of Regina you . . . 
on pavement, you are bound to come through the constituency 
of Regina Coronation Park because No. 6 and No. 11 Highways 
turn into Albert Street. And on the right hand of Albert Street is 
Regina Coronation Park all the way down to the CN (Canadian 
National) rail track, the Towers Mall, and then if we follow . . . 
the south border follows the CN line west all the way to 
McIntosh Street and then up McIntosh Street to the north. 
 
All of that — I’ll describe it as a rectangular chunk of Regina 
— is the constituency of Regina Coronation Park. Primarily 
residential, but a good smattering of malls, mall activity and 

stores to service the residents. And we’ve got some very good 
schools, both public and separate high school and public and 
separate schools, not surprisingly, to serve the people of that 
wonderful constituency. 
 
The people, Mr. Speaker, are . . . we have a range from some 
very — I’ll describe it as fairly upper-end housing to we have 
some what I would describe as lower-end housing. But the vast 
majority of the housing stock and apartment buildings in Regina 
Coronation Park would be firmly middle-class to 
upper-middle-class housing. 
 
And we’ve got people that work day after day raising their 
families, trying to make our province a better place for them to 
live and for their children to live, and in some instances for our 
grandchildren to live. We have a nursing home — William 
Booth nursing home — is the largest nursing home in the 
constituency and they just do a tremendous job with people that 
are residents there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a nice constituency and it’s been my honour to 
represent that area for some time now and I just want to thank 
my constituents for their continued support. It means a great 
deal to me as I go about my duties in the Legislative chamber 
and on the government side of this legislature. 
 
I want to take a moment to do something I do way too seldom. 
And that is to acknowledge the support and love of my family. 
It means far more than I ever could say. And that support 
enables me to step forward every day and do the very, very best 
that I can for the people of Saskatchewan and for my 
constituents. 
 
I want to thank my wife, Lorna; my sons and daughter; and of 
course my parents, John and Jean for their support. And all the 
rest of the family too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province of opportunity — Saskatchewan is 
indeed a province of opportunity. Seven months ago, seven 
short months ago, the Premier gathered us together and said: 
let’s get in the bus; let’s tour Saskatchewan and let’s engage the 
people; let’s engage the people of Saskatchewan; let’s glean the 
very best ideas they have; let’s work with them; let’s renew 
partnerships; let us, let us get more in tune than we have been 
for many, many years with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Premier was on that bus every kilometre that it 
travelled, every day, day in, day out. And I’m delighted to say 
that we all had an opportunity and it was a tremendously good 
experience to meet people, to engage them, to hear their 
thoughts, to hear their ideas, and to have them push us in some 
ways; and then to come back and see that, some of those, many 
of those ideas reflected in this Throne Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s democracy at its best. It’s what governance is 
all about. And governance . . . The people of Saskatchewan 
have known this for a great many years; we don’t often take the 
time to think what governance is all about. But governing is 
really about gathering together — all of us — and doing 
together what we can’t do alone. It’s co-operating and it means 
things like creating SaskTel so that we could have telephone 
service throughout rural Saskatchewan, including the farm I 
grew up on, so that we could have that telephone service in 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

remote geographical areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of our governance that we’ve done in 
Saskatchewan there’s a few things that we have to be very, very 
proud of, and I wanted to talk a little about Crown corporations 
today because that’s an area that clearly defines us on the 
government side from members opposite on the opposition side. 
 
Some of the accomplishments we have as a result of our Crown 
corporations is we’ve got more kilometres of power line per 
capita than anywhere in the world. We’ve got more lines, more 
kilometres of telephone lines per capita than anywhere else in 
the world. Of course, we’ve got more kilometres of highways 
and roads than any other jurisdiction in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are things that Saskatchewan people have 
done working together. We’ve got . . . in Saskatchewan, we 
have insurance that’s now accepted. Farmers can purchase for 
their farms, their buildings, machinery and livestock, and so on. 
But it wasn’t always so. 
 
Before SGI was created, the private insurance companies would 
not sell insurance to farmers. The argument that they used was 
too high a risk — no fire department and it just didn’t make 
sense. Well, SGI led the way, Mr. Speaker — this is now a 
matter of our proud history — SGI led the way with the farm 
pak, and then later on they developed the Tenant Pak policies, 
package policies, and many other consumer-friendly 
innovations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns have done a good job over the years, 
and I want to come back to the Crowns in a few minutes. The 
Crowns have done a good job historically. I want to bring it up 
to something a little closer to today’s reality in a few minutes. 
 
But the Speech from the Throne, there’s a few things in it that I 
particularly want to highlight. I want to commend my 
colleagues who have spoken to this important debate because 
every one of them I’ve listened carefully to and I’ve enjoyed 
their speeches. I think they’ve done a very good job of 
representing their constituencies and of pointing out the good 
things that there are, the government’s plan, what it is that we 
have in this great province of opportunity — Saskatchewan. 
And I think my colleagues have done a good job, each in their 
own way, of highlighting the positive things. 
 
One of the things in this Speech from the Throne that 
particularly is attractive to me, Mr. Speaker, is when we 
announced that we’re going to have a young person on every 
Crown corporation board. It’s leadership for tomorrow, today. 
That’s what it’s really all about — developing our future 
leadership by engaging them in a very, very real way today. 
And I know that there’s a great many young people throughout 
this province that will have a tremendous contribution to make 
. . . to making our province a better place and to making our 
Crown corporations work better. So that’s one of the things that 
particularly attracted me in the Throne Speech. 
 
The other area I want to talk about that I’m very proud of, Mr. 
Speaker, is that of health and the innovations that are taking 
place in that. We have a wait-list initiative underway. We’ve 
got an advice or a hotline, 24 hours, in the works. And we’ve 
got improvements in service delivery throughout the piece. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very, very pleased with the direction that we’re 
moving in health care. I think it just bodes . . . It will result in 
good things for all of us. 
 
Want to talk briefly about a couple areas of my responsibility, 
that being Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
And I want to just use this opportunity to share that this great 
Crown corporation, Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, is responsible for some efficiencies, Mr. Speaker, 
that . . . For instance, there’s been 40 surplus properties that 
have been sold since 1997, returning $2.6 million to the 
Saskatchewan treasury every year. And this is something I’m 
very proud of and didn’t know until after I became Minister 
Responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation). 
 
Every year we save taxpayers close to $3 million in our Central 
Vehicle Agency purchasing and operations through fleet 
discount purchases and that sort of thing. Just almost an aside, I 
have a letter, a report from the city of Regina that shows that in 
their most recent light truck acquisition they purchased 20 light 
trucks, most of them half-tons. They used Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation to purchase these pickups 
and they paid a fee to SPMC for handling the transaction. 
 
(15:30) 
 
After they paid the fee to SPMC the savings to the city were 
over $580 per vehicle, Mr. Speaker, times 20 vehicles — this is 
pretty significant. We’ve got ourselves well in excess of over 
$11,000 worth of savings to taxpayers of the city of Regina. I’m 
very proud that SPMC is able to partner with the municipal 
government and realize some of those savings. SPMC is 
responsible for saving $800,000 through our distribution centre 
that provides all sorts of services, furniture and supplies, office 
supplies, throughout government. And it’s a significant savings 
each year. 
 
Files — this should come as no surprise to any of us — files 
seem to multiply. One of my colleagues, the member for Regina 
Centre, says, “I can believe that,” and I’m sure you can. Files 
multiply like dust bunnies under beds and one of the things that 
SPMC has done is they’ve got a system of off-site storage, and 
it is resulting in $1.2 million savings by taking files out of high 
rent districts and moving it into the warehouse area. 
 
I toured that particular warehouse just, I think it was, last week 
— if it wasn’t last week it was the week before — but it was a 
very impressive sight to see the rows and rows and rows of files 
and to be informed how quickly those files can be recovered on 
request, Mr. Speaker. So it’s not a case of they’re just sort of 
dumped willy-nilly into a warehouse — it’s very, very 
meticulously filed and we’re very proud of the turnaround time 
for when those largely unused files are needed . . . we can 
access them very, very quickly. But a savings of $1.2 million 
annually in space for files is a very important contribution that 
SPMC makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s other things that SPMC does, but I want to 
share a couple of things that are very important to Regina and 
this area, that we’re particularly proud of having been a part of. 
 
SPMC is bringing an additional almost 300 employees into the 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

 

downtown core of Regina by bringing an additional 70,000 
square feet of government office space into play in downtown 
Regina, and in departments moving in there. It’s a very 
important contribution we make to strengthening the downtown 
of this capital city, of making downtown, keeping downtown a 
vibrant, happening place. 
 
One of the other things that it’s involved in right now is the 
construction of the sound stage. SPMC is the property manager 
of that development, and we’re very, very proud and pleased 
with what’s happening there. And what a tremendous 
opportunity that is for employment. I’m especially pleased for 
the employment that relates directly to Regina people, but Mr. 
Speaker, this is an opportunity that exceeds Regina people. It 
. . . there’s just good news all the way around from the sound 
stage. 
 
But I want to say one piece of good news that the Premier, 
when he was on his Team Canada tour just last month, signed a 
. . . was it 35 or 45 million? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 45. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — . . . $45 million dollar deal with a German 
film company, and they’re going to do their film work right 
here on a TV series. They’re going to do the work right here in 
Regina at our sound stage. That is a very significant contract to 
have been signed, and especially when you recognize that the 
construction isn’t even complete yet on the sound stage. 
 
The other thing that SPMC has partnered with, and did a very 
similar service, Mr. Speaker, was with the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation and the construction of the new 
entertainment centre that’s attached to Casino Regina. And 
we’re very, very proud of that. 
 
I might as well slip into now talking a little bit about the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, which most people will 
recognize as Casino Regina and soon, Casino Moose Jaw. 
 
In the . . . and more about Moose Jaw in a minute. I’ll ask the 
member from Moose Jaw Palliser . . . or Moose Jaw North . . . 
to just hold on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gaming Corp. in the last six years has contributed 
over $100 million. It’s returned that in income to social and 
public purposes. Over $100 million is not an insignificant 
amount of money. 
 
As importantly, it employs over 650 people right here in 
Regina. Six hundred and fifty people have got good jobs. 
They’re very, very proud of the jobs that they have, and I might 
add they do a very good job over at Casino Regina. I’m very, 
very pleased to be associated with the good people that are 
working there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to point out that at Casino Regina we’ve got over 52 per 
cent of the employment, of the employees are Aboriginal. And 
we’re . . . I mean it’s by policy but it’s also worked out just 
tremendously well. And it was my honour to attend the 
Aboriginal Government Employees’ Network annual awards 
evening in Saskatoon this winter and I accepted on behalf of 
Casino Regina the employer of the year award. And it was 

indeed a great honour to receive that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gaming Corp. has been recognized by the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission on that very issue of 
employment equity and we intend to continue that into Moose 
Jaw as we open that. I think it’s slated for sometime in 
September. 
 
Casino Moose Jaw is an area, Mr. Speaker, that we’re very, 
very proud to be a part of that because what, what our 
involvement there has allowed is for the Moose Jaw Temple 
Gardens Mineral Spa to increase its size. They’re adding rooms 
just across the street from their current location. They’re 
building more rooms. They’re building a parkade and that’s all 
part of the hotel/parkade and what will be Casino Moose Jaw 
when it opens. But it’s an exciting prospect that indeed makes 
Moose Jaw even more of a tourist destination. 
 
And I want to just for the record say that my wife and I enjoyed 
an evening — actually, it was Valentine’s evening — we 
enjoyed it in Moose Jaw at the spa. Very nice place to go. And 
they run just a . . . they run a quality operation there — just first 
class. And we enjoyed the pool, we enjoyed some of the people 
we met in the pool, and anyway, Moose Jaw, I highly 
recommend a trip to Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Why not? Why not put in a quick little 
plug? We also did the tour of the tunnels the next morning and 
really enjoyed that, too. My congratulations to the good folks of 
Moose Jaw. It was a cultural experience and a learning 
experience and it was fun — all wrapped up into one — so we 
quite enjoyed our time there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gaming Corp also . . . this is one of the things that 
is hugely not recognized because it’s done on a volunteer basis. 
The employees at Gaming Corp, at Casino Moose Jaw, 
volunteer their time and their efforts and they select, the staff 
themselves select community organizations and worthwhile 
causes for which they then organize all of the employees that 
will donate their abilities and their times and they go to work 
for these organizations. 
 
There’s over 70 community organizations and non-profits 
throughout Regina that they have volunteered I don’t know how 
many, how many hours — very, very significant — and they’re 
very . . . we’re very proud of the job that the people that work at 
the casino do. And I’m very pleased to have been able to help 
those employees as I went out in my own right and helped them 
support some of those 70 partners that we have throughout the 
province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked a little bit about a couple of my 
areas. I want to talk a little bit now about . . . back to Crown 
corporations. 
 
I want to start I guess by recognizing the three speeches here 
that the Leader of the Opposition has made on Crown 
corporations. Rather than quote from all three, which essentially 
say the same . . . May 24, 2001 and November 26, 2001 at the 
Saskatchewan Party leader’s dinner. Just for the record so 
people can look these up, but the themes are the same with 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

respect to Crown corporations. 
 
So at least I give the Leader of the Opposition and the 
opposition members credit — you’re consistent. You say you 
want to do away with all but the core Crown corporations. 
You’re at least consistent on that and it’s wonderful. I welcome 
that because it clearly delineates the difference between us on 
the government side and members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is said, and I quote: 
 

Step Three . . . 
 
This is from the October 2 address to the North Saskatoon 
Business Association. 
 

Step Three: (is about) Keeping Our Crown Corporations 
Focused on Core Services. 

 
They’ve defined the core services as SaskPower, SaskTel, 
SaskEnergy, and SGI — the big four. 
 
And they’ve said that all other Crowns . . . Well here’s what the 
quote says: 
 

So, the third step for a . . . (Sask) Party government . . . is 
to immediately stop the expansion of crown corporations in 
areas that are not directly related to the provision . . . 
 

To the provision . . . 
 

of the core services of power, natural gas, 
telecommunications and insurance. 

 
Further, we will phase out all government-owned 
businesses or business activities that are not directly related 
to the provision of these core services. 

 
And the members say, sold. 
 
So the point is that’s what you believe; that’s not what we . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the hon. member or 
remind the hon. member that . . . direct all comments to the 
Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they 
believe. And what we believe is something completely 
different. We believe in Crown corporations, we believe . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — . . . we believe that by working together 
there is much we can do. 
 
I talked about two Crown corporations — Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation and some of the great things 
that they’re able to do because they’re a Crown corporation, not 
. . . and controlled by the government. I talked about 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation and some of the things that 
it’s able to do and the benefits that we’re able to derive from 
that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what we have . . . I want to ask the opposition. 
When they say they want to do away with all other Crown 
corporations, do they even know that what they’re saying is 
they want to do away with Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation, which is a Crown corporation? Do they know that 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan fund 35 per cent of the 
premiums of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance? And they’re 
saying, do away with it? 
 
You tell me . . . Let me rephrase that because I don’t want to 
engage you, Mr. Speaker, in the debate in a personal way. 
 
I don’t know how it is that they could tell us that they should do 
away with Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, the 
Crown corporation that pays one-third of the premium for 
farmers. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Please to tell me what private corporation is going to pick up 
one-third of the premiums for crop insurance for farmers. The 
silence is deafening, Mr. Speaker, the silence is deafening. How 
does this work? What do they believe? They say, do away with 
it. Well I’m forced to come to the conclusion that what the 
opposition, that is based primarily in rural Saskatchewan, what 
they’re saying is they don’t believe that farmers deserve some 
support. They don’t believe in crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. I 
say that’s a shame. 
 
We believe in the Crop Insurance Corporation, the Crown 
corporation that’s served a useful role in Saskatchewan for 
many, many years. They don’t believe in it. They have said, 
their own leader has said repeatedly, out the door with 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, that Crown 
corporation. Out the door, they say — no more Crown 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a good list of Crown corporations that 
have been put together to provide safe, reliable service to all 
parts of Saskatchewan and we have done so with amongst the 
lowest rates in all of Canada. That’s the number one job of our 
Crown corporations and they do it well. 
 
We have utility rates, Mr. Speaker, that are amongst the lowest 
in all of Canada. We . . . we have SaskTel, which is the first 
fully digitized teleco in Canada, all of the digital throughout . . . 
digital switching stations throughout the entire province. First 
teleco in all of Canada to do that. 
 
The reason that I stopped and smiled, Mr. Speaker, is the heckle 
I heard about we’re behind everyone else. SaskTel has been a 
leader and an innovator for many, many years. There is none so 
blind, Mr. Speaker, as those who will not see. 
 
SaskTel partnered and helped to pioneer many, many things, 
including now — and they continue to do so — including now 
they have high-speed Internet, which is available . . . that allows 
you to use your telephone to talk to individuals and, and, and to 
have the high-speed Internet operate simultaneously, Mr. 
Speaker: both at the same time, both at the same time. 
 
That’s an innovation that SaskTel pioneered and we were the 
first teleco to introduce that to my knowledge anywhere in the 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

 

world, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very, very proud that SaskTel is 
able to continue to do things like that. And they do so, as I 
mentioned, with very low rates. 
 
Our Crowns employ over 9,000 people and support literally 
thousands of Saskatchewan businesses, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
proud record — 9,000 people employed in Saskatchewan by 
our Crown corporations. That’s a wonderful part . . . In fact, the 
Crowns represent about 15 per cent of our gross domestic 
product, and I’m quite pleased to continue to support that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Looking for some of the rates, let me just to go to SGI because 
that’s the first rate that I’ve come across. And the vehicle 
comparison that I want to use, Mr. Speaker, is for a 2001 Ford 
Taurus SE four-door sedan; and this comparison shows 
Saskatchewan — SGI — the insurance rate is $1,183. 
Amazingly, Calgary, the land of milk and honey to the 
opposition is $2,335; Toronto, $2,437; St. John’s, 
Newfoundland, $2,592. Mr. Speaker, compare that to our 
insurance premium of $1,183. 
 
I really appreciate, now we’ve got some acknowledgement that 
boy, are we ever good . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes. 
The member for Wood River says, you just keep believing it, 
and my name. And let me tell you, I will continue to believe it. 
My parents, my grandparents helped build the Crown 
corporations in this province. They helped build this for the 
benefit of us all, a benefit that we continue. 
 
We’ve got over 9,000 people working in the Crown 
corporations, earning good, earning good pay — earning good 
pay. And do you know what? I’m really proud of that. 
 
We’ve got highways workers that build and maintain highways. 
They do it day in, day out. They keep our roads clean. I’m 
proud of them. We’ve got a civil service that is second to none 
here in Saskatchewan. And for the member of Wood River’s 
benefit, I’m proud of it, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud of it — they 
may not be — I’m proud of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, not to put too a fine point on 
it but I want to talk a little bit about Crown corporations and 
about the need to invest. 
 
We’ve got a new study or . . . well, I should quote from the 
paper here. It says a new study was conducted by the university 
study group at the University of Saskatchewan and the office of 
resource planning at the University of Regina. The article 
studies the economic impact of the two research parks that we 
have in Saskatchewan and it uses a wide range of data. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason that I’ve talked about this is that the 
study showed that the tenants of Innovation Place in Saskatoon 
spent 248 million in Saskatchewan during 2001. That does not 
. . . that figure doesn’t include the tenants’ sales. Tenants at 
Regina’s new research park added $141 million in economic 
activity. Together the two parks have 140 tenants and employ 
almost 2,800 people and have a combined square footage of 
120,000 square metres. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the impact of this SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) investment is clearly big. What it’s 
about is about government working to make our province 
better, government working to do research, government 
working to create jobs, government working to make our 
province a better place. 
 
I compare that, Mr. Speaker, with the opposition, the Leader of 
the Opposition who has suggested that, weather permitting, they 
might balance the budget; weather permitting, they might bring 
a few more people into Saskatchewan. But weather permitting. 
That’s their plan — weather permitting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we have in this Throne Speech is a 
solid plan that acknowledges some of the difficulties we’re 
having today in terms of drought, in terms of low commodity 
prices worldwide. Some of the challenges that we face on that 
agricultural scene include the American subsidies to their grain 
farmers, the European Economic Community’s subsidies to 
their grain farmers, and the federal government, on the other 
hand, the federal Government of Canada refusing to step up to 
the plate and subsidize in a more meaningful way the farmers of 
Canada and, more specifically, of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need a level playing field and our farmers 
would do quite well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m . . . before I take my place, I do want to touch 
on a couple of areas. One is where there’s a very significant 
difference. I want to acknowledge the work that the Minister of 
Labour has done on the minimum wage file. I think it is very, 
very commendable, and I congratulate you on getting the 
minimum wage increase that you’ve so recently announced and 
look forward to that implementation taking place. 
 
But I contrast the minimum wage increase that my seatmate 
was able to announce with what the member for Humboldt said 
and is in Hansard in June 26, year 2000. And I quote. The 
member for Humboldt said, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Mr. Minister, I’ve been informed by Kirsch Construction of 
Middle Lake that they have approximately 15 to 18 men on 
their payroll. They have 20 to 30 men waiting to work. 
These people are willing to work for less than minimum 
wage as long as they work. If it were not for labour 
legislation put in by your government, we could have a 
construction firm such as that complete that road. 

 
So says the member for Humboldt in this very Assembly. And I 
can only conclude it wasn’t an idle thought. I can only conclude 
it wasn’t an idle thought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a sad day when you’ve got that level of 
understanding of what it takes to keep a household going, what 
it takes to keep food on the table, what it takes to keep your 
utilities paid, your taxes paid — what it takes simply to keep 
body and soul together. And it takes, quite frankly, more than 
minimum wage, Mr. Speaker. It takes more than minimum 
wage, and yet we’ve got members opposite saying, oh we’ve 
got people lined up that would work for less than minimum 
wage. Mr. Speaker, it just never seems to end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to — just before I finish — I want to talk a 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

little bit about tax cuts and sort of the mantra of the opposition. 
They say they’re all about slashing taxes and the economy will 
go . . . will grow. 
 
These disasters of doom across the way are saying things like, 
we’ll lower the taxes and it’ll encourage new business to come 
to Saskatchewan. Well you know, in the ’80s there was a guy 
named Grant Devine who said, we’re going to slash the taxes 
and we’re open for business; Saskatchewan is open for 
business. 
 
And you know what? After about seven or eight years, that 
slogan was no longer open for business, Mr. Speaker. It was 
hoping for business. Hoping, with an H in the front. Hoping for 
business. People were leaving Saskatchewan in record numbers. 
Nine and a half long years of that policy that members opposite 
would have supported. Some of them indeed sat in that 
government. Some of them worked in those offices of 
government members then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They said in the ’80s, slash taxes and we’re open for business. 
Well if that worked, it most certainly should have worked in the 
’80s. There is much more to economic development than 
simply slashing taxes. There is much, much more to it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what distresses me is not . . . What distresses 
me, Mr. Speaker, is not that any of us would want lower taxes. 
Of course we want lower taxes. And indeed this Minister of 
Finance has lowered taxes in each of the last five budgets. Each 
of the last five budgets, he’s lowered taxes, and he’s presented 
balanced budgets. More about the budget speech next week, this 
being the Speech from the Throne. I’m pointing out that lower 
taxes alone is not all that works. 
 
Members opposite are saying that the Crown corporations are in 
the way. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the ’80s Grant Devine said, elect 
us and we’ll do away with lots of those Crown corporations; 
they’re in the way — we’ll get those Crown corporations out of 
your way and, by gosh, Saskatchewan is going to just blossom. 
He painted a wonderful picture and it sounded good. It sounded 
good. 
 
Election night. I remember it well in April of 1982. Election 
night. I’m watching on TV. I’m shocked. I remember it well, 
Mr. Speaker. And I can remember saying to my cousin who was 
with me that moment, saying, you know, if they can keep a 
quarter of their promises and deliver anything close to a 
balanced budget, I’m going to be a Conservative next time. 
 
He looked at me. And I said: don’t worry; I don’t think I’m 
changing. Don’t worry. There’s not much danger of that. This is 
one hare-brained scheme. And it sure was, Mr. Speaker. It 
didn’t work then and it won’t work now. It didn’t work then and 
it won’t work now. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Grant Devine at that time said, if I 
repeat something often enough, people will believe it; if I say it 
often enough, people will believe it; if I say an untruth often 
enough, even though it’s an untruth, people will come to 
believe it; all I have to do is repeat it over and over. That’s what 
they said then. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what I see out of this crew — this 
opposition now — is more of the same. If they say that untruth 
often enough, if they repeat it often enough, people will believe 
it. 
 
Well simply slashing taxes didn’t work in the ’80s; it won’t 
work now. Simply doing away with Crown corporations will, 
will . . . That’s what it’ll do — it simply does away with Crown 
corporations and we’d see head offices leaving Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, it would be a disaster. I want no part of yielding 
government to that . . . those masters of doom and gloom; I 
want no part of yielding the government there. 
 
I want us to recognize the plan we have; I want to recognize 
Saskatchewan as a province of opportunity. I will be very, very 
proud to continue in this province; to continue working as hard 
as I can on behalf of the people not only of Regina Coronation 
Park, but the people all across this great province. Mr. Speaker, 
I am very, very proud to support this, this Speech from the 
Throne. I will be voting in favour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a 
few words about the Throne Speech, but before I do that I’d like 
to welcome back my friend and colleague from Battleford-Cut 
Knife who’s had some tough times in the last year. And I with 
great pleasure welcome him back into the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — And I would also like to welcome the new 
member from Saskatoon-Idylwyld into the legislature as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government Throne Speech has no plan, no 
vision, and the government seems to have no ability to change. 
 
As we have seen, this government under its new Premier has 
really turned away from the former premier, Mr. Romanow’s, 
governance and policies. And this government has really taken 
a hard turn to the left, I believe the word is. It’s fiscally 
irresponsible, the direction this government is going in, and I 
believe Mr. Romanow would be . . . is very upset with the 
direction of this NDP government under its new Premier. 
 
As we have seen now the government is running deficits even 
though they go to great lengths to hide the fact that they are 
running a deficit. They are now running a $478 million deficit 
but they try to hide it under the Fiscal Stabilization Fund which 
is really a false bookkeeping procedure. I believe there’s only 
three provinces in Canada that has that bookkeeping procedure. 
We have met with the various banks in Canada, we have talked 
to the auditor, and they all agree that the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund does not exist. 
 
When they look at the budget they just discount the Fiscal 
Stabilization totally and do not take it into account. And the 
credit rating companies, Dominion, and the Saskatchewan 
auditor, and the banks of Canada do not believe that 
Saskatchewan is running a balanced budget. It is running a 
deficit budget this year and ran one last year. 
 
It’s interesting to note, they say that they borrow from this fund. 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

 

The fund has no money in it but what they’ve done is when they 
did run a surplus back when Mr. Romanow was premier they 
took the money and quite rightly put it and paid down debt, and 
I give Mr. Romanow and his cabinet in those days credit for 
doing that. But this new government under the present day 
Premier, what they do is take and they borrow money from a 
bank and claim to have taken it from a Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
that doesn’t exist. 
 
So over the past two years the debt of Saskatchewan has gone 
up but they have never ran a deficit. Well it’s impossible to 
increase the debt of the province without running a deficit. So 
there’s just another example of the trickery in bookkeeping that 
this present government has and we’ll see in the present budget 
if they continue with this lax form of bookkeeping and trying to 
basically hide a deficit from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The province is definitely going in the wrong direction and one 
of the reasons this province is going in the wrong direction 
fiscally is because of the spending habits of this province. 
There’s a number of examples where the government has 
wasted millions of dollars. It spent $80 million to develop an 
automated land titles system where they could have bought one 
for 1 to $2 million that . . . from another province or company 
and without wasting $80 million of hard-earned taxpayer 
money. 
 
And as we all know, the government lost $28 million investing 
in the potato business and all they created was nine full-time 
jobs — $28 million loss. And the Minister of CIC has the nerve 
to say that’s a success story. How can the minister say that’s a 
success story? I don’t know — $28 million loss but that’s 
supposed to be good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, no small business in this province can operate 
like that. Businesses have to make their loans. They have loans 
to the bank and they can’t afford to take on losses like that. But 
of course this government just goes to the taxpayer and asks for 
more money and keep wasting the money and throwing the 
money out the . . . out, basically, out the window to meet its 
commitments. 
 
And the recent statistics that came out concerning the 
population loss in Saskatchewan — again the government 
seems to be living in some kind of a dream world. The Hon. 
Minister of Economic Development actually said the recent 
census statistics were good news — again good news. Less 
people in Saskatchewan would be good news from this 
government. All he had to say was be more wealth for the ones 
left behind. Well another ridiculous statement by a government 
that’s totally out of touch with reality and totally out of touch 
with the taxpayers of this province. 
 
And the real sad thing about making comments like that is that 
it chases taxpayers away. It chases businesses away. It chases 
investment away. And that’s all the things that we should be 
attracting to this province right now. A shrinking tax base 
means it’s going to be harder and harder to fund health care and 
education and the very important job that the government 
should be doing on a day-to-day basis. 
 
This government mentions companies that they have invested 
in. They created 500 jobs. Well the government promised to 

create 30,000 new jobs and all they can say is that they have 
created 500 jobs, government jobs. And it’s certainly not the 
way to go in this province. 
 
Around the world in every free and open democratic nation or 
every nation that has a market economy — which all the 
western world does — private, small businesses are the key to 
job creation, the key to wealth creation, which is so 
fundamental to an economy. And this government seems to 
always take the attitude that people that take any initiative on 
their own to create jobs, to create wealth, to create investment is 
a bad thing. This government wants to stick to government 
owning businesses. And when they invest in these businesses 
they are competing with private sector, they are competing with 
small businesses, and it drives away that job creation and that 
investment, and again the spiralling effect of loss of jobs, loss 
of investment in this province. 
 
Governments by nature are inefficient. Government-owned 
businesses are even more inefficient. We need to get this 
government and any government out of the business of doing 
business and get them back to the core responsibilities and let 
business do business in the province. Allow the business to 
create jobs and create wealth in this province so they can be 
taxed. Yes, we will tax the businesses. Successful companies 
pay taxes. The government uses those tax dollars to fund health 
care and education. 
 
In the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we say, there’s 
no really plan to change; they want to continue on this path. 
There’s no vision, no ability to change. They’re locked in their 
state, and they really, over the last 10 years, have really added 
to the crisis in health care. They’ve had no plans for the future. 
 
But one thing that government always does . . . and they state 
that the Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition of 
Saskatchewan, has no plan. Well let me tell you the 
Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, has a plan for this 
province. A game plan for growth it’s called. 
 
What we want to do is increase the population of this province 
by 100,000 people over the next 10 years. That’s a goal that we 
would strive to . . . and I will tell the member right now how we 
would increase the population of this province by 100,000 
people over the next 10 years. 
 
And the first item in this plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
concerning personal taxes. We think the best way to lower 
personal taxes is in increasing personal family exemptions to be 
competitive with other provinces. Right now, Saskatchewan . . . 
a Saskatchewan family, a couple with two children begins to 
pay provincial income tax once their combined income reaches 
$20,000. 
 
That same family in Alberta pays no income tax until the 
combined income reaches $33,500. And it’s very important that 
we close this gap. We don’t have to meet . . . we don’t have to 
be exactly the same as Alberta. We don’t have to beat them, but 
we have to be close. We have to be close. And right now the 
difference between $33,500 and $20,000 is a huge amount and 
it’s not going to attract businesses and create jobs in this 
province. 
 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

The second item in the Saskatchewan Party plan for growth is 
reducing tax on growth and productivity . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I am having difficulty 
hearing the member while he gives his speech, so I’d ask all 
hon. members to bring the noise level down a little bit so that I 
can hear the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — . . . Deputy Speaker. It’s funny. When the 
Saskatchewan plan comes out with their economic plan for 
growth the province, the government does not want to listen to 
it. They just accuse us of not having one. But here it is. If the 
member would just like to listen, listen very quietly, I will tell 
you about our plan to increase this population by 100,000 
people over the next 10 years. 
 
The second point on our economic plan. We would reduce taxes 
on growth and productivity by eliminating the small-business 
tax and cutting the corporate capital tax in half — in half, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Small business is the largest creator of jobs in 
Canada, as I pointed out before, but Saskatchewan’s 
small-business tax is a major barrier to growth. 
 
And small businesses also need private sector capital 
investment to grow. Not government sector, not government 
ownership, private sector capital to grow. And by making 
Saskatchewan a small-business tax-free zone and reducing the 
tax on capital investment, we take a giant step in creating an 
economic climate for growth and job creation. Private sector, 
not government ownership, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the third item in our plan for growth is to deliver smaller 
and smarter government. Smaller and smarter government gets 
rid of the current regulatory gridlock blocking business growth 
and new job creation in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
People expect their government to keep the taxes as low as 
possible and make the most effective use of every tax dollar 
spent. 
 
No, we’re not going to send it to Chile and we’re not going to 
waste it in Georgia and we’re not going to waste it in Australia. 
We’re going to keep those tax dollars in this province for the 
good of the people of Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Party 
would review every activity of government to ensure that every 
tax dollar is being spent as effectively as possible with the 
broad goal of growing Saskatchewan — a novel thought the 
government hasn’t thought of. Grow Saskatchewan, not 
Georgia, not Australia, not Chile — Saskatchewan. 
 
This comprehensive review will examine every activity of 
government based on the following questions. Does it serve a 
compelling public interest? Is it affordable within the fiscal 
environment of the province? Is it being delivered or offered in 
the most efficient way? Is it accountable to the taxpayer? 
Accountability is something the government doesn’t 
understand. And most importantly, does it contribute to 
growing Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years? 
 
(16:15) 
 
No part of government will be left out of this exercise and will 
result in a smarter, more efficient smaller government. A 
government that serves the best interest of the taxpayer in a way 

that is fully accountable to the taxpayer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
the taxpayer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — The fourth plank in our Grow Saskatchewan 
plan is to provide quality educational opportunities to young 
people in the new economy. Saskatchewan is losing thousands 
of young people every year to other provinces because they 
don’t see an opportunity for a successful future here in 
Saskatchewan. And the latest statistics show that, very 
obviously, that we’re losing people out of this province. We’re 
losing our youth and the most productive people out of this 
province. 
 
A key component in a challenge of growing Saskatchewan is to 
provide world-class educational opportunities for our young 
people that are relevant to the new knowledge economy. But we 
must also take steps to encourage graduating students to stay in 
Saskatchewan with competitive tax rates — something I talked 
about before — new job creation which the private sector must 
do, and tax incentives for graduating students who stay in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Number five in our plan is balanced and fair labour laws. 
Saskatchewan needs fair and level playing field when it comes 
to labour laws. Competitive, balanced, and fair labour 
legislation is fundamental to attracting new capital and business 
investment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Our game plan for growth includes 
implementation of legislation to make workplace democratic in 
the process of certification and decertification of unions — 
democratic, nothing hidden. It’s all out, right there. Everyone 
has the right to vote, favour or against, of certifying and 
decertifying a union without fear, without any reprisals — 
secret ballot. Secret ballot, Mr. Speaker, just like an election. It 
would be a secret ballot and only the person voting would know 
how they voted. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, a full review of workers’ compensation 
boards, organization, governance, policies, and fee structure, 
and elimination of union preference tendering in all of 
government and Crown corporation construction contacts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we understand the government was going to 
implement the Dorsey report and as we have seen, the minister 
has reneged on that promise. The workers of this province — 
the people who’ve been injured in this province — were 
counting on those changes to set up an independent review 
board so that their concerns would be heard and this 
government is turning their back on those people once again 
and not implementing the Dorsey report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sixth point in our economic growth plan is 
stop expansion of Crown corporations to compete with existing 
Saskatchewan businesses. Fundamental, Mr. Speaker, to grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

 

Mr. Weekes: — We would stop immediately the expansion of 
Crown corporations in areas that are not directly related to the 
provisions of the core service of power, natural gas, 
telecommunications and insurance. 
 
It is worth noting here that our plan is not bound to continue 
government ownership or the sale of Crown corporations. What 
we are committed to is to ensure Saskatchewan taxpayers 
receive the best possible service and the best value for the 
investment they’ve made in our Crown corporations. 
 
Make it very clear to the government, we have no intentions of 
selling any Crown corporations. What we want to do is get 
them out of the way so they’re not competing with private 
investment, not sell them. Make them efficient. Make them 
accountable to the taxpayer. 
 
Right now, there’s no accountability. When we asked the 
Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) about the Crowns, he doesn’t have any answers. 
He’s not responsible, he says. No accountability. 
 
We’re going to make the Crowns accountable to the taxpayers 
of this province, get them out of the way of small business and 
private investment so that businesses can grow jobs in this 
province and create wealth for the government of the day and 
the government takes those taxes to pay for health care and 
education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — A novel thought, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The seventh point is key economic expansion to areas of natural 
advantage. We will focus economic expansion in areas where 
we already hold the natural advantage: value-added 
manufacturing processing, particularly food processing; 
intensive agriculture; tourism; technology; our natural resource 
industries, particularly forest, mining and energy; and the 
rapidly growing young Aboriginal population. 
 
Number nine in our plank to Grow Saskatchewan is building a 
strong social partnership for growth. And I think that’s very 
important. We need to build this strong social partnership 
between business, labour, government and the First Nations to 
focus on growing Saskatchewan — growing Saskatchewan for 
all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — And not send them to Alberta? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now talk a bit about 
justice and security in this province. Sometime ago, the 
government made a commitment to hire 200 new police 
officers. But unfortunately, to date, they’ve only hired 45 new 
police officers, and I understand they’ve a net loss actually from 
retirements from the police force. And meanwhile, Regina is the 
car theft capital of North America. Again, another broken 
promise by this government and another area where the people 
of Saskatchewan are very concerned about. 
 
As I have mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, the government had 

announced that they were going to implement the Dorsey 
report. We’ve waited almost a year. There’s been no legislative 
changes concerning the Dorsey recommendations, and we are 
again waiting, waiting for some changes. The people of 
Saskatchewan are waiting for these changes. 
 
When it was announced by the former minister of Labour, he 
suggested that they needed legislative changes to create an 
independent appeal . . . avenue of appeal for claimants who 
disagree with decisions of the board. And again, Mr. Speaker, 
nothing is being done there and we wonder why. Possibly the 
reason is because there’s been three Labour ministers in the last 
three years. But still that’s not the problem of the people of 
Saskatchewan — that’s the government’s problem. 
 
They can’t quite figure out who is going to do what, and I 
understand there’s going to be many changes coming right 
away again. So who knows? Maybe that will be another reason 
not to do anything. We can’t find a minister of Labour any more 
so we’ll just forget about it. 
 
In the last Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, the government . . . 
And I’ll quote from the last Throne Speech. They talk about 
establishing: 
 

. . . a labour-business roundtable providing a forum for 
complete and open dialogue between employees and 
employers. The intent is to reach consensus on a wide 
variety of labour issues to the benefit of all Saskatchewan 
workplaces. 

 
I’d like to quote from a newspaper article, February 8, 
StarPhoenix, “Labour, management at impasse,” and this is 
quoting from a labour leader: 
 

Nearly a year after it was launched, the province’s quest to 
bridge the gap between labour and management through a 
round-table process has stalled, and one prominent union 
official suggests the idea should be shelved. 
 

Well that’s what the union movement thinks about the 
government’s round table. It’s another broken promise by this 
government, and unfortunately again, that’s at the expense of 
the taxpayers of this province, at the expense of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to make a few comments about investment and the 
economy, and particularly agriculture, Mr. Speaker. This 
government . . . (inaudible) . . . since it tore up the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) back in 1995 to develop an 
adequate farm safety net. They talk about rural revitalization, 
and to date it’s been a total disaster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, the government accuses the Saskatchewan Party of not 
having a plan. And I’d just like to lay out the Saskatchewan 
Party’s agriculture plan. We believe the government’s role in 
the industry should be to develop policies and strategies that 
will foster profitable and sustainable agriculture. 
 
Now the federal government and its provincial counterparts 
need to stabilize the agriculture sector in the short term. 
Stabilize agriculture in the short term is very important. Then 
they need to remove barriers to trade and capital investment and 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

encourage the development of new agriculture industries. 
 
A long-term and sustainable agriculture safety net that family 
farms can rely on is a . . . should be a top priority for this 
government, and the farm community of this province 
desperately needs something they can rely on. One reliable 
program that producers can count on in times of extraordinary 
challenges would make a world of difference to the industry. 
Recent programs have been nothing but a bureaucratic 
nightmare for producers. And you can talk to any producer out 
there and they would agree with this comment. 
 
Once a strong program is in place, the government’s vision for 
the future of agriculture should include measures to help the 
industry attract investment capital, develop new agriculture 
ventures and markets, encourage value-added intensive 
agriculture operations. 
 
The agriculture industry, Mr. Speaker, has been negatively 
affected by a lack of vision, both at the federal and the 
provincial level. Family farms have seen too many studies, too 
many reports by this government. They’ve seen too many 
meetings and heard too many excuses. It’s high time this 
government and the federal government present a vision for 
agriculture and a plan to stabilize Canada’s agriculture sector. 
 
But what have we seen from the Saskatchewan government? 
What we’ve seen, the Agriculture minister of Saskatchewan 
going hat in hand to the federal government wanting cash. 
Every few months we hear the minister has been to Ottawa, the 
federal government say no, there’s no cash for you. And back 
comes the Minister of Agriculture— no money for agriculture. 
 
A couple months later, back he goes to Ottawa, asks for money. 
The federal government — same thing — no money for 
agriculture. 
 
Well I suggest that if the provincial government developed a 
plan and a common sense plan that would take into account the 
agriculture sector, go to the federal government and go to the 
other provinces in this country and negotiate an adequate 
long-term safety net . . . They have to go there with a plan in 
place. 
 
And the federal government is working on a plan, but the 
provincial government seems to be silent on any plan for 
agriculture. All they do — go to Ottawa and ask for money, and 
the federal government naturally tells them, don’t come back 
for any more money; we have no more money. But always, 
always what is needed is a long-term plan in place and this 
government does not have a long-term plan that they are willing 
to present to the federal government to negotiate with the 
federal government and the provinces. 
 
So what has the provincial government done to date? One of the 
primary safety net programs, Saskatchewan crop insurance, has 
been trimmed. Spot loss hail coverage and the variable price 
option has been chopped, and farmer premiums are rising. 
That’s the provincial government’s response to the serious 
crisis in agriculture. 
 
The government has added a forage insurance program for 
grazing but this should not be at the expense of the grain 

industry. It would have been a few dollars to leave in place the 
spot loss and add the forage component of the crop insurance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see that the government has gone to 
Ottawa, come back with nothing, and the response to the 
Saskatchewan farmers — we’re going to increase your 
premiums on the crop insurance, eliminate some of the options 
in crop insurance. In other words, penalizing the Saskatchewan 
farmer and not offering them any help for the future in a very 
dry period and maybe one of the driest periods in history, at 
least since the dirty thirties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to turn my attention to some constituency concerns. 
And again I will outline the needs and the desires of the people 
in Redberry Lake constituency and see really the non-response 
or negative response this government gives to people in 
Redberry Lake and to the Saskatchewan people in . . . as a 
whole. 
 
There is a group in Redberry Lake constituency and it’s called 
the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve. And really there’s a 
great opportunity for Saskatchewan to capitalize on unique 
national and international recognition. 
 
The United Nations recognized biosphere reserve and rural 
heritage sites in other provinces of Canada but in Saskatchewan 
there is only one and it’s called the Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve, which was designated by the United Nations 
Educational, Science and Cultural Organization, UNESCO, in 
January of 2000. 
 
And I’d like to give a bit of an explanation of what this 
biosphere is and is not. The biosphere is not a park, although 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve includes a regional park. It is 
not a town, although Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
includes the town of Hafford. The reserve is not a RM (rural 
municipality), although Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
includes parts of three rural municipalities. And the reserve is 
not a wildlife sanctuary, although Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve includes a federal migratory bird sanctuary as well as a 
provincial wildlife refuge and a representative areas network 
site. 
 
What the world biosphere is, is a centre of excellence with 
sustainable economic development. Redberry Lake Biosphere 
Reserve is managed by a committee, a community committee 
comprised of elected officials from the participating municipal 
governments and community boards operating as the Redberry 
Regional Economic Development Authority Incorporated . 
 
The biosphere is an internationally recognized centre for 
excellence and a resource for conservation, research, and 
education. The reserve provides an opportunity for high quality 
research into the impacts of global, regional, and local 
environmental change and human activity. This work is 
coordinated by a technical committee. 
 
The biosphere reserve is a highly honoured status. Redberry 
Lake Biosphere Reserve is part of the worldwide network on 
UNESCO of some 375 locations, 10 of which are in Canada. 
Redberry is one of the three designations for Canada in the 
decade leading up to 2000, joining high-profile Clayoquot 
Sound in BC. There are also biosphere reserves in Quebec, 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

 

Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta. 
 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve is the only one in Canada 
resulting from local grassroots effort, a matter of great 
significance to UNESCO. Saskatchewan’s Minister of 
Environment and Resource Management signed the UNESCO 
nomination for Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve in 1999. 
 
Now why Saskatchewan should financially support the 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve’s research, education, and 
public information facility. UNESCO designations are a matter 
of pride for the other provinces where they are . . . where they 
exist, and they are supported accordingly. Unfortunately, this 
one in Saskatchewan is not supported by its provincial 
government. 
 
UNESCO decides what will be designated based upon input 
from the jurisdictions. If, as is suspected, there are some 
officials within the government’s departments and agencies 
who would have favoured other areas as a UNESCO site, then 
they have either failed to do the groundwork necessary to obtain 
the status or UNESCO has rejected the proposals because they 
have failed to meet the very strict criteria. 
 
The government and the people of Saskatchewan benefit in a 
large measure from the existence in the province of the 
UNESCO-designated biosphere reserve to enhance profile for 
tourism to the province, and the tax revenues derived therefrom, 
enhance opportunities for high profile and credible 
environmental research and the provision of an internationally 
connected educational resource for sustainable development. 
Proximity to Saskatoon, its university and research facilities and 
its tourism businesses, further enhance the opportunities 
available to that city in particular. 
 
In order for Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve to provide the 
services to the province and its partners in research, education, 
and tourism it is important that one facility that serves all those 
particular goals is able to open and be available to the agencies, 
schools, and the public. 
 
Commitment by the provincial government towards the facility 
will enable the province to have input into the character and 
substance of research activities carried out there and to lever 
additional federal funds to assist with its agenda. Providing 
funding assistance and core annual funding to the operation of 
this facility does not set a precedent except possibly for other, 
as-yet-undesignated UNESCO sites within the province. 
 
However the province maintains control over future 
designations and therefore over funding commitments in the 
future. This designation is not present within any other 
municipal groupings nor does it involve any other municipal, 
regional, provincial, or national park built facility. 
 
I’d just like to . . . I’m quoting from information sent to me by 
the biosphere committee, so if you’d just bear with me a bit I’d 
like to read some of the accomplishments to date of the citizens 
of Redberry Lake, and Blaine Lake, and Hafford, 
Saskatchewan. Since 1989 the local society that has taken the 
lead in tourism and conservation development for the Redberry 
Lake communities has been the Redberry Pelican Project. It has 
undertaken a number of community and tourism development 

activities. Some are locally based and some directly benefiting 
the entire province. 
 
In addition it has developed and maintained the first-class 
resource centre at Redberry Lake which has been used by large 
numbers of agencies, educational groups, and researchers in 
conservation and tourism, as well as countless visits to the 
province. 
 
And some of the examples of the accomplishments by this 
group: they have developed a major catalogue library of 
monographs on ecotourism development, acclaimed by some 
researchers as the best in Canada; developed Internet camera 
systems to promote ecotourism in Saskatchewan and Western 
Canada; it has consulted pro bono as recently as the winter of 
2001 on setting up camera systems for the waterfowl project in 
North Battleford; initiated and followed through on the 
development of an ecotourism accreditation system for 
Saskatchewan, the first of its kind in Canada as far back as 1992 
and still heralded as an example of the best practices in the 
industry; obtained international important bird area designation 
for the lake and its watershed; also twice awarded the Tourism 
for Tomorrow highly commended award, 1992 and 1999, by 
British Airways in recognition of the society’s contribution to 
tourism best practices, and raising the stature of tourism to the 
province’s natural areas. And the founder of the society was 
awarded the Conservation Award by the Governor General of 
Canada, 1992, for the same reasons 
 
Obtained world biosphere reserve status for the community as 
defined by the boundaries of the watershed of Redberry Lake in 
January 2000. The Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve was 
dedicated by the Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan in November 2000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the biosphere reserve and the committee and 
the citizens of Hafford and Blaine Lake and Redberry Lake area 
are wanting funding. And they would like to hire a biosphere 
reserve coordinator. 
 
Now they would hire this coordinator to assist to conserve 
biological diversity; promote research and monitoring; and 
assist the community committee and a variety of scientific, 
culture, education, development agencies to develop the 
Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve as a model of sustainable 
development in the service of the community and the people of 
Saskatchewan and Canada. The coordinator would also 
facilitate co-operation and exchanges at regional and 
international levels. 
 
Some of the other duties would be to maintain the Redberry 
Lake Interpretive Centre for the use of school groups, the 
general public, the partner agencies under the direction of the 
community committee; also conduct and coordinate the 
development and delivery of interpretive programming to 
school groups and the general public under the direction of the 
community committee; assist at meetings of the community 
committee and its five standing subcommittees as follows: 
culture, research, and education; economic development; health 
and social well-being; ecosystem research and conservation; 
and agriculture. Assist research partners through coordinating 
logistical support; assist in the preparation of partnership 
proposals; maintain accurate records including visitor statistics 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

and partners . . . project records; and other activities under the 
direction of the community committee. 
 
The bit of history to this, of course, is there’s a whole issue 
around the Hafford Hospital which is in this area. And one of 
the plans for sustainability in the area was to create a fully 
functional hospital with adequate medical staff — doctors, 
nurses, technicians — and explore options to enhance 
recreational opportunities to meet the needs of all people living 
in Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve. 
 
Now as we have found out, unfortunately, the government has 
not come through for the people of Redberry Lake, Hafford, 
and Blaine Lake areas. I attended a public meeting in that area 
last Thursday in the community hall and unfortunately they got 
bad news from the board. 
 
The hospital in Hafford has acute care beds, emergency 
equipment, health centre, and attached special care home, but 
lacks one important aspect — and that’s a doctor. Now it’s 
pretty hard to run a hospital when you don’t have a doctor. And 
unfortunately, the health board has not done its part. Their 
hands are tied, they say. They can’t put a full-time doctor in 
Hafford. And this is one of the fundamental areas of the 
biosphere and the community. 
 
The government’s action plan has really failed the people of 
Hafford and Redberry Lake because it promises publicly funded 
accessible health care and in Hafford they do not have 
accessible health care in any way. And it’s very unfortunate 
because that was one of the planks that they were going to 
develop and encourage investment and part of the infrastructure 
that an area needs in order to develop their communities. 
 
It’s interesting that this is totally . . . This community effort is 
totally from the people and by the people and they only need a 
little bit of help from the provincial government to get this 
interpretive centre going and to help them on their way to really 
developing tourism and economic development in that area. 
 
It’s a nice fit. They’re not far from Saskatoon. We have a light 
source in Saskatoon, the synchrotron, and it would be a nice fit 
to develop possibly tours out to the internationally recognized 
biosphere, potential of incorporating the Native people into a 
tourism aspect up there. I know Europeans, especially people 
from Germany, love our traditions, our Native traditions that we 
have in this province. And it could come together as a package 
to really develop this whole area, to help all the citizens of this 
area, including the Native people and the citizens of Redberry 
Lake and Hafford and Blaine Lake. 
 
And I’m just going to quote from an article in The Riverbend 
Review, and four members of the interpretive centre . . . from 
the committee concerning the interpretive centre met with 
Premier Lorne Calvert to discuss the centre and its needs. And 
it is with great optimism and dedication the committee believes 
that the centre will reopen. 
 
And unfortunately, their hopes have been dashed. There’s no 
funding. There’s no hope of funding. But the Premier seemed to 
have left them with the impression that something was going to 
be done, and it’s very unfortunate that he left them with that 
impression. They definitely need some help, not very much 

help. And we will continue working for the people of Redberry 
Lake on this venture. And hopefully the government will see fit 
to help these people out in that area and get this development 
going, which will be a great benefit to that area and the 
province as a whole. 
 
The other item I’d like to bring up is really the — it’s quite 
scary, actually — is the problems in Perdue. And as, as we have 
been outlining in the last couple of days, the residents of Perdue 
has applied for the federal-provincial infrastructure program for 
three years now and they’ve been turned down three years in a 
row. 
 
And it’s very unfortunate because just after . . . just the other 
day, one of the wells in the village collapsed and before, even 
before the well collapsed, the water quality was very poor and 
they’ve been . . . they knew that they had to make some changes 
and start improving their infrastructure. But like I said three 
years in a row they’ve been turned down by the 
federal-provincial infrastructure program. 
 
And now they’re at a point where basically they’re without . . . 
they’ve never had a boil-water advisory, and it seems that they 
. . . their water has to get to such a, such a situation that the 
people . . . the health of the residents of Perdue has to be a 
danger before the government considers them for these 
programs. 
 
And I’d just like to quote from a letter from the government’s 
own Saskatchewan Environmental Resource Management, a 
letter to the mayor and council, “Water treatment plant 
problems,” and it’s from the environment officer at SERM. And 
the letter goes on to say: 
 

In my November 30, 2000 letter to you, I recommended 
that the boards hire a water treatment plant consultant to 
audit the plant, suggest ways to improve the potability of 
the treated water supply, and apply and find the resources 
to correct the problems identified. 
 
It is my understanding the village has followed through on 
my recommendations, but to date has not acquired 
sufficient funding to fix the problems. As a result the 
situation has now reached a critical level. 
 

And this is from the government’s own environment officer. 
And the letter goes on to say: 
 

By way of this letter, I strongly urge the council to use 
every means possible to acquire the necessary funding to 
correct your water quality problems. Failure to correct 
these problems immediately could result in serious safety 
issues for your citizens and libel issues for the council. 
 

(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find this totally unacceptable. The government 
has to do something for the people of Perdue. They need to help 
them out. Unfortunately it’s just not the people of Perdue that 
has this problem. There are many, many other communities in 
this province that are in similar state, but they are only going to 
look after the ones it seems . . . where the systems have totally 
collapsed and the health and welfare of the citizens are at risk. 



March 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the mayor of the 
village of Perdue. She says it will cost 900,000 to repair the 
wells and waterlines and naturally she says, we don’t have the 
money to fix it. She estimates that over half the village’s 
population buys water now. And it’s interesting to note that the 
government of Saskatchewan has money to spend in Georgia 
and they have money to spend in Australia, but they don’t have 
the money to improve the infrastructure in Saskatchewan, in 
villages like Perdue, Saskatchewan, which is just basic safety 
and health for the citizens of this province. 
 
And according to Sask Water, 9 out of 10 rural communities 
with populations of less than 1,000 are in need of improvements 
to their water systems and more than 120 towns and villages 
have deficient water treatment systems. It’s a very, very 
unfortunate situation to be in. I believe this government has to 
take a look at its priorities and look after the needs and desires 
of these people in the small towns and communities of 
Saskatchewan, in particular the village of Perdue. 
 
In the Throne Speech there’s a title that says, listening and 
learning. Well the bus tour went through rural Saskatchewan, 
stopping for 10 or 15 minutes in every community. I don’t 
know how much listening they did because they barely talked to 
anybody while they were in the community. They stopped and 
had a few photo ops and so obviously they’ve never talked to 
anybody in the community. They certainly didn’t learn 
anything, and it’s very obvious by the policies of this 
government that they have not learnt anything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems to be a pattern developing with this government. As we 
see, they talk about attitude and they always throw across the 
House that you got to have a better attitude. So basically don’t 
worry, be happy. Well unfortunately the people of this province 
can’t take that attitude when they don’t have safe water, they 
don’t have proper health care, and maybe don’t worry, be happy 
is fine for the government on that side, but certainly not good 
enough for the people of the . . . of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minister of CIC said that $28 million loss in potato 
business is . . . says fine, it’s success, don’t worry, be happy. 
That’s just taxpayer money, right? 
 
And it’s incredible to hear comments by the Economic minister 
when referring to the population of Saskatchewan going down 
that that’s okay, don’t worry, be happy, there’ll be more for the 
rest of us. More taxes for the rest of us. More debt for the rest of 
us. What we need is to encourage people to come to this 
province, not chase them away and then just slough it off, don’t 
worry, be happy about it. 
 
How about the people of Hafford? The Premier went on a 
fundraising tour and was in Hafford in the last year. He put on a 
nice speech. What happens after the Premier leaves? The 
Hafford Hospital closes. I guess don’t worry, be happy would 
apply there too. The Premier’s happy, but the citizens of 
Hafford unfortunately have some . . . some worries concerning 
that. 
 
The same issue is with The Redberry Lake Biosphere. Again 
the Premier said some nice words, people left there happy. 
Premier says don’t worry, be happy. To date nothing has 
happened. Again it seems to be a pattern continuing and they 

say they’ve got a good attitude. Well, maybe they’ve got a good 
attitude, but unfortunately the people of this province have 
other thoughts concerning the government’s attitude towards 
them. 
 
Same thing in Perdue. When the bus tour went through Perdue 
and they stopped, basically again, we’ll look at it, don’t worry, 
be happy, things will work out. Well now . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . that’s right, I don’t think they were in the town 
of . . . the village of Perdue long enough to get a drink of water. 
They were only there for a few minutes and had a photo op and 
left and so again the people of Perdue, they’re worrying, they 
don’t have adequate water, they have concerns. So, don’t worry, 
be happy is not good enough for the people of Perdue as well. 
 
Same thing in agriculture. What about the safety net? Where is 
the safety net the province of Saskatchewan been hoping for for 
the last number of years? Again, basically don’t worry, be 
happy, it’ll come. Maybe. Maybe not, but the government’s 
happy, that’s all that’s really matters. 
 
So in closing Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to, to say that this 
Throne Speech has been . . . has been a bit of a disaster for the 
people of Saskatchewan . It does not have a . . . this government 
has no vision and no plan for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion and I will be 
supporting the amendment to the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a real pleasure this 
afternoon to get up and talk about the things that we are going 
to do for this province into the future. 
 
I’m up here speaking today in favour of this Throne Speech and 
against the amendment proposed by the opposition because I 
have great faith in what we can do for this province when we 
work together with all the people that are here. 
 
When we talk about a province of opportunity, when we talk 
about a place where we all want to live, what we know is that 
we need to work together. And the goal of this particular 
Throne Speech, even more so than all of the ones that we’ve 
built on to come to this one, is to continue to go and listen to 
people, find out what they want, work together with them to 
build what we need to do in the future. 
 
And we have many signals of that . . . of those things that we 
are doing already. And they’re everything from what was 
announced today around the ethanol plan which is a visionary 
plan for the future of this province, to the action plan on health 
which we introduced in December, and to the building of 
various institutions and places that are a big part of this 
province. 
 
And what I want to do this afternoon in a few short minutes that 
I have here is to say a little bit about this particular part of 
Saskatchewan, which happens to be Regina Lakeview. And I 
don’t get a chance to say this very often, but I welcome all of 
you to my constituency where you spend much of your life. 
Because this, this is a very good place; it’s built around this 
particular legislature; and this particular institution is a key 
factor in what happens in our community. 



188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2002 

 

But we’re also part of Wascana Centre and we have many of the 
issues that relate to the arts, to music, and many of these other 
things. 
 
And when we look at the kinds of policies that we have 
continued to bring in this province for over 50 years, we know 
why we have a World Poetry Day today, where our 
Saskatchewan poets are leading the country in the kinds of 
work that they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — And I think that when Dave Margoshes 
who was here earlier, who is one of my constituents, said this 
morning at the special celebration that you, Mr. Speaker, helped 
him organize, that he got absolute co-operation from the people 
within your staff and within the legislative staff, he was being 
very, very clear in understanding that we have a place for 
artists, we have a place for poets, we have a place for 
musicians, we have a place for writers in our plan for what we 
want for Saskatchewan. 
 
And so what we are trying to do in my constituency, but I think 
in all constituencies, is to recognize that those people which 
have a positive vision, which have a view which looks forward, 
are the people that are going to build the province. 
 
There are many people who want to point out a lot of the 
negative things that they can see. We know that it wouldn’t 
matter where they would live, they would still have that kind of 
a negative attitude. But we’re going to work with the ones that 
want to build and move forward. 
 
One of the interesting parts of . . . new parts of the Regina 
Lakeview constituency is the sound stage. And many people 
look at that new structure that is being built in the old teachers’ 
college, the old arts, kind of, place, as a rejuvenation of a place 
that has served us for many, many, many years. 
 
And if you think of all of the people who obtained their 
education, and their arts education for their teaching careers and 
for many other things, that have come out of that building, to 
now have it rejuvenated as a place which can put into life the 
ideas and concerns that people have, I think that we can 
recognize that this is a 21st century use of something that we 
have done for a long time. 
 
Our legislation that we have developed around the film industry 
works at making sure that our Saskatchewan ideas have a place 
on the world stage. And this is another piece of that. 
 
And I know that we’re getting close to the end of the day, and 
so I’m going to finish off what I want to say today and then 
adjourn the debate with a poem. And this is a poem that is 
really a fall poem; it’s a September, maybe an August poem. 
But it’s about how we, on this side of the House, operate our 
lives and how we make our plans. And it’s about balance and 
it’s about listening to other people and it’s about working with 
them. 
 
This poem is by Glen Sorestad, our Poet Laureate. It’s called 
“Frost Warning.” 
 

Last night we argued 
over whether to cover the garden — 
protect the delicate tomatoes, 
the fragile cucumber vines, 
whether the bruising of tender plants 
caused by discarded sheets and clothes 
was worth the effort, knowing 
early frost was a slim risk. 
 
But you are a practical woman, 
not given to gambles, 
and I am the poker player. 
 
We compromised as usual: 
you went out and covered the plants 
 
It didn’t freeze and this morning 
we are both happy, both winners. 
I guess that’s how it’s always been. 

 
Well that’s how we do things in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 
we work together; we understand our particular characteristics; 
and we end up going forward in partnership to build the kind of 
province that we want. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn the 
debate for this afternoon. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 


	World Poetry Day
	World Poetry Day

