















































Hansard: March 25, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 215 
 March 25, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — . . . Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to present 
today on behalf of people who are concerned about children 
who are being exploited through the sex trade: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Watson, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned about deficiency in the tobacco legislation. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any such tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 
 

Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
great community of Tisdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Avonlea and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the condition of our highways in 
this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 

loss of lives and to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area (Mr. Speaker). 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people in the Francis, Yellow Grass, 
and Radville area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the 
current state of tobacco control legislation in the province. And 
their petition notes today, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the government’s current tobacco reduction strategy 
places all responsibility for the sale or possession of 
tobacco solely on retailers and their clerks; and there is no 
legislation that makes it an offence for those under 18 to be 
in possession of tobacco products. 

 
And the prayer of the petition would address that situation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from Swift Current, 
Hazlet, Hodgeville, and Neville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about certain inadequacies in the tobacco legislation. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by citizens of Carrot River, Kelvington, 
Big River, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned about . . . with the 
changes to this year’s crop insurance program. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage, in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

communities of Southey and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
tobacco law. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are all from 
the centre of Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
are received: 
 

Addendum to a petition concerning the legal age for 
possession of tobacco; 
 
A petition concerning repairs to Highway 35; and finally 
 
A petition concerning the resolution of the Lake of the 
Prairies situation. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: in the 2002-2003 fiscal year, 
will the Department of Highways provide the necessary 
funds to develop a test section of highway construction 
using rubber asphalt technology; if so, what are the details 
of any such test planned for the coming fiscal year? 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 13 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
many truck gravel boxes did the department purchase 
directly or through SPMC in the 2001-2002 budget year; 
further to that, Mr. Speaker, did the department accept the 
lowest tendered price and if not, why? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to welcome and recognize and ask all my 
colleagues here in the Assembly and yourself, Mr. Speaker, to 

welcome two very special people in my life . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Obviously the member from Kindersley 
doesn’t have very many special people in his life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery I’d like 
the members to please welcome my wife, Barbara — who’s on 
the left, by the way, because they have been mistaken for sisters 
— and my super daughter, Kim, on the right. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Ladies and gentlemen . . . thank you. I 
know that I speak on behalf of all members, Mr. Speaker, when 
I say that it’s those kinds of special people that support us in our 
efforts on behalf of all the people in this great province of ours. 
And without their support some of us may not be here; some of 
us may have more difficult times than we have been having by 
being here. So I want them to be welcomed very much and 
thank them again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly two people seated in your gallery. Vern Hoyt and his 
son, Adam, are from the Regina Victoria constituency. Vern is 
the president of the Sask Party Association there and he’s a very 
dedicated worker for us. And I’m sure his son is anxiously 
awaiting to join in the ranks and work for us as well. I’d ask all 
members to welcome them. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are again joined 
this afternoon, in the east gallery, by Mr. David Karwacki, 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. I’d ask all members 
to kindly welcome him this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I may, and I 
appreciate the opportunity once again, to introduce and ask you 
to welcome to the legislature here today, a long . . . well-known 
member, and an astute member of the political world in this 
great province of ours. Again, Mr. Emmet Reidy, who is also 
sitting in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask everybody to 
welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Gas Plant to be Built this Spring 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Construction of an $88 million gas 
conservation plant, approximately 1.7 kilometres west of Glen 
Ewen, will begin immediately after the spring break up. BP 
Canada has obtained the necessary permits, and the time frame 
for opening the plant in June or July of this year. 
 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plant will process solution gas from 
surrounding oil wells in the area and complement the already 
existent plant in Steelman. Normally this gas is flared as a 
waste product at the well site or the oil battery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The plant will process three million cubic feet per day of 
recovered solution gas. The solution gas will arrive at the plant 
by a pipeline from the surrounding wells and oil batteries and is 
sweetened by removing hydrogen and sulphide . . . hydrogen 
sulphide and carbon dioxide which produces propane, and 
butane. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another achievement to demonstrate that 
private investment is not deterred from investing in our 
province, but encouraged by this province’s responsible 
stewardship in government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Catholic Family Service Fundraiser in North Battleford 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this past 
Saturday evening, the Catholic Family Service of North 
Battleford presented Cinderella, A Fantasy Evening. It was their 
tenth annual charity dinner and auction, held at the Tropical Inn 
in the North Battleford . . . in the city of North Battleford. 
 
The vision of the Catholic Family Service of The Battlefords 
Incorporated is to live in accordance with social justice, 
accepting our common calling to help others preserve, restore, 
and enhance their quality of life. The mission of the Catholic 
Family Service of The Battlefords is to enable families to make 
life-giving choices which promote esteem, trust, and courage to 
live despite limitations and loss, and the mercy to forgive 
injuries. 
 
I had the pleasure of being seated at the table with a number of 
people: my wife, Cindy; my mother- and father-in-law, Ron and 
Rose Poelzer; also the chairperson of the Catholic Family 
Service, Marlene Tarnowsky and her husband, Peter; and also a 
very distinguished parliamentarian, Senator Herb Sparrow and 
his wife. 
 
We had a very enjoyable evening, mixing politics and religion, 
and all in good spirit and raising money for a very good cause. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Business Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to highlight a very prestigious event that 
was held on Saturday in the city of Yorkton. Four hundred and 
fifty community leaders and business people attended the fourth 
Celebrate Success awards that recognize 12 local businesses for 
their outstanding contributions in eight separate categories, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Twenty-nine community businesses and associations were 
nominated, who all make a very valuable contribution and 

success to the city of Yorkton and east central Saskatchewan. 
And the winners included: the community involvement was the 
Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns; property restoration was The 
York House Dining and Lounge; the new expansion business 
was GX Radio and The Fox. The customer service was The 
Bentley Retirement Community. And young entrepreneur was 
Jim Dandy Clothing. 
 
The Wall of Success included Brown’s Leisure World, 
Ottenbreit Sanitary Services, and the York-Saskatchewan 
Drycleaners. 
 
And the community merit awards, Mr. Speaker, went to the 
Health Foundation of East Central Saskatchewan, which by the 
way is raising nine and a half million dollars for a new project 
out there; the Yorkton Short Film & Video Festival, the longest 
video festival in Canada; and the Snowarama for Easter Seals, 
25 years of continuous success. 
 
And the business of the year was Bailey’s Funeral 
Home/Yorkton Memorial Gardens Crematorium and Family 
Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I were to capture the theme of the evening, the 
award winner after winner talked about the pride of 
Saskatchewan and how people appreciate and how the province 
. . . appreciate the province and city, and how much they have 
to offer in accelerating the successes in our province. 
 
Yorkton is a community of vision, Mr. Speaker, and a goal. 
Today we’re number three in trade and business in our 
province; and, Mr. Speaker, they’re aiming soon to be number 
one. 
 
Congratulations to the event organizers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Author Receives Order of Canada 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
this year Eastend author, Sharon Butala, was named an Officer 
of the Order of Canada. Her Excellency, the Right Honourable 
Adrienne Clarkson, Governor General of Canada, made the 
announcement on January 14. 
 
The Governor General will present the medal to Sharon at a 
ceremony being held in Halifax later this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sharon Butala was the lone Saskatchewan 
honouree among 29 individuals selected to the officer rank of 
the Order of Canada, and just one of two provincial residents to 
receive honours in the year 2001. 
 
The Order of Canada recognizes people who’ve made a 
difference to our country by recognizing their outstanding 
achievements in service in various fields of human endeavour. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Sharon Butala’s writing has captured the essence of the 
Saskatchewan prairies and explores the lives and the musings of 
people who inhabit them. Her outstanding achievements in 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

writing, her involvement in the community of Eastend, and in 
the preservation of the natural grasslands are examples of 
Sharon’s desire to bring the meaning of southwest 
Saskatchewan to the rest of Canada. 
 
Not only is she a worthy recipient of this prestigious award, but 
an inspiration to all of us. I am sure all members will wish to 
join me in extending our congratulations to Sharon Butala. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Students 
Win International Competition 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the first 
weekend of this month, University of Saskatchewan students, 
Dan Murza and Cory Weiss, competed in the International 
Undergraduate Student Business Plan Competition held in 
Lincoln, Nebraska. The competition was fierce with teams from 
business schools all over the continent, but these two 
Saskatchewan students won first place and 7,500 US bucks. 
 
Their winning idea was called Sandow SK Classic, a 
manufacturer and on-line store that features replicated and 
authentic collectible 1970’s jerseys and accompanying display 
cases. 
 
The Sandow business plan was developed as part of an 
entrepreneurship class and grew from there. Sandow uses eBay 
as its selling forum, but is developing its own website and plans 
to supply sporting goods stores after the brand name has been 
established. 
 
Monica Kreuger, the instructor for the team’s class says the 
success of Dan and Cory shows that we have the talent to 
compete with the rest of the world and win. This team has 
proven that solid opportunities exist for profit-based businesses 
owned by young people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she went on to say that they have beaten teams 
from many other universities in the U.S. and Canada that have 
large entrepreneurial programs, substantial funding, and easier 
access to capital. We should be proud that our U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) students have done so well 
against such competition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nipawin Resident Wins Prestigious Award 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 
the Saskatchewan Country Music Association has honoured 
Nipawin’s Jim Chute with its prestigious Legend and Legacy 
Award. The Nipawin hotelier and songster was caught 
completely by surprise last weekend when he was presented 
with the award. 
 
The award, which is not presented every year, acknowledges 
Jim’s considerable contribution to the country music scene. 
This dates back to his early days in the industry in Calgary 
through the Barlee Band days to his presidency of the 
Saskatchewan Country Music Association and his continuing 
involvement in and support of country music. 

To add to his surprise, his mother and three sisters were also in 
attendance for the presentation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Craig Day, originally of Nipawin, was also 
honoured at the event. Craig received the Saskatchewan 
Country Music Association’s Humanitarian award for his work 
on the Schmirler project. Craig collaborated on a musical 
tribute to his cousin, Saskatchewan Olympic champion curler, 
Sandra Schmirler. Proceeds from the sale of the ensuing CD 
(compact disc) have gone to cancer research in Schmirler’s 
name. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Jim Chute 
and Craig Day on this tremendous accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Barker Foundation 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to draw attention to yet another example of the spirit of 
Saskatchewan. Fred Barker began farming in the Daphne 
district with his sister Louise after Fred returned from serving in 
the Second World War. The Barkers always supported small 
town Saskatchewan and after Fred’s death on April 8, 1995, 
Louise — now living in Sunshine Manor — wanted that 
support to continue. With a desire to leave a lasting legacy of 
support and to help decide where the support would go, Louise 
set up the Barker Foundation. After a year of dotting and 
crossing all the legal t’s and i’s, the first donations have now 
been made. 
 
The first recipients are McNab Park, Watson Skating Arena, 
Humboldt hospital fund, Spalding United Church, and lastly, a 
$1,000 scholarship for a graduating student from Watson High 
School. The scholarship — to be awarded annually — is for a 
grade 12 student who excels in math and science, both of which 
are areas of great interest to Ms. Barker. 
 
Besides Ms. Barker, four other members sit on Barker 
Foundation Board. They are Gordon and Norma Weber, Brenda 
Curtis, and Regan Bernard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to applaud these efforts and recognize 
them as an enduring example of the community spirit and pride 
found in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kenaston Dinner Theatre 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night, I had the 
honour of attending the annual Kenaston dinner theatre. This 
year’s event attracted over 450 people over the course of 
Saturday and Sunday. The money raised by this event will go 
towards the operation of Kenaston Place — the local town hall 
in the community of Kenaston. 
 
This year’s play was entitled, Who Done it, and to Whom? Kind 
of sounds like the present government’s budget title. Of course, 
we all know that these events are the result of huge efforts of 
volunteers from the community itself and surrounding area. 
There are about 100 volunteers, including the cast and crew, as 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

 

well as the numerous dinner servers, of which I had the pleasure 
to assist them last night. 
 
I’m very pleased to see that these community projects remain 
successful despite the fact that so many rural residents are 
leaving our province in such large numbers. Folks who are 
leaving would admit that if they had the choice to stay and be 
part of the community, they would do that. 
 
I would like to congratulate the residents of Kenaston for 
organizing such a fine dinner theatre this past weekend. I would 
like to thank all the volunteers who helped make this evening so 
successful and wish them success in the years to come. I would 
ask that all members join me in saluting the community of 
Kenaston for their Saskatchewan spirit. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board Report 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Labour finally released a Workers’ Compensation report, a 
report that had been hiding since December of last year. This 
report paints a clear picture of government getting bigger and 
bigger, yet services to employers and employees is not getting 
any better. 
 
From 1995 until the year 2000, administrative costs at Workers’ 
Compensation grew by over $12 million or almost 50 per cent. 
Yet the number of claims barely increased at all. Why are 
Saskatchewan employers paying 50 per cent more in 
administrative costs when the overall size of the program is 
virtually unchanged from five years ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that this 
morning that we had the opportunity, along with WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) board chairperson, John 
Solomon, to release the COR (committee of review) report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a report that is, by legislation, required 
every four years for a review done of the compensation system. 
This is a very good report. The committee put in a great deal of 
work and there is some excellent recommendations that will 
address the Workers’ Compensation system and address many 
of the concerns there are with the system. 
 
This report went for a very good release this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m looking forward to a very good year with 
WCB. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question to the minister did not question whether there was 
good things in the report. I had a specific question for the 
minister and she refused to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report indicates another clear example of the 
NDP growing the government instead of growing 

Saskatchewan. Administrative costs jumped 50 per cent, from 
$25 million in 1995 to thirty-seven and a half million dollars in 
the year 2000. The number of WCB staff jumped by 25 per 
cent, from 337 in 1995 to 407 in the year 2000. Yet, the number 
of reported claims increased by less than 3 per cent over the 
same period; 25 per cent more staff, 50 per cent more 
administrative to manage 3 per cent more claims. 
 
My question to the minister. This is one more reason people in 
jobs invest . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would you please go directly to the question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Why is the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
growing the government instead of growing Saskatchewan? 
Would the minister answer the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, WCB is an independent 
board, but it also enjoys and provides to businesses of 
Saskatchewan some of the lowest rates across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — It also provides . . . Speaker, it also 
provides excellent service for the 37,000 claims that are handled 
through the board yearly. And good service to the employers 
that are stakeholders in WCB. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past five years, two years actually, WCB 
has had a number of reviews and has gone through a massive 
restructuring and reorganizing, giving team-based approach for 
services to clients, which is more appropriate, geographically 
based throughout the province. It will give better service to 
injured workers. And also the balanced score card in 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, maybe the minister isn’t prepared to deal with her 
responsibility, but you would think she would at least ask the 
question: why have costs skyrocketed when in fact the client 
base is about the same? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the WCB has hired 25 per cent more staff, they 
are spending 50 per cent more money, but the service to injured 
workers is not getting any better. Many injured workers who 
appeared before the Dorsey review said that the WCB service 
was getting worse. Workers complained that the WCB was not 
accountable. Doctors describe it as fortress WCB. And Mr. 
Dorsey himself recommended that the NDP launch a fairness 
audit of the WCB and appoint a full-time appeal commissioner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Labour listen to injured 
workers, doctors, employers, and its own report, and launch a 
fairness audit of the WCB and hire a full-time appeals 
commissioner? Will she do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

Opposition is correct that was one of the recommendations in 
the report. But the decision’s been made that we need input 
from our stakeholders, feedback from our stakeholders, if this is 
the appropriate and the best action for the board to take, not 
only to provide good service for injured workers but also 
accountability to the stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House prefer to have 
feedback from stakeholders, not make decisions no matter what 
the consequence like the members of the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Accounting Practices for Forthcoming Budget 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the height of sleaze. That’s how one NDP insider 
is describing this week’s budget. The NDP plans to change its 
accounting methods in order to hide the deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it now appears the new Premier has set out to 
destroy Roy Romanow’s legacy of balanced budgets and fiscal 
integrity. The Premier has instructed his Finance minister to do 
some creative bookkeeping and hide the deficit in a desperate 
attempt to cover up his own mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP resorting to such desperate 
measures to cover up its own mismanagement and hide the 
deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite wants to 
talk about the height of sleaze. I’ll tell the member opposite and 
the House what the height of sleaze is — the height of sleaze, 
Mr. Speaker, are people that make shameful comments in the 
media anonymously, without identifying themselves. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that if anyone has anything to say they 
should come forward into the open light of day and make their 
statement. And I’m prepared to have a public debate, Mr. 
Speaker, with anyone over the practices of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And while I’m on my feet, I want to say to 
the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, through you, we have had 
for decades in this province a practice of financing municipal 
infrastructure through the Municipal Financing Corporation 
including water projects. And I want to know if that party over 
there is against that kind of financing for third parties, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, last year the NDP 
tried to use its so-called rainy day fund to hide a $500 million 
deficit. And it didn’t work. So now they’re inventing a new 
trick to try and hide the deficit. No wonder some of their own 
members are calling it the height of sleaze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people deserve open and 

accountable government; not Enron-style accounting tricks 
from the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister’s own 
mid-term report stated nothing about a new accounting 
principle. The third-quarter financial report stated nothing about 
a new accounting principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP has nothing to hide, what is the reason 
for this sudden change? If this is an appropriate accounting 
practice, why wasn’t Roy Romanow using it for the past 10 
years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, I’m always amused, Mr. 
Speaker, how these days Roy Romanow is touted as the 
opposition’s hero . . . (inaudible) . . . When he was here, when 
he was here, I don’t recall him saying that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite, I haven’t seen any 
announcement of a new system of accounting for the province 
of Saskatchewan, so the members opposite are going to have to 
enlighten us. 
 
But I want the members opposite to come clean, Mr. Speaker. I 
want them to tell the people of the province and this House 
whether in principle they believe that third parties — not the 
government but third parties — should be denied access to 
financing and amortizing capital costs over time. I want them to 
go on the public record, just as all the other anonymous people 
should, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier should be 
thinking about changing the name of the NDP — he should 
change it to the EnronDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one step that the NDP could be taking to 
provide a clear and honest picture of this province’s finances. 
They could, they could be moving to summary financial 
statements in order to show a complete picture of all the 
province’s finances. No more funnelling money in and out of 
Crown corporations, no more imaginary transfers from the rainy 
day fund that doesn’t exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 7 out of 10 provinces have already made this 
move. And the Provincial Auditor is calling on this government 
to also make this move instead of playing jiggery-pokery with 
the books in order to hide the deficit. 
 
Will the NDP give the people of Saskatchewan a complete and 
honest picture by going to summary financial statements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In case the member opposite missed it, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has published summary financial 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

 

statements since approximately 1992 — one thing they never 
did when they were in power, Mr. Speaker. We publish 
summary financial statements fully audited by the Provincial 
Auditor every single year, Mr. Speaker. And not only that, we 
introduced mid-year financial statements and quarterly 
statements. 
 
When it comes to accountability, Mr. Speaker, we can compare 
our record to their record, a record which included in one year 
not even producing a budget, Mr. Speaker. So when it comes to 
accountability, we don’t have to take any lessons from the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and everybody in this province 
knows it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think you can 
forgive Saskatchewan people for being a little suspicious. 
 
Last year the Premier took over from Roy Romanow and he 
inherited a huge surplus. He quickly turned that into a massive 
deficit. Then all of a sudden he decides he has to change the 
way the books are kept. He tells his Finance minister to disguise 
the budget and create the illusion that the General Revenue 
Fund is somehow balanced. Mr. Speaker, it’s not only the 
height of sleaze; it’s the height of desperation. 
 
As an NDP source stated in Saturday’s Leader-Post, and I 
quote: 
 

What you . . . have is a deficit accounted for in a new way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is he hiding? We have been told that there 
are summary financial statements. No summary financial 
statements come to this House with the current budget; and I 
ask the Finance minister to present those summary financial 
statements on Wednesday when he delivers his budget. Or is he 
only trying to cover up a deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 
doesn’t know that summary financial statements can’t be 
produced until after year end until they’re audited, then there’s 
not much I can say that will help the members opposite. But I 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — But I do want to say this, Mr. Speaker, you 
talk about plans. What we have from the members opposite are 
promises to cut taxes in addition to the tax cuts that have been 
brought in by this government which total, Mr. Speaker, $981 
million. They are telling people that they will cut taxes by $981 
million. 
 
And how will they pay for it, Mr. Speaker? Oh, they’ll sell off 
the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. Now in year one, that 
might work. Cut taxes by a billion dollars and spend the 
proceeds from the Crowns. 
 
In year two here’s their plan, Mr. Speaker — no tax revenue 
and no assets. Well how does that add up, Mr. Speaker? It 

doesn’t add up. They know it. We know it. And the people of 
the province know it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance Program 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on Friday 
we revealed that Saskatchewan farmers will be facing huge 
increases in their crop insurance premiums for this year for a 
significantly reduced level of coverage, due to the removal of 
spot loss hail and the variable price option. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, one farm, as an example, in 
risk area 11 in the Raymore area has calculated the same spot 
loss hail coverage as last year will now cost $5.50 per acre more 
this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to purchase this same level of crop insurance and 
hail insurance as that farmer had last year, his premiums will 
increase by a whopping 206 per cent. Mr. Speaker, will the 
minister explain to the farmers of Saskatchewan who may be 
facing the second year of a drought, why is he increasing 
premiums on the provincial crop insurance program by as much 
as 206 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s question today 
goes on to tell Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan 
producers across the province that the member opposite has 
absolutely no idea about what’s happening in the agriculture 
community at all. No idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because I said to the member yesterday, or last on Friday . . . I 
said to the member on Friday that crop insurance premiums are 
going to go up in this province because the federal government 
didn’t put its share in on the formula adjustment. That’s what I 
said to him on Friday. 
 
He has then had a conversation, Mr. Speaker, with the president 
of the Crop Insurance Corporation and the president of the Crop 
Insurance Corporation has said in Saturday’s article and I say to 
the member he just needs to read . . . and he says this: 
 

Prices have increased for commodities, which will increase 
coverage per acre as well as (the) premiums. 

 
Coverage is up, premiums are up. Why are they down is what 
he said. The biggest drop for the cost share commitment is 
down from 35 per cent to 28 per cent was the going reason by 
the federal government, is what Mr. Matthies says. And so the 
member should know, now . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it’s going to cost Saskatchewan 
farm families thousands of dollars more to access the same 
level of coverage as they had last year. On this one farm as an 
example, the total premium costs for crop and the spot loss hail 
insurance coverage will cost this farmer an additional $8,000 
more in premiums over last year. 
 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

There’s been a lot of talk about safety nets in this House over 
the last year, and there have been many changes and 
reincarnation of federal programs. But the farm families of this 
province are especially relying on crop insurance, particularly 
when we have continued drought conditions. But the NDP now 
have ripped that protection out from under them once again. 
 
How can the Minister of Agriculture justify reducing coverage, 
at the same time jacking premiums up to farmers across this 
province by as much as $8,000 per farmer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to go one more time 
to the member opposite, because he does not appear to have a 
full appreciation of what the issue is, and I’ve tried now on a 
couple of days to explain to the member. And I hear the 
member say now that farmers are going to get the same level of 
coverage is what he said just a minute ago. 
 
Now he said for the last couple of days that they’re going to get 
a reduced level of coverage. Today he says they are going to get 
the same level of coverage. Well this is what they are going to 
get, Mr. Speaker. If you were to take the average of wheat in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, and you take the coverage will go up 
this year from $95 to $103 an acre, Mr. Speaker. And the 
premiums are going to go up from $2.31 to 3.01, Mr. Speaker. 
And if you do that on canola, Mr. Speaker, this is what will 
happen to canola in the province — the coverage will go up 
from $93 to $136 an acre. 
 
Coverage is up, Mr. Speaker, on average, and the prices are up. 
But the member needs to get it right, Mr. Speaker. The reason 
why coverages are more expensive this year for producers is 
because the federal share of their . . . in the formula is less. And 
everybody knows that in the province, Mr. Speaker, except the 
member from Kindersley doesn’t know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
addition to the changes that we’ve outlined here earlier, the 
minister has also announced a new forage program and a crop 
rainfall pilot program. The program will base insurance payouts 
on historical rainfall levels at area weather stations. But the 
catch is is that producers can choose a weather station from 
anywhere they want in the province. 
 
For an example, a farmer near Leader can choose a weather 
station in the Melfort area. If that weather station receives less 
than 80 per cent of the normal rainfall levels, then the farmer at 
Leader will receive a payout. But if the rainfall levels aren’t 
below normal, he’s out of luck. Even if his crops are completely 
decimated by drought, he’s out of luck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers are shaking their heads at 
this program. Why is the Minister of Agriculture making 
farmers gamble for their forage and crop rainfall protection? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we 
should remember that it’s exactly that member there last year 

who made fun of the forage program that we put in — the crop 
coverage program. Exactly the same member, Mr. Speaker. 
Exactly the same member who made fun last year of the 
community Internet across the province. The same guy, Mr. 
Speaker, the very same guy. 
 
Now today the member is standing up and saying that the crop 
rainfall forage program . . . or crop program is a sham. And I 
want to say to the member opposite and to you, Mr. Speaker . . . 
through you, Mr. Speaker, that last year the forage rainfall 
program is now being adopted in this province under the main 
program of crop insurance. Why? Because that’s what 
Saskatchewan farmers says works and that’s why we’re doing 
it. 
 
And this year, Mr. Speaker, we’re implementing the crop . . . 
this year we’re implementing the crop forage rainfall program. 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because that’s what Saskatchewan 
producers say works in the province. And if we’re not . . . and 
we’re not paying attention to what the member from Kindersley 
says because every time he supports farmers, we’re in trouble, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this crop and rainfall 
program is a crapshoot, plain and simple. In fact with this 
program it’s quite possible for a farmer who has a bumper crop 
to cash in because if the rainfall station he chooses receives less 
than 80 per cent of normal rainfall levels he gets a payout 
regardless of whatever type of crop he has. Yet another farmer 
who ends up with a crop disaster will not receive a payout if the 
weather station he happens to bet on to . . . doesn’t receive 
adequate rainfall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a farmer may want to choose his own local 
weather station for his rainfall coverage but because there’s 
limits on the number of producers that any station can cover, he 
may be excluded from that option. 
 
Mr. Minister, will the minister of the House explain to 
Saskatchewan farm families why this program makes any sense 
at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . why this program makes sense 
because, Mr. Speaker, this is why it makes sense. Last year our 
Farm Support Review Committee travelled the province and 
talked to producers and producer organizations and farmers and 
said, what do we need to do, Mr. Speaker, to enhance the crop 
insurance and the farm support revenue programs in the 
province? 
 
And what they said, Mr. Speaker, is that you need to take your 
forage rainfall program and you need to implement it on a full 
crop insurance basis, which we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. And it 
was based exactly on the same program that we’re 
implementing this year on the crop sector — exactly the same, 
Mr. Speaker — of which farmers are endorsing in scores, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, when we take a look at the 
document, the Farm Support Review document, which 
consulted with farmers and producers, this document right here, 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

 

Mr. Speaker, of which everybody consulted with. Nowhere in 
this document, Mr. Speaker, is any representation from the 
Saskatchewan Party. No representation. They’re disconnected, 
they’re out of touch, and they don’t understand what’s 
happening in the agricultural field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this program is so 
flawed, so defiant of any logic, and such a gamble for producers 
that we’ve renamed it. Maybe we should call it the Serby derby, 
or more appropriately . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member knows full well he’s not 
to use, refer to members, other than by their title or by their 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well then maybe more appropriately it should be 
named rainfall roulette. Crop insurance agents will now become 
the croupier at the roulette tables. Perhaps crop insurance 
should use the 1-800 information line that they have so that 
farmers can connect to Diana Warwick’s psychic network, so 
they can choose which weather station that they want to bet on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has made a complete mockery out of the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program. The Saskatchewan 
Party, Mr. Speaker, is calling for an emergency debate here this 
afternoon, so we can debate in this House increased coverage 
. . . or decreased coverage levels for farmers, increased 
premiums for farmers here in Saskatchewan, and a new roulette 
table — roulette table — for the farmers to bet on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Agriculture stand up in this 
House this afternoon and debate his crop insurance program, 
and allow farmers in this province to know exactly the type of 
crop insurance program he’s bringing in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley 
is a joke when it comes to the farm policy. He’s a joke. And I 
say why, Mr. Speaker. We had in Saskatchewan a Farm Support 
Review Committee that travelled the province and consulted 
about what we should do with farmers. Was the Saskatchewan 
Party present for any of those discussions? Absolutely void, Mr. 
Speaker, never see them. 
 
The member from Kindersley stands up in March and he says 
. . . or in the first part of January, and he says on the radio 
waves, I’m going to have a Saskatchewan farm program that 
will be rolled out in the first part of March. And then do we see 
a farm program in March? Don’t see a thing from the 
Saskatchewan Party. And then he stands up at a meeting in 
Moose Jaw on March 8 and he says, you know what, we’re 
going to have a farm program for farmers right in the middle of 
March. 
 
Well the middle of March has gone by and no farm program . . . 
(inaudible) . . . And today he wants to debate an agricultural 
policy in the legislature when they’ve been absolutely void. 

You gave us AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), 
you gave us CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). None of it 
works. You have no understanding of farm policy in the 
program — none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Northern Forest Protection Worker Training Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
more good news. The Minister of Post-Secondary and Skills 
Training and I travelled to Buffalo Narrows this morning and 
we signed an agreement on a new five-year firefighting 
program and it’s to focus on the training of the next generation 
of Saskatchewan forest firefighters. 
 
The northern forest protection worker training program, Mr. 
Speaker, will create 108 seasonal firefighting positions in 14 
northern communities and deliver training needed for these 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. This MOU (memorandum of understanding) 
signed between SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) and Post-Secondary will provide $1.14 
million a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. I 
would like to make it possible for all members to be able to hear 
the minister’s statement. The minister, carry on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, more good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this MOU was signed 
between SERM and Post-Secondary and will provide $1.14 
million in each of the five years of the agreement. 
 
And Northlands College will deliver training that will lead to 
certification of northern employers and firefighters along with 
the communities. SERM will supervise the work crews and 
train them on wildfires involving fire prevention activities and 
engage in wildfire training and standby during high fire 
hazards. When the fire hazards are lower, Mr. Speaker, the 
crews will be under the direction of the communities and will 
begin to work in the communities doing a wide variety of public 
work projects including cleaning up many northern 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out the new north chairperson Bobby Woods, 
who is also the mayor of Buffalo Narrows, recognized the 
importance of this new program for northerners. And Bobby 
Woods says, I quote: 
 

Northerners need . . . good quality long term jobs (and) this 
program offers (that), but they also care about their 
communities and (the) sustainable forest resources. 
Involving them directly in protection efforts makes good 
sense. 

 
Mr. Speaker, great news; northerners are getting jobs. 
 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to respond to the minister’s statement on behalf of the official 
opposition. 
 
The minister’s statement refers to an agreement, and it’s 
somewhat difficult to make an assessment over all, of the 
program, without having a copy of that agreement, so I would 
ask the minister if he could possibly make that available to us as 
quickly as possible. 
 
I think that we all agree that training more workers in the North 
in order to more professionally fight fires and allow them 
greater opportunity would be a good thing. 
 
I also appreciate another component in the agreement where 
these people, after receiving their training, will be made 
available to public works communities . . . or public works 
departments in the various communities; and I think perhaps 
utilizing their skills, their expertise, on a broader basis may be 
something that is going to prove very beneficial. 
 
The one concern I would have, Mr. Speaker, is that it indicates 
in this agreement that funding is going to be provided to a level 
of $1.14 million in each year over the course of 5 years, $5.7 
million in total, Mr. Speaker. It would be interesting to know 
what kinds of costs are being covered with that amount of 
money, and are there subsidies going to be provided to the 
communities, wage subsidies in order for them to be able to 
utilize these workers in the public works departments. 
 
And I guess the other thing that might be very interesting to see 
is the actual training program itself. As someone who’s been 
involved in training programs, I think you realize they must be 
very comprehensive in order that people can fully benefit from 
the training. I mean, there are all sorts of other issues — life 
skills — and those sorts of things that need to be addressed as 
well. 
 
So we’ll be interested in looking at this agreement, Mr. 
Speaker, and further exploring the details of the program in the 
future. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, 
The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kindersley on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — . . . Mr. Speaker, to move a motion of urgent and 
pressing necessity under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state very briefly the 

nature of the motion, please? 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Changes in Crop Insurance Premiums and Coverage 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with the changes that the minister 
has announced in crop insurance, farmers will be faced with 
sharply higher premiums for reduced coverage, and they’ll also 
be having to try and figure out which rainfall station to bet on 
here in Saskatchewan now, Mr. Speaker. So we feel it’s of 
urgent and pressing necessity that the farmers of this province 
clearly understand what kind of changes the Minister of 
Agriculture has in mind for him and how much of a premium 
increase we can expect. 
 

We call . . . that this Assembly call on the provincial 
government to reverse its decision to impose significantly 
increased premiums and reduced coverage for the 2002 
crop insurance program. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The members 
will come to order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 1 converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — . . . conversion. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Why is the member from Coronation Park on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
colleagues in the legislature. 
 
Seated behind the bar is a good friend of mine and a friend of 
many of us in the legislature, former MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) for Regina Wascana, Clint White, who 
very, very ably represented that part of this great city from 1978 
until 1982. 
 
And lest anyone feel too bad about the relatively short tenure, 
Clint has been fond of telling me over the years I’ve known him 
that when former Premier Blakeney asked him to run, he 
assured him all you have to do is run and it’s sort of a 28-day 
campaign and you won’t win anyway. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

 

Mr. White went on and acquitted himself very well in the 
Blakeney cabinet and made a very significant contribution to 
our province. So I ask all hon. members to join me in 
welcoming an hon. friend, Clint White. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
with a great deal of pleasure that I rise again today to rejoin the 
debate on the Throne Speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat 
again: a very good Speech from the Throne it was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday, before I ran out of time, I had spent 
some time discussing Moose Jaw and all the wonderful things 
that are going on in the city that I’ve called home all my life. 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many things ongoing and many . . . and the 
members here are well aware of all the good news coming out 
of Moose Jaw. It’s a wonderful city to live in. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I noted on Friday, and I 
will note again today, that the difference in Moose Jaw is really 
the people. The people are what makes Moose Jaw a special 
place to live in. None of the success, none of the changes, none 
of the innovative ideas that are happening in Moose Jaw and 
continue to continue on would ever have come about if it hadn’t 
been for the vision and dreams and the very hard work of the 
people in our city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I touched on some of the folks that lived there that 
are very active; Yvette Moore; Michelle Powers from Moose 
Jaw Tourism; Deb Thorne from the Mineral Spa; Gary Hyland, 
a former teacher that is very active in the community with 
Festival of Words and the Cultural Centre. Those are just a few 
of the very active citizens of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also touched on Friday on the four pillars that 
are spoke to on the Speech from the Throne. Investment in the 
economy and in the environment, investment in infrastructure to 
build our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tried to make the point on Friday that sometimes 
when we view these statements in a Speech from the Throne 
they don’t have an awful lot of meaning, so what I try and do is 
bring them into a context of how they affect me, how they 
affect my community and my neighbours. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, those are things that have been successful in 
Moose Jaw — investment in our community, in our 
environment; investment in our infrastructure within our 
province and within our city. And, Mr. Speaker, what I do is 
think of how they have affected my community and what effect 
they could have province-wide. And, Mr. Speaker, that really 
speaks to the vision of this government. 

(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, another one of the pillars is the provision of 
quality education. And I made mention of the community 
schools in Moose Jaw — Riverview Collegiate and Empire 
School — who play a huge role in the community. And that 
idea of community schools and SchoolPLUS has been grabbed 
onto with much enthusiasm by the school boards, citizens, and 
parents of my community. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s so many things going on. I’d like to 
pass along a congratulations to Dr. Helen Horsman, the 
chairperson of the . . . and the director of education of the 
Moose Jaw Roman Catholic Separate School Division. The 
separate school division was recently honoured and won the 
Catholic Schools for Tomorrow award. The award was 
sponsored by Today’s Catholic Teacher of Dayton, Ohio. And 
it’s very unusual that our . . . a school division outside the 
United States should be recognized for the work they do. And I 
would like to say a congratulations to the school division in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s many things that are going on in 
education across this province. No single item can be addressed 
in a single way. We have to come at it from all sides and 
address the multi issues that are out there in a variety of ways. 
And just some of the things that Saskatchewan is doing, that 
we’re about to launch the Campus Saskatchewan — an Internet 
gateway to all of our post-secondary institutions offering 70 to 
80 courses by the end of March 2002. 
 
And while for you and I, Mr. Speaker, who are a little bit past 
our days of formal education — maybe not, but we may be — 
distance learning and Internet learning is absolutely made for 
Saskatchewan. People throughout the province, no matter how 
remote of a location they live in, can access the Internet through 
the excellent system we have through CommunityNet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has the best coverage across Canada 
for a province-wide . . . for this province-wide network, and it’s 
expanding even more this year. But distance learning is suited 
ideally for our province. Students can remain at home. They can 
continue on with their employment and continue on with their 
education over the Internet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our universities have jumped up four spots higher 
in the Maclean’s ranking this year. Our tuition levels are lower 
— less than the national average. The centennial merit 
scholarship program to recognize high achievement at the 
post-secondary level has been initiated. Three hundred 
scholarships will be awarded to graduating high school 
students, approximately covering the first year tuition costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on of the initiatives that are 
taking place in education across this province, and it’s a huge 
step in building our province in the future that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other pillars talks about our health care 
system and families. This government’s commitment to 
renewing and improving our health care system is without a 
doubt a top priority, Mr. Speaker. And while this work proceeds 
along this province’s chosen path of a publicly funded, publicly 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

administered system, we face challenges but we also know that 
maintaining our health care system is a priority. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again I think of Moose Jaw and the things 
that are ongoing there. The Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health 
District has over the years done a remarkable job. They’ve 
provided top quality services and specialized services to Moose 
Jaw and the surrounding area, improved and expanded many 
services, and begun some very unique relationships with 
bordering health districts to better yet utilize the resources that 
are there. 
 
And the first example that pops to mind is the mobile CT 
(computerized tomography) scanner, which was the first of its 
kind in Saskatchewan, but provided services between Moose 
Jaw and the Swift Current Health District and for the five health 
districts in the southwest corner of the province — just another 
way and another example of Saskatchewan citizens, how we 
adjust and find solutions for difficult problems. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the Thunder Creek board members 
have gone on to the newly expanded health authority, but others 
have stepped down to take on new challenges and to put back 
into our community in a variety of ways. But to all the present 
board members and the previous board members, Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to pass along a heartfelt thank you for all the time, 
effort, and dedication that they’ve put in over the years to 
provide quality service and dedication to the citizens of our 
district. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, health care and health 
determinants are important to this government. We talk about 
healthy and self-reliant families. Many things affect the health 
of children in families. Health is the result of many things: good 
food, adequate living accommodation, jobs, and education, just 
to name a few. 
 
But when we look at the commitment by this government and 
topics that were addressed in the Throne Speech, expand the 
implementation of Kids First, a program targeted to vulnerable 
children, Mr. Speaker, that’s very important. Children are our 
best resource. 
 
Expanding the building independence, which has reduced social 
assistance caseloads— lots of good work has been done in this 
area and it continues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has made a commitment to construct 1,000 
housing units for low-income families in urban and northern 
areas over the next five years. You can’t have a healthy 
population, Mr. Speaker, unless you have healthy living 
accommodations. 
 
Begin implementation of the action plan for Saskatchewan 
health care, measures to better manage waiting times for 
elective surgery, create primary health care teams, increase 
recruitment and training activities, and establish a 24-hour 
phone line to offer immediate advice from registered nurses — 
Mr. Speaker, again innovative solutions to problems that will in 
the end result in benefits to all of us. 
 

Mr. Speaker, also one of the health determinants is really decent 
wages. That’s a huge factor, Mr. Speaker. This government’s 
announcement to increase the minimum wage by 35 cents on 
May 1, and another increment of 30 cents on November 1 of 
this year, is very important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
opposition’s view of the minimum wage increase certainly is 
characteristic of their view of the working poor. The opposition 
would hold the line on the lowest wages in the province and 
maintain a class of working poor. 
 
This was revealed in a statement by the member from 
Humboldt in this House, in Hansard, June 26, 2000 when she 
said, and I quote: 
 

. . . Kirsch Construction of Middle Lake have 
approximately 15 to 18 men on their payroll. They have 20 
to 30 men waiting to work. These people are willing to 
work for less than minimum wage as long as they work. If 
it were not for labour legislation put in by your 
government, we could have a construction firm such as that 
complete that road. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our government has proven that as our economy 
grows, all people in Saskatchewan can share in its prosperity. 
Not the opposition. They would have the lowest paid workers 
receive less than minimum wage. They would have a race for 
the bottom, with no protection for working poor. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition suggests that 
the government should assist those on minimum wage by 
decreasing taxes. And I ask, where have they been over the last 
few years? 
 
I would like to remind the members present: in our budget last 
year through our tax reform, 55,000 low-income people came 
off the provincial income tax roll, the improved personal tax 
benefits of $8,000, universal child and senior credits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the flat tax was abolished. 
 
We introduced the Saskatchewan employment supplement 
which ensures that the working poor receive as much income as 
they would on Social Services. The extended health benefits 
plan ensures that working poor have the same extended health 
benefits that welfare recipients receive. Mr. Speaker, 
post-secondary bursaries have been improved for low-income 
families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the end of the list. The sales tax 
credit has been introduced which provides a credit up to $264 
per family per year. This is equivalent to a tax exemption on 
$4,000 in taxable purchases. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we take note that sales tax does not apply to 
home electricity, heating, children’s clothing, personal services 
like haircuts, or food and basic shelter. Mr. Speaker, the 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

 

essentials of life are tax free. 
 
Low-income workers spend their money in the local economy. 
They do not have savings accounts; they do not travel. 
Therefore the more money that is put in the hands of 
low-income workers means more money into the local 
economy. It’s actually good for business and will create 
positive spinoffs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard much of the Crown corporations 
over this last week and I imagine we will continue to hear more 
about them as this session progresses from an opposition that is 
bound and determined to sell off our provincial assets. 
 
But here again, I don’t think of SaskTel or SaskEnergy as some 
far-off entity. I think of these Crown corporations as they are in 
my community — providing excellent cost-effective services in 
my community, providing good jobs for my neighbours in my 
community, purchasing goods and services whenever possible 
in my community, and providing sponsorships for local events 
in my community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is look at the list. SaskPower has 
2,300 employees province wide: 850 of those employees are in 
Regina; 1,450 employees are in 69 communities across 
Saskatchewan. SaskPower pays out $432 million to 5,300 
Saskatchewan companies for goods, services, royalties, and 
fuel. That’s money and income into my constituency, and into 
the opposition members’ constituencies also. 
 
SaskTel has 2,200 employees in Regina, and 1,423 employees 
in other communities across our province; $238 million is spent 
by SaskTel in more than 5,000 Saskatchewan manufacturing 
firms, distributors, contractors, and suppliers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where would those local businesses be without the 
support of the Crowns? 
 
SaskEnergy has 297 employees in Regina; 687 employees in 
communities across our province; and $21 million is spent on 
products purchased from Saskatchewan suppliers. 
 
When we look at the Crowns as a total, Mr. Speaker, and we 
add them all up, there’s just about 4,500 employees in Regina 
and 4,100 in communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Providing good jobs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Good jobs, paying taxes, contributing to 
their communities throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s $519 million in employees’ salaries that go 
back into this province, through the Crowns, into each and 
every one of our communities; and purchases, through the 
Crowns, into our communities, into our local businesses, of 
$1.5 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns are an important asset that we have 
worked hard to maintain and to build, and it’s a commitment by 
this government that we’ll maintain the Crowns and the services 
that they provide throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to 
make a bit of a statement for the members across the floor. 
 
There was a statement made the other day that the bulk of the 
money coming in the NDP government investment portfolio 
have come from two sources. The first is a $131 billion sale of a 
British cable company called LCL (Leicester Communications 
Limited). Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish it was billion, but I don’t 
believe it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend a few minutes and just touch on 
the things that are being done in my department, the 
Department of Labour, to improve the working conditions in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really believe that Saskatchewan people are 
practical, productive, and very innovative; however we have to 
work together if we’re going to continue to build a safe and 
secure future for our children, our grandchildren, and for all of 
Saskatchewan. And one way that that is being done is 
relationships that have been fostered between areas of 
occupational health and safety and prevention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my department’s occupational health and safety 
division strives to prevent occupational injuries and illnesses. 
And one well-known example of this is the department’s efforts 
to improve workplace safety through our 4,000 workplace 
occupational health and safety committees. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And another area that is receiving great emphasis is education 
and injury prevention. The Department of Labour and 
Education are helping develop classroom curriculum materials 
so students can learn about labour standards and occupational 
health and safety before they enter the workforce. A ready for 
work program targeted toward Saskatchewan youth is one of 
our most important injury prevention initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no other age group is more vulnerable to work 
injuries or less knowledgeable about their workplace rights and 
responsibilities than our 15- to 24-year-olds. We know that 15- 
to 24-year-olds make up about one in every six workers in the 
provincial labour force, yet they account for one in four 
workplace injuries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ready for work is equipping our youth with 
knowledge about, and positive attitudes towards, workplace 
safety and injury prevention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure everyone here will agree that money 
invested in occupational health and safety and prevention is 
money well spent. This year marks the 30th anniversary of 
Saskatchewan’s pioneering occupational health and safety 
legislation, the first of its kind in North American. After three 
decades it’s clear, health and safety is a saving, not a cost from 
which everyone benefits. 
 
Health and safety works because the average time-loss injury 
rate for the five-year period, 1996 to 2000, has declined by 35 
per cent as compared to the five-year period, 1973 to 1977. 
Health and safety works because workers’ compensation claims 
have dropped 28 per cent since 1972. 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

On this 30th anniversary of occupational health and safety in 
our province, the creation of WorkSafe Saskatchewan is a very 
important step forward. WorkSafe Saskatchewan is a 
partnership between Saskatchewan Labour and the WCB aimed 
at preventing occupational illnesses and injury by promoting a 
positive safety culture in Saskatchewan workplaces. The goal is 
to motivate people in the workplace to improve their health and 
safety standards, attitudes, and behaviours. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, like the rest of Canada, Saskatchewan faces 
a growing demand for skilled labour. How well we meet this 
challenge will determine how prosperous our province will be 
in this coming century. A robust Saskatchewan economy must 
capitalize on the diverse strength of all its citizens. 
 
Doing this means we must ensure that our workforce adapts to 
our changing demographics. One-quarter of all new workers 
entering the provincial labour force are Aboriginal. 
 
Saskatchewan Labour is working with Aboriginal 
organizations, business, labour, and government agencies to 
develop and deliver programs that foster employee awareness 
and full workplace inclusion. If our province is to flourish, 
Aboriginal workers must be full partners in the economic and 
social development of Saskatchewan. This is a challenge, but 
also it is a great opportunity for us to seize. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a key element of a healthy economy is an 
efficient, effective, and accountable workers’ compensation 
system. Our government is committed to this. And as you 
know, two major reviews of our Workers’ Compensation Act 
have been done in the past 24 months. 
 
Last May we received a report from Mr. Jim Dorsey who asked 
to carry . . . who was asked to carry out an administrative 
review of workers’ compensation. He presented us with a list of 
recommendations aimed at improving WCB, ensuring fuller 
compliance with the intent of the Workers’ Compensation Act, 
and improving WCB accountability both to me as minister 
responsible and to you, the stakeholders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was also . . . The committee of review was 
struck to examine and report on workers’ compensation matters. 
The response to this committee was excellent, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m pleased to report there was 119 thoughtful presentations 
from individuals and organizations put before the committee of 
review for its consideration. 
 
Taken together, Mr. Dorsey’s administrative review and the 
subsequent work of the committee of review covered the full 
scope of our Workers’ Compensation Act. My officials and I, 
with the WCB’s assistance, have been studying the 
recommendations since the report was submitted to me in 
January. And, Mr. Speaker, that report was released this 
morning. 
 
Let me say that the fiscal stability that this government has 
worked so hard to bring about over the last decade will 
continue. And what has this fiscal stability meant to this 
province? Mr. Speaker, we have delivered the largest personal 
income tax reduction in this province’s history, lowering 
income tax levels by almost one-third since 1993 for the 
average Saskatchewan family. And our 6 per cent provincial 

sales tax is the lowest of all provinces that have one. Our 
government has also supported and stimulated small business 
by reducing the provincial income tax rate for small business by 
40 per cent over the past 10 years. 
 
Over the 1990s, Saskatchewan’s economy outperformed every 
other province, including Alberta, in terms of gross domestic 
product on a per capita basis. That economic growth in part 
made these and other tax reductions possible, as did the $3.7 
billion reduction of the public debt which lessens the interest 
burden that Saskatchewan residents are asked to carry. 
 
Our government is recognized nationally for good financial 
management, and our credit rating has been upgraded nine 
times since 1995. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a sign of confidence 
from outside partners that are . . . that our ability to manage 
Saskatchewan’s financial affairs is stable. 
 
The credit for these accomplishments must go to our citizens 
for their hard work and to the provincial government policies 
that are working for Saskatchewan. In the Throne Speech, our 
government commitment to meet this province’s immediate 
priorities and expanding our economy. This commitment to 
addressing priorities and expansion needs the co-operation of 
Saskatchewan people to live within our means while we seize 
our opportunities. 
 
We will do this by working with all Saskatchewan residents to 
build a province of economic opportunity and a province where 
the values of caring, compassion, and co-operation guide our 
decisions. 
 
Despite our economic and fiscal difficulties, we see promising 
signs of recovery. Our long-term trend lines over the past 
decade have been very strong and in the last two months 
Saskatchewan’s economy has grown by 10,000 jobs. Our 
unemployment rate at 6.1 per cent is the second lowest in 
Canada. These are the early signs of what we hope will be an 
economic rebound this year. 
 
In the Throne Speech opening the spring session, we spoke of 
the four pillars on which we’ll strengthen our province’s future 
in the coming two to three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge everyone to listen to these four pillars, think 
of them in the context of your community, and then spread the 
idea throughout the province: investment in economy and in the 
environment, investment in infrastructure to build our province, 
the provision of quality education, and a provision of quality 
health care and support to families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I have had the privilege of serving as the 
MLA from Moose Jaw Wakamow there has never been a day 
go by that I have not been presently surprised and impressed by 
the people I have had the opportunity to meet — not only in my 
community, Mr. Speaker, but throughout the province, whether 
travelling on the bus tour or attending various functions through 
the province. 
 
In Saskatchewan, there is enormous opportunity to do many 
things as we work our way through some difficult 
circumstances affecting us and our Canadian neighbours. These 
opportunities will be realized by following our economic and 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

 

community development plan, in partnership with industry and 
Saskatchewan’s people that the Throne Speech has outlined. 
 
The key to a prosperous future is to build wisely on our high 
quality public services, on our natural environment, and on the 
spirit of our citizens and our economic potential. We believe 
Saskatchewan is quickly becoming Canada’s province of 
opportunity and we can meet the future with confidence and 
optimism knowing we are blessed with an abundance of human 
and natural resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I will support the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly a pleasure 
to take my turn to reply to the Speech from the Throne this 
year. Mr. Speaker, this is an occasion where we as elected 
members have an opportunity to talk about our constituencies, 
say some thank you’s to some of the people who have helped us 
get here, and raise the concerns of our constituents, Mr. 
Speaker. I intend to do that this afternoon. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly proud to represent the 
citizens of Last Mountain-Touchwood. I consider it an honour, 
Mr. Speaker, to be here to represent them, to voice their 
concerns, and to have a watchful eye for their well-being, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have on a number of occasions described the location of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and I’ve spoken about its voting history. 
I think I can make claim that the citizens, the voters of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood are amongst the most politically aware 
and politically astute voters in the province. 
 
If you look at the voting history of my constituency in the past, 
you will see that up until the ’99 election the voters of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood have always sent a member to the 
government side of this House. And I think they did that with a 
purpose and they knew what they were doing. 
 
They also knew what they were doing this time, Mr. Speaker, in 
1999. They decided that they weren’t going to support this 
government any longer, Mr. Speaker, and they didn’t. They did 
vote with the majority of voters in this province and they were 
just a little bit ahead of their time. But they got it right in 1999 
and the rest of the province will get it right in the next election, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have some thank you’s 
that I should express to those people who help me every day 
and to those people who helped me become their elected 
representative. 
 
First of all I’d like to thank my wife, Marlene, and our children 
for being supportive. They always pick up the slack when I’m 
not there. They encourage me, they provide the support that all 
of us know is necessary, and they make the sacrifices, Mr. 
Speaker, that all . . . as you well know, all our families do. 
 
I’d also like to thank in particular our grandchildren. We have a 
number of grandchildren who spend a fair bit of time with us 

whenever we can and when grandpa is not too busy to bring 
them to the farm and that sort of thing. If we have an occasion 
to drive by the Legislative Building, they refer to this as 
grandpa’s big office. And they enjoy coming and visiting and so 
on. And they certainly brighten our lives and I would like to 
thank them for everything they’ve done for Marlene and 
myself. 
 
I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, without also saying a thank 
you to my parents. They have . . . all their lives when I was 
growing up, our family was always politically aware with keen 
interest as far as what was happening on the provincial and 
federal scenes. And that’s because my parents were . . . instilled 
that political awareness in us. And I think that probably played 
a factor in me being here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sometimes we as elected members assume that we got here on 
our own volition, and we will continue to do that, but when we 
sit back and reflect on the political process we soon realize that 
we can’t do it by ourselves. We have those hard-working men 
and women in our constituencies who are part of our 
constituency organization who go to meetings, put up the signs 
at election time, help organize and run fundraising functions, 
and so on. And they do this for no personal gain, and I think we 
should be thanking them. And I would like to thank all those 
people who have helped me and continue to help me, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another person that I would like to thank at this time is my very 
able constituency assistant, Carol Mellnick, who works 
tirelessly in my office, who keeps me on track — and that’s no 
small task, Mr. Speaker — keeps me organized, provides me 
with the information, and does a good part of our day-to-day 
constituency work. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been very fortunate to be one of the 
members who were selected to participate in the legislative 
intern program. I was very fortunate to have a young lady, 
Maria Kurylo, one of our interns working with me for the last 
two and a half months. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, it has 
certainly been a very pleasurable experience, and I must . . . 
she’s certainly helped me with some of the things I’m going to 
present in my speech this afternoon. All the good things are her 
work. If I stumble and mess up, that’s my fault, Mr. Speaker. So 
I would like to thank her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was preparing this address for this 
afternoon, I looked at constituency concerns and I looked at the 
notes I made last year. And, Mr. Speaker, not much has 
changed. Basically the concerns of this last 12 months are the 
same as what they were in the past. They centre around health, 
health care; I receive a number of inquiries and complaints from 
municipal governments dealing with infrastructure; and from 
citizens of the constituency and other citizens that I meet with 
on occasion, and they’re concerned about government 
interference in the economy. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And of course agriculture’s . . . is always a constant concern. 
And particularly more so now in the last week or so since the 
Minister of Agriculture announced his . . . the changes to the 
crop insurance program. The drought is a constant concern with 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

the farm producers in the constituency, particularly the lack of 
snow for runoff and for moisture for this year’s crop. A number 
of . . . a large number of farmers have gone ahead and dug wells 
and had dugouts dug, but we need snow, Mr. Speaker, for 
runoff for livestock and for farm use. 
 
One of the concerns I hear on a regular basis is, farmers tell me, 
well we’ve got snow . . . enough snow in our area to get a crop 
going but we don’t know where we’re going to get the water to 
spray, Mr. Speaker. Because if we don’t get any significant 
snow between now and May 1, we’re just not going to have any 
water. It’s going to be a real problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the area of health, the issues that are most commonly raised, 
and would come as no surprise, are the long waiting lists for 
elective surgery. People are paying for their own MRIs 
(magnetic resonance imaging); they’re going off to Calgary or 
Edmonton and having their MRIs done so that they can perhaps 
move up a bit in the waiting lists. 
 
I had a neighbour of mine who was waiting for quite a number 
of months for cataract surgery. It was to the point where he 
could . . . his sight was . . . He had a problem with his sight to 
the point where he couldn’t legally drive so his wife and 
himself went off this summer to Calgary, he had the operation 
done, and it cost him $2,500, and he was able to drive home. He 
said he’d waited long enough and he couldn’t carry on any 
longer so he took matters into his own hands. 
 
Another area of concern in the health area are the services that 
we have in the form of hospitals in the constituency. There’s a 
hospital, a small hospital, in Lestock; a little larger hospital by 
rural terms in Wynyard; and of course we . . . and then we have 
the Cupar Health Centre. And the people living in these 
communities are concerned about and then are asking the 
questions, will these facilities be there in the future to provide 
the services that we need, Mr. Speaker? 
 
There is a bit of an anomaly, I guess, with the creation of these 
new regional health authorities in my constituency. The Living 
Sky District was part of . . . is now part of the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. Well that Living Sky Health District 
covered an area that came south along Last Mountain Lake 
down to Strasbourg. Strasbourg is approximately 45 miles from 
Regina but now that area is in the Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority, in their area. 
 
You would wonder, when the government was making these 
changes to boundaries, why they wouldn’t have looked at the 
boundaries that are . . . that they put in place and rationalized 
them so that the people in Strasbourg would come to Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also the make-up of that Saskatoon Regional Health Board . . . 
The people in my constituency are concerned of the make-up, 
the number of people coming from Saskatoon versus the 
number of people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the areas, as I’d mentioned, that I get a lot of inquiries, 
complaints, and disappointments, I guess, is the whole area of 
infrastructure. Towns and villages, RMs (rural municipality) — 
they’re all the same. They all . . . they’re just not getting enough 
money to provide the infrastructure that they need in their 

jurisdictions. The towns and villages apply year after year after 
year and are turned down. The odd one does get an approval, 
but the number that are turned down far outweigh the number 
that are successful under this program. 
 
As an example, the Town of Wynyard is constantly struggling 
to provide enough water for their citizens and for the processing 
plant that they have in their community. They have wells . . . 
number of wells. I believe the number is 14 or 15 wells. And 
still I’m told that it’s just . . . it’s on a day-to-day basis whether 
there’s enough water there. The poultry processing plant in that 
community requires a great deal of fresh clean water for their 
processing activities, and the Town of Wynyard is having real 
problems. 
 
Another community that’s having . . . that would like to 
improve and provide some additional services in their 
community, particularly emergency services, is the village of 
Kelliher. That village, Kelliher, bought a standby power plant at 
a great saving. They got quite a deal on it. They were able to 
buy this almost new power plant. And what they would like to 
do is they would like to install that plant in the waiting room of 
their rink. 
 
And in case of an emergency, if we had something to the 
equivalent of the ice storm that Eastern Canada suffered a 
number . . . a couple of years ago, they would be able to power 
up their, not only their waiting rooms but they’d be able to 
power up their water system and their sewer, sewage system if 
. . . And they’ve got the plant; all they need is some assistance 
to get this thing installed, to get it wired up. And I’ve been 
working with them and, to this point in time, we haven’t been 
successful. And I think it’s a very deserving project that needs 
to be looked at. 
 
More recently, Mr. Speaker, in fact within the last couple of 
days, I’ve made aware of the village of Elfros has . . . their well 
has gone dry. They drilled a new well at a cost of $30,000 last 
August; they thought they had all kinds of water, and to their 
great disappointment, about four days ago that well went dry. 
They are now hauling water of some . . . a round trip, I’m told, 
of 40 miles at a cost of approximately $1,500 a day. 
 
They have a well driller on site. They drilled a test hole down to 
a depth of 400 feet. It’s a dry hole. It cost them $2,000. They’ve 
now moved to another location. I talked to the councillor in 
charge just at noon, and he tells me they’re down about 200 
feet, still haven’t hit water. They’re hopeful they will, but 
there’s no guarantees. And if they don’t hit water in this 
location, frankly, they don’t know what they’re going to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They are facing a very, very serious problem, and they cannot 
afford that $1,500 a day for water, Mr. Speaker. So I’ve been in 
discussion with the Minister of Municipal Affairs, and 
hopefully, we will be able to . . . this government will be able to 
find some assistance for them. 
 
Another area of constituency concern again centres in the 
Wynyard area. There’s a group of families who have family 
members with disabilities. The families are looking after them 
and, as you could well know, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
24-hour-a-day, 7-day-a-week job if you want to put it in those 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

 

terms. And these people are crying out for some help, a respite 
home where they could take their family members and have a 
bit of a break for a day or two, Mr. Speaker. And to this point in 
time we haven’t been successful. 
 
As I mentioned, one . . . and the area of concern that we hear all 
the time is the invasion of this government into the economy, 
competing with private business. And this is a concern, Mr. 
Speaker, that goes across the piece. It’s not only in the 
constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood, it’s in . . . all across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these people, this NDP government just don’t seem to get 
the . . . see the picture, Mr. Speaker because I’m afraid they 
have their minds made up; it’s only their way to develop an 
economy. And Mr. Speaker, I can say — and I think the people 
of Saskatchewan will agree with me — that it’s not working. 
 
We just have to look at the financial situation that this 
government finds themself in, and on Wednesday’s budget 
that’ll be very evident, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had a local merchant who called me just when the new 
tobacco regulations were . . . came into effect and he was very 
upset. He said all the onus rests with the merchant; he has all 
the responsibility. He has incurred all the costs, and yet the 
offenders, the young people who are buying cigarettes illegally, 
there’s no repercussions. He felt this is very unfair, that it 
should be a balance, Mr. Speaker. He’s certainly willing to do 
his part, Mr. Speaker, and control the sale of tobacco products. 
But he feels that the young people that . . . who illegally 
purchase these products should be . . . there should be some 
repercussions that come to bear on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another unique situation I was made aware of just recently is 
that . . . the area of the activities of Crown corporations. It 
appears, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this NDP government is 
putting such a financial squeeze on the Crowns, to squeeze out 
more dollars so that they can balance their budgets, that the 
Crown corporations are now squeezing their customers. They’re 
forcing people to . . . if they’ve got a power installation on an 
abandoned farm site, they’re . . . it’s either hook . . . get that 
power hooked up and pay us some dollars or else we’re going 
to come in there and rip it out. And these people aren’t getting a 
whole lot of warning ahead of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess this is balancing the budget, NDP style. 
 
The other . . . As I mentioned, this whole area of government, 
of this NDP government competing with private business, was 
made very clear to me by a constituent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You may have . . . may recall that last week I did a member’s 
statement on the move of this large grain annex in . . . that took 
place in the beginning of March in my constituency. And I 
mentioned that a young farmer by the name of Robert Keyser 
purchased it and had the elevator moved. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what really upset Rob Keyser. He . . . Rob and 
his dad, over the last number of years, set up a pulse processing 
plant on their farm. And they’d grown their business to the 
point where they’re hiring, at peak operation times, anywhere 
up to 15 people. So they’re a job creator. Rob has taken over the 
management of this operation. 

And you know what upset Rob, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is last fall 
when this NDP government went and provided taxpayers’ 
dollars to one of his competitors. He phoned me; he was very, 
very upset. And as a matter of fact, the reason why he was more 
upset than normal is that during the bus tour — this NDP bus 
tour that the members opposite like to talk about, the Minister 
of Social Services and the member from Greystone and the 
member from Regina Dewdney made a special trip out to Rob’s 
farm to talk to him, to listen to his ideas, hear his concerns and 
they said they were listening. Well I don’t think they listened 
very well because, only a month later, here they go hand the 
taxpayers’ dollars to one of his competitors, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So here we have a young farmer . . . a young businessman who 
was making substantial investment in this province and what 
position does he find himself in? He’s got to compete with his 
own tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not a great surprise, 
Mr. Speaker, with the economic development policies of this 
government. 
 
Now I read with . . . listened with interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to the section in the Speech from the Throne that dealt with the 
NDP bus tour and the listening and learning. And I’ve already 
given you one example of how the NDP members did not listen 
and certainly didn’t learn anything from that tour. 
 
But I have another story that was related to me by a local 
businessman in another community. This business person 
operates a pretty decent-sized car dealership, another job 
creator. The NDP bus pulled into the community. The Premier 
was on the bus, along with a number of cabinet members and 
MLAs and they were, of course, going out and supposedly 
talking and listening to the people. 
 
It was arranged for the Premier to come and visit this business 
person. So as the story goes, the Premier walks into the office, 
to the private office, sits in the chair, introduces himself, sits in 
the chair and says to the owner: well Daryl, what’s on your 
mind? And Daryl was just going to start telling the Premier 
what’s on his mind. An aide rushes in, Mr. Premier, we’ve got 
to go. Nice to meet you Daryl, we’ll see you again. That’s 
listening and learning, Mr. Speaker, NDP style; listening and 
learning. And it’s very evident that they did neither listen nor 
neither did they learn. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Must have been time for a photo op. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Exactly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Nothing more than 
a photo op. 
 
The members opposite, they like to criticize the Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings that our caucus held earlier this month. 
I would like to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people 
that attended our meetings, they had an opportunity to present 
their ideas, to interact with the MLAs that were at the meetings, 
and this process ran anywhere from an hour and a half to two 
hours — not two minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to turn my attention now to the 
area of post-secondary education. I read with interest the one 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

sentence in the Speech from the Throne, and I’ll quote: 
“Saskatchewan’s commitment to post-secondary education will 
also be maintained.” 
 
Well what does that mean: the commitment will also be 
maintained? I’m sure that gives our universities, our students, a 
lot of comfort when they hear that their commitment will be 
maintained. I listened last Friday with interest to the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education’s reply to the Speech from the 
Throne. And I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that her staff did 
quite a good job in preparing her speech for her. She outlined 
the mandates of the universities and talked about the type of 
vision that our universities should have and so on. And I can 
find no fault with that. 
 
She also mentioned though, particularly at the University of 
Saskatchewan, that we have a number of colleges that deal in 
the health care area, whether it’s the College of Medicine, the 
College of Nursing, and one college she mentioned was the Vet 
College. And the University of Saskatchewan is unique by 
having all of these colleges there. 
 
But what I was listening for — and I’m sure the dean of the 
Veterinary College and other people associated along with the 
administration of the University of Saskatchewan, what they 
would have liked to hear — was a commitment to funding that 
university, the Vet College, because there are some problems 
there. 
 
This college is funded through an agreement with the other 
western provinces and to my knowledge that agreement has not 
been renewed. And there’s some real major concerns, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there. 
 
Now getting back to this comment of the commitment will be 
maintained. What does that mean? Well last year the 
universities and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) saw an increase in their operating 
revenue of three and a half per cent. What is it going to be this 
year? 
 
The message that we’re hearing on this side of the House from 
the government is that in all likelihood it’s not going to be 
anywhere near that. The three and a half per cent last year 
wasn’t adequate. It wasn’t adequate to meet the needs of the 
university, so the universities had no other alternative but to 
increase tuition fees — a 15 per cent increase in tuition fees. 
 
So is that what our students are looking at again? Another 
increase in tuition fees of 15 per cent or more? Is that what we 
mean by maintaining our commitment, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
I’m sure that gives our students a lot of comfort. 
 
Last year after the budget was presented, I looked very closely 
and during estimates I investigated the number of dollars that 
the universities received, new dollars, and the number of new 
dollars that the students provided to the universities by the way 
of increased tuition fees. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the students gave the universities 
more new money than this government did. And I think that is 
shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, shameful. That means higher 
student debt at a time when our students already have a debt 

load that they can hardly maintain. 
 
So if we see anything less than a 4 per cent increase in funding 
to our post-secondary education institutions this year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’ll mean higher student debt — higher tuition 
fees and higher student debt for our students. 
 
What our post-secondary education institutions tell me they 
need — they need a commitment to stable, long-term funding. 
And that’s something that this government isn’t prepared to do. 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a Saskatchewan 
Party government would be prepared to make that commitment 
and we will make it after the next election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — I was pleased, however, with the reference in the 
Speech from the Throne to the Canadian Light Source. Again, 
in typical NDP fashion, it’s a day late and a dollar short, but at 
least they did make a commitment to establish a Saskatchewan 
synchrotron institute. This is something that I spoke in this 
House last session; it’s something that the Alberta government 
has put in place well over a year ago, and finally maybe — 
maybe — this government is going to put a Saskatchewan 
synchrotron institute into place. 
 
The president, Peter MacKinnon, at the University of 
Saskatchewan tells me that he’s travelled to a number of 
universities throughout the world that had light . . . synchrotrons 
located on their campuses. And he’s being told over and over 
again by those people that the universities must be a major user 
of that scientific installation. If not, the city, the province, and 
the university will not reap the benefits of having a scientific 
installation such as the synchrotron located on campus. 
 
So the question is this: is this NDP government prepared to 
make the investment so that this province will reap the benefits 
of that Canadian Light Source that’s being built at the 
University of Saskatchewan as we speak? 
 
I am somewhat fearful that they aren’t prepared and they can’t 
make that type of investment, simply because they’ve 
mismanaged the economy so badly that they just don’t have the 
dollars to put into . . . to make that kind of investment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But I hope that I am proven wrong. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like to turn my 
comments to agriculture. There’s many more . . . there’s a lot 
more I could say about post-secondary education and the 
students and the number of students that are leaving our 
province and so on, but perhaps I’ll save some of those 
comments for the budget address, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Within the last few weeks the Minister of Agriculture has 
announced the particulars of the 2002 crop insurance program. 
And to the dismay of all farmers of Saskatchewan, this 
government says one thing but does something else. And I will 
demonstrate exactly what this government — this NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government — has done to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But prior to getting into the crop insurance explanation and 
showing the effects of the changes that this year’s program will 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

 

have, the dramatic and devastating effects it will have, I’d just 
like to say . . . mention a few things about some of the areas of 
concern in agriculture. And as I had said earlier, the drought is 
certainly . . . the ongoing drought is certainly a problem. 
 
Another area of concern in my constituency, and I’m sure in 
other constituencies across the province, comes from the elk 
producers, those farmers who made a significant investment in 
diversifying their farms and now with the arrival of chronic 
wasting disease in the province, they are between a rock and a 
hard place. There’s no sale for their animals, the product of 
their animals, yet they have all the costs. 
 
I had a producer in my constituency tell me that if this thing 
doesn’t get turned around and if it doesn’t rain in the spring, he 
has no alternative but to shoot his animals that he has on his 
farm right now. I think that’s a terrible situation. But the silence 
on this issue from the members on the other side of the House is 
deafening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, the changes in crop insurance, to 
this year’s crop insurance, are quite devastating. And as soon as 
I can find my example, I will take you through an example to 
show you as to how it affects . . . 
 
I have it here. Okay. I’ll try to explain from a producer’s 
viewpoint and from a . . . as to why the changes that this 
government has put in place for the 2002 crop year, why they’re 
so devastating. 
 
First of all I should mention, though, that earlier in the day 
when we on this side of the House felt that we should have an 
emergency debate on the changes . . . to the changes of crop 
insurance and we asked for leave to have that emergency 
debate, who over there on that side hollered no? 
 
Well I was watching, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you know who 
hollered no? It was the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — the Minister of Agriculture. That’s what he thinks 
about the farmers of Saskatchewan, that he won’t even devote 
half a day to debate such an important topic, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I don’t know if he even understood the question, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might ask the question, one might ask 
the question, why, why is it so important or why is this change 
particularly to the spot loss hail . . . loss of the spot loss hail 
option, why is that so devastating to the producers of this 
province? 
 
In order to understand that, I guess what I should do at this time 
is explain how the average producer looks at insuring his crop 
for a loss, whether that be through a loss through drought, 
whether it be loss through frost, whether it be loss through 
insect damage, or whether it be loss through hail. 
 
And this is . . . their losses are different for everything . . . Let 
me phrase it this way. The risk of loss through hail is different 
than the risk of loss through all the other things that can attack 
and damage a crop. If you have a drought, it’s generally within 
an area or it’s more widespread. It’ll affect a whole region of 

the province as we saw this year. If you have a frost, quite often 
it’ll affect a larger area. Insects, generally, they just don’t affect 
a portion of a field; they’ll affect a whole section or at least a 
whole field and that sort of thing. 
 
So that’s why you need to have different risk management tools 
at your disposal. And that’s why farmers enrol in crop insurance 
for the multi-peril risk to look after the things like loss due to 
frost, drought, insect damage and so on, and all those others 
things. 
 
But hail . . . the loss due to hail is . . . it’s . . . the risk is entirely 
different. It’s not uncommon to have a portion of a field — and 
I’ll use a field size of even half a quarter, 80 acres — where the 
north half of that field can be hit by a hailstorm and you can 
lose 60, 70 per cent of that. And right on the south end of that 
field there’s no damage. That’s the nature of hail. It’ll hail on 
one side and you’ll have damage to a crop on one side of the 
road; on the other side, the crop is untouched. And anyone 
who’s farmed for more than one or two years, and farms in an 
area where hail is a problem will . . . can tell you that. It’s no 
big secret, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So that’s why it’s so important to many farmers in this province 
that the . . . they have a program where they can insure a crop 
against the multi-perils of drought, frost, and those sorts of 
things. But also they have to carry, carry spot loss hail 
insurance because there are many farmers who the greatest risk 
to their crop is due to the loss of hail. 
 
I myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first time I signed up for crop 
insurance was when they included — way back in the 80’s, I 
believe it was — when they included the spot loss hail. That’s 
when I first brought . . . bought crop insurance. 
 
I had . . . I was in conversation with a number of farmers on the 
weekend and they told me the same thing. They said, the first 
time they bought crop insurance was when the spot loss hail 
was . . . (inaudible) . . . You know when they’re going to get rid 
of it? They’re going to get rid of it this year if they can afford to 
do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now for those members opposite who neither understand nor 
had any experience with insuring crops for loss, I’d like to go 
through an example to illustrate why it’s so important, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that that spot loss hail option be put back into 
this year’s crop insurance program. 
 
What I have before me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an actual 
example of a crop insurance contract in district 11. As my 
colleague, the member from Kindersley indicated earlier today, 
these numbers apply to a farm in the Raymore-Cupar area 
because they’re in that risk area. 
 
This is . . . these are numbers from an actual crop insurance 
contract. They’re not pulled out of the air. And I will go 
through it in some detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that the . . . 
hopefully the members opposite . . . and particularly the 
Minister of Agriculture who stood in his place today and 
hollered over at us and said, we just don’t get it, we just don’t 
get it. 
 
Well we get it. We get it and so are all of the farmers of this 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

province going to get it. And you know where they’re going to 
get it? If this doesn’t change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re 
going to get it in some . . . in an area that I can’t even mention 
in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But now, I’m hoping . . . I don’t see the Minister of Agriculture 
in the House this afternoon. I’m hoping that he’s at least 
listening in his office and if he isn’t, I would be more than 
happy to sit down and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — . . . point out the absence or presence 
of other members in the House. So I’d ask the member to come 
to order. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Okay. If those 
members who care to have a interest and understand how these 
changes are going to affect the farmers of this province this 
year, I will explain it to them. Because we do get it, and 
hopefully they will get it after I’ve explained it to them. And as 
I said these are numbers that are from a 2001 crop insurance 
contract. So they’re not fictitious. These are real numbers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This particular contract, there was 1,475 acres of crop insured 
under this program. They were made up . . . and I will go 
through each crop with the appropriate number so that 
hopefully people can understand — those people opposite can 
understand. 
 
And the reason I chose this contract is because it reflects what’s 
actually happening out in rural Saskatchewan. I could have 
taken a contract, I could have looked around and talked to my 
constituents and found a contract that would greatly exaggerate 
the situation. But I felt that we should present a fair and 
unbiased example so that hopefully these people will 
understand. 
 
So, as I said, these are real numbers. Under this contract, this 
producer had 285 acres of spring wheat insured, and these are 
all insured at the 70 per cent option so that this producer could 
then have the spot loss hail, which he paid a premium for; so on 
those 285 acres, the producer had $23,710 worth of insurance. 
 
Now I should mention that that is crop insurance and it’s also 
the number that is used for the spot loss hail. So now that 
producer paid premium, the crop insurance portion of the . . . 
And when I say crop insurance I’m referring to all those . . . that 
premium that covers all those types of losses, like drought and 
frost and so on. And the hail, spot loss hail premium is another 
separate premium. And I will give you those numbers. 
 
The crop insurance premium was $474 on those 285 acres. And 
these are the producer’s . . . what the producer paid, by the way. 
These are the dollars that the producer actually paid. The spot 
loss hail premium was $232 for a total premium on those 285 
acres of spring wheat — crop insurance plus hail insurance — 
total premium was $706. 
 
The next crop that’s listed on that contract is barley. This 
producer had 230 acres of barley insured at a value . . . and its 
crop insurance value was $16,435. He paid a crop insurance 

premium of $394 and a hail insurance premium of $169 for a 
total of $563 on those 230 acres of barley. 
 
Oats, 265 acres insured for a coverage of $14,030; premiums — 
crop insurance 395, the hail portion 144, for a total of $539. Oh, 
canola, 120 acres, value of insurance 10,260; the premium on 
the crop insurance portion 282, hail portion 199, for a total of 
481. Desi chickpeas, 235 acres, value of the crop insurance 
coverage $25,100; premium $1,440 for the crop insurance 
portion, $516 for the hail insurance, for a total premium on 
those 235 acres of desi chickpeas of $1,956. I’m getting to the 
end, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It won’t be too much longer on this 
example. 
 
Lentils, 245 acres, value of insurance $32,680; crop insurance 
premium is $1,052. The spot loss hail premium was 672 for a 
total premium on those 245 acres of lentils of $1,724. Kabuli 
chickpeas, 95 acres — crop insurance coverage 19,655; the 
premium for the crop insurance portion, $1,230, the hail . . . 
spot loss hail premium, $404 for a total premium of $1,634. 
 
So now the totals. Under this contract this producer had, as I 
mentioned earlier, 1,475 acres insured, made up of the various 
crops as I’ve mentioned for . . . and the total value of that . . . of 
the coverage of crop insurance on that contract was $141,870, 
of which the premium breaks down this way: the total crop 
insurance portion of the premium was 5,267, the spot loss hail 
premium on that total contract was 2,336, for a total premium 
payable . . . and if you don’t . . . didn’t remember any other 
number that I’ve told you . . . said up until now, remember, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this number of the total premium that this 
producer paid, was $7,603. That’s what this producer paid for 
that . . . to . . . for that crop insurance contract in 2001. Then 
what the producer did is, once he heard the Minister of 
Agriculture’s announcement of changes to this . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I thank my colleagues for providing me a moment 
to introduce some special guests who have travelled quite some 
distance to join us this afternoon. 
 
I’d like to introduce in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, two 
members of the Greek Parliament and the spouse and the local 
chaperone for today. But we are joined in the Speaker’s gallery, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, by Savas Tsitouridis, and his wife, Maria. 
Mr. Tsitouridis is a member of the New Democracy Party and a 
member of the Standing Committee on Economic Affairs in 
Greece, a member of the Greek Parliament. 
 
He’s also joined by Mr. Pithagoras Vardikos, a member of the 
ruling PASOK (Panhellenic Socialist Party) Party and a 
member of the Standing Committee on Cultural and 
Educational Affairs, a member of parliament in the Greek 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

 

Parliament. And they are joined by a local face that’ll be 
familiar to many, Mr. Thomas Siarkos, who is owner of the 
Memories restaurant. 
 
We are very pleased to have them join us. They’re here on the 
occasion of visiting the Greek community here, in 
Saskatchewan, to celebrate the 181st anniversary of the 
independence of Greece. We will all recognize in this House 
not only the strong and proud traditions in our world related to 
Olympic events, but also the long and proud traditions of 
democracy that are part of the heritage that the world’s inherited 
from Greece. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to join in 
bidding a special welcome to these guests here, today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — . . . to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party official opposition, I am pleased to 
extend a warm kalo sariste sto Saskatchewan to the Greek 
Parliamentarians; Savas Tsitouridis and his wife, Maria, to 
Pithagoras Vardikos and to our good friend Thomas Siarkos 
from Memories Fine Dining here in Regina. 
 
Over the years, Mr. Siarkos, Mr. Salinas, their fine chefs and 
staff have provided members of our caucus with some 
delectable and most delicious meals. And I trust that Mr. 
Siarkos will relay to the Greek parliamentarians visiting 
Saskatchewan my personal gratitude for the wonderful 
hospitality that I received from members of the Greek 
communities while in Parlion Astros and Agios Petros in 
Greece during my visit there four years ago. 
 
Greece is a most magnificent country, compelling in its history, 
its beauty and the strength of its citizens. We in Saskatchewan 
feel blessed to have members of the Greek community in our 
midst as part of our multicultural mosaic. Congratulations on 
the celebration of your 181st anniversary of the independence 
of Greece. We hope that you will enjoy your visit here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now we will return to 
the crop insurance lesson. And the last thing I said, Mr. 
Speaker, was that this producer paid in the fall of 2001 a crop 

insurance premium, all premiums in total of $7,603. So now 
what the producer did just a few days ago, sat down and applied 
the new rules as best he could based on the limited information 
that’s available and . . . to the 2001 contract to see what kind of 
costs this producer would have in 2002. 
 
So the only change that this producer did in the calculation is to 
. . . as the Minister of Agriculture has said, the spot loss hail 
option is no longer available in crop insurance. So what does 
the producer do that has . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s zap, 
it’s gone. Exactly. 
 
So the producer has no . . . has to go out and purchase spot loss 
hail from private insurance company. Well, in fact, this 
producer did top up some . . . on some crops, top up some of his 
spot loss hail because, on some of the crops like the desi 
chickpeas and the kabuli chickpeas and even the lentils, this 
producer felt that he needed some additional insurance. So he 
actually went out and purchased additional insurance. So he 
knew . . . he knows exactly what it cost from last year and he 
applied those costs to replacing the loss of spot loss hail. 
 
So now let’s have a look at how this has affected him. On the 
spring wheat, instead of paying 200 . . . and what he has done, 
he’s merely replaced those . . . that insurance that he lost. He’s 
not topping up anything. So at the end of the calculation he will 
have exactly the same dollars worth of insurance as he had in 
2001, but the calculation is done under the new rules. 
 
So on the spring wheat, instead of paying $232 for spot loss 
hail, he now has to pay $1,280 in premium. On the barley, this 
230 acres of barley to replace the spot loss hail, instead of 
paying $169 he has to pay $888. On the oats, instead of paying 
$144, Mr. Speaker, he has to pay $758 in hail premiums. 
 
On the canola instead of paying $199 for spot loss hail under 
Crop Insurance, by having to go and buy from private 
companies, he would pay, instead of $199, he would pay $942 
for exactly the same coverage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It even gets worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On the Desi chickpeas 
he paid a hail premium of $516. To replace that spot loss hail 
by buying it through private companies he would pay a 
premium of $2,304, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the lentils the producer paid $672 for spot loss hail through 
Crop Insurance. By having to . . . by being forced to buy it 
through private insurance he pays a premium of 2,470. 
 
On the Kabuli chickpeas he paid a hail premium through Crop 
Insurance of $404. By buying it privately, $1,804, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now instead of paying a hail . . . a spot loss hail premium of 
2,336, he will now this year have to pay $10,446. If you look at 
the net costs by subtracting out last year’s premium, he’s 
looking at an increased cost of $8,110 or about $5.50 an acre 
additional cost for no additional coverage. 
 
That’s a cost, Mr. Speaker, that farmers cannot afford to pay. If 
we’re looking at a drought, Mr. Speaker . . . Now if this farmer, 
the owner of this contract, if he decided that he’s not going to 
diversify his farm and go back to the traditional crops, he could 
lower his costs of hail insurance. But he would certainly lower 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

his income because it’s the specialty crops that have the higher 
prices, provide the greater portion of income; and it’s the 
specialty crops where there’s a surcharge on the hail insurance 
premium. It ranges from one and a half to one and 
three-quarters, and in past years it was twice the basic rate. 
 
So in this calculation the producer, his base premium cost for 
the cereal grains — wheat, barley, and oats — the premium rate 
was 5.4 per cent for those crops. But when you look at crops 
like chickpeas and lentils and canola, there’s a surcharge. For 
the chickpeas and the canola the surcharge in this case was 1.7 
times the basic rate. So the producer was, instead of paying 5.4 
per cent premium rate, he was paying well over 9 per cent — so 
therefore the high cost, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So when you do the calculation, and you compare apples with 
apples, this producer, if he seeds exactly the same crops in 
2002, and seeds them on the same land, he would incur an 
increase in crop loss premiums of over 200 per cent — 206 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. And this is a . . . As I said earlier, this is a 
cost that farmers cannot afford to pay. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we constantly hear from the Minister of 
Agriculture, and the Premier, and the members opposite, it’s the 
federal government’s fault — it’s the federal government. That 
was the whole gist of the Minister of Agriculture’s answers to 
our questions today. It’s the federal government’s fault. I don’t 
know how he didn’t manage to work in that it was also the 
Devine government’s fault. He missed that one, but . . . so what 
he did . . . he blamed it on the federal government. 
 
Well what are the effects of these changes to crop insurance, 
Mr. Speaker? I mentioned earlier that this contract holder paid 
$2,336 in crop insurance premiums. Well the total premium for 
that contract was 5,000 . . . the spot loss hail portion of that 
contract . . . the total premium was $5,840, of which the 
producer paid 2,336, the Government of Saskatchewan paid 
1,752, and the province of Saskatchewan paid 1,752, and the 
Government of Saskatchewan paid the same . . . of Canada — 
sorry, Mr. Speaker. The Government of Canada paid $1,752 to 
pay this crop . . . this spot loss hail premium. 
 
So what is the effect of removing this spot loss hail option? 
This government is allowing the federal government to 
withdraw its dollars out of Saskatchewan. They keep talking 
about the federal government has to put more money into 
agriculture, and they’re giving them a vehicle to withdraw their 
dollars. 
 
We saw . . . the farmers of this province have seen this before. 
We saw it when they tore up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) contract. That allowed the federal government to take 
millions of dollars out of this province, and I’m afraid that 
situation is the same, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It appears that this government is intent on balancing their 
budget. The Romanow government balanced its budget on the 
backs of farmers when it tore up the GRIP contract. The Calvert 
government is doing the same by gutting crop insurance. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d remind the member that any 

reference to other members should be by their title, or by their 
constituency, and not by their name. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. History is repeating 
itself. 
 
Now the other thing is, so what have we got now? We’ve got 
the spot loss hail option removed from crop insurance. So now 
that the federal government is saving some money, the 
provincial government is saving an equal amount, and the 
producer is paying a whole lot more. 
 
But the story doesn’t end there, Mr. Speaker, because now the 
farmers will be forced — and they will — they will go and buy 
the hail insurance because in many areas of this province hail is 
the greatest risk of crop loss and farmers will insure for that. So 
they will go and buy from the private companies. So the 
provincial government is a winner again because, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a 3 per cent premium tax on hail insurance premiums 
paid. 
 
So therefore this government’s not only saves money by having 
to put less money in crop insurance but they’re going to collect 
more money on premium tax, Mr. Speaker. And all that money 
is being paid . . . is coming out of the pockets of our farmers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now that I’ve explained it, hopefully some of the members 
opposite will understand it. I know all the members on this side, 
I didn’t have to explain it, because they understood it. In fact 
many of them will be living this and be paying these higher 
bills, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what did the Minister of Agriculture and his NDP 
government offer as a replacement, Mr. Speaker, to these 
changes? Well they offered a couple of brand new options 
under crop insurance. They offered the forage rainfall program 
and they offered the annual crop program. And we heard it 
referred to earlier today as the rainfall roulette program. And 
that’s exactly what it is — rainfall roulette, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As my colleague from Kindersley explained during question 
period, the farmers have the option of insuring their forage or 
their annual crops and picking a weather station. And basically 
you can pick any weather station. There’s, I believe, there’s 
about 40 weather stations across the province. So I can imagine 
the farmers who may want to look at this, who have a bit of a 
gambling nature to them — and farmers are gamblers, that’s a 
nature of the business — they may take this map, blow it up, 
put in on a wall, and throw a dart, Mr. Speaker. And wherever 
that dart lands, that’s the weather station they’ll pick because 
there’s no logic, there’s no scientific way of doing this, you 
may as well just throw the dart. 
 
So I can imagine that perhaps, I don’t know, I haven’t been 
talking to any of the people they have in place to market this 
new program, I think they’re probably all in training and getting 
their outfits; they’re getting their carny outfits and they’re 
getting their maps with the balloons. And they’re getting to 
learn the carny lingo — put your money . . . step right up ladies 
and gentlemen. Put your money down. Throw a dart and see if 
you’re going to be a big winner this year. I’m sure that’s what’s 
happening out there. Wouldn’t surprise me, Mr. Speaker. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

 

Basically it’s a joke. The options, the new options are a joke, 
and the farmers are saying that — it’s a joke. 
 
What are some of the farm leaders saying? And I’d like to read 
this quote from the March 13 Leader-Post. Terry Hildebrandt, 
president of Agriculture Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan, termed the program a major disappointment. 
That’s what some of the . . . the other farm leaders are 
expressing the same, same sort of disappointment with this new 
program. 
 
I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that even their own supporters, 
their own dyed-in-the-wool, long-time NDP supporters aren’t 
supporting these changes. I recently talked to some of those 
dyed-in-the-wool NDP supporters who have always voted NDP, 
will continue to vote NDP, and will never change the way they 
vote. And you know what they told me? The Minister of 
Agriculture made a huge mistake — a huge mistake. It’s a joke, 
the new options. 
 
And I’m afraid these people will see the results of these changes 
that they made next time we’re called to the polls, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So why . . . so then that leads me to the question, Mr. Speaker: 
why would the government do this? Why would they gut one of 
the main planks of support to the farmers of this province? Why 
would they do that? 
 
Well I think the question is pretty evident. If we look at the 
results of the last election and if you talk, I’m sure if you talk to 
the people who were on the bus and get their true analysis of 
what they heard out there, they know that they’re not going to 
get any support in rural Saskatchewan so they’ve just simply 
written them off. They’ve written them off. They don’t care 
about Saskatchewan. The people in rural Saskatchewan, the 
farmers, they didn’t vote for us, so we’re going to do it to them 
every time we can. 
 
And that’s exactly what they’ve done. They’re balancing their 
budgets on the backs of our farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this is causing . . . As I’ve indicated, I’ve demonstrated the 
additional costs that farmers are forcing. But there’s another 
dimension to this whole change, and it’s putting the farmers 
between a rock . . . some of our farmers between a rock and a 
hard place, Mr. Speaker. Because I’ve already demonstrated 
that many farmers are . . . they have to buy the crop . . . or hail 
and spot loss hail insurance because that’s the greatest risk. 
Many farmers tell me that they get hail damage to their crops 
one in three years, Mr. Speaker. And so therefore they’re going 
to insure for that risk. 
 
But also, for those farmers who want to take advantage of the 
spring cash advance program, they have to buy crop insurance. 
You cannot qualify for the spring cash advance program unless 
you hold a crop insurance contract. So for those farmers . . . 
these would be the farmers who could least afford it, they’re 
faced . . . they’re looking at their limited dollars and they’re 
saying okay, what do I do with my limited dollars? Do I put 
them into spot loss hail or do I put into crop insurance? 
 
Well now, if they find themselves that they need that additional 
operating money that this government hailed a couple of years 

ago as a huge gift to Saskatchewan farmers . . . it’s a loan 
program, that’s all it is. So if they want to take advantage of that 
program they have to buy the crop insurance. 
 
As I’ve said, some of them will be looking at costs of 200 per 
cent and possibly more in their operating costs. And those are 
the very farmers that can’t afford to incur those kinds of cost, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now wouldn’t $25 million that was lost in SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) . . . I 
would think that would pay for a lot of spot loss hail premiums. 
But what do these people do? They give their smart boys — the 
people with the shiny suits and the shiny shoes — and say here, 
take some Monopoly money and go out and play Monopoly. 
See if you can buy Park Place or Boardwalk or whatever. And if 
you lose 5 or $6 million or $28 million, it’s no big deal. Well it 
is a big deal. It’s a real big deal. It’s a big deal to the people of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion . . . I know that the members are 
riveted opposite and I’d like to continue on but I know there’s 
members of our caucus that would like to have their 
opportunity. 
 
The question is, how did we derive at this place in time and in 
this financial crunch that we find ourselves in? Well how did 
we go from last year having a surplus of $840 million to this 
year, the Provincial Auditor and the bond rating companies and 
I think even the Minister of Finance, will finally admit that 
we’re looking at a half a billion dollar deficit. 
 
And how did we get there in a short period of time? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll tell you how we got there. This government has 
never has had a plan; they have no vision; they govern from 
day-to-day, putting out fires. It’s crisis management, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s no wonder that we find ourselves in this dire 
financial situation. 
 
They have no idea how to grow the economy. They’re 
committed, they’re tied, to the idea that we can do everything 
through government, through Crown corporations, and it’s not 
working. 
 
It seems to me that someone said the definition of insanity is 
doing the same thing over and over again and expecting 
different results. And I think that’s what these people are doing. 
They’re expecting different results and it’s not going to happen, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll tell you who has the plan, Mr. Speaker — we on this 
side of the House; the Saskatchewan Party has a plan. We have 
a plan to grow this province by 100,000 people in the next 10 
years, to create jobs, to create . . . to have more taxpayers so 
that we have money to fund the things that we need to do, 
whether it be crop insurance, whether it be post-secondary 
education, whether it be health care, whether it be . . . provide 
the social workers that we need. 
 
What do these people do? Last year they hire 571 people . . . 
more government workers; this year they’re going to fire them. 
That’s the result of no planning, Mr. Speaker. 
 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 
amendment . . . the motion, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to have this opportunity to address the House with a reply to the 
Throne Speech. 
 
I’d like to begin, Mr. Speaker, again by recognizing your 
one-year anniversary just past, and congratulate you. It’s not an 
easy task. But I want to commend you for your firmness but 
fairness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to also welcome the new member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld here into the Assembly. It’s got to be a proud and an 
honourable day for any member that has the privilege of being 
allowed to serve in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I want to also . . . I want to let the member 
from member from Battleford-Cut Knife know that our prayers 
were in fact with him when he went through some trial. And 
I’m so very pleased to see that he’s back here with us in this 
Legislative Assembly. Welcome back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, for the past few years I have 
risen in this House during the reply to the Throne Speech to 
discuss challenges — challenges to our province, to our 
constituencies, challenges in our personal lives. And this year, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no different. 
 
Last year at this time I had just resigned as Speaker and taken 
on the challenge of becoming a Liberal minister in a coalition 
government. It was a challenge I felt I needed to take on for my 
constituents and for the people of Saskatchewan. I said last year 
that it was a challenge of how to best serve the people who put 
their trust in you and represent their interests. 
 
This past year is no different . . . was no different to me, Mr. 
Speaker. I made a choice to remain in the coalition government 
a mere five months ago for my electors and for those I had 
made a commitment to in my ministry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I rise today with a feeling of great anticipation 
and some trepidation. These are my first remarks as an 
independent member. I am happy to be at this point, but I did 
not arrive here easily. It has been a long journey and indeed 
took a great amount of soul-searching. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The decision has been one of the most difficult in my life. The 
choices are made on a diverseness of factors. As elected 
officials, we pursue this office with our own visions and 
interests but we must also recognize, Mr. Speaker, our number 
one goal is to represent the views of our constituents — the 
people who bestowed their trust in us and this specific honour. 
 
And it’s also those people that I had the privilege of introducing 

earlier in the House — our families, my wife and my daughter, 
and those people around us that support us in whatever 
decisions that we decide to make. As a matter of fact, I can 
almost hear my little grandchildren now saying, go poppa, go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I accepted, I accepted the 
challenge as Speaker and minister because I was convinced that 
stability is important to good government. I am even more 
convinced of that now. We are all here for the greater good than 
ourselves. 
 
And we’re not here for ourselves; this is not a game of personal 
political agendas. We are responsible for creating good public 
policy for this province and its people. Some of these folks 
forget the reasons that they were sent here was to represent the 
people that gave them the honour and the privilege to serve 
here; to work together, Mr. Speaker, to work together. It’s so 
easy to sit and criticize, easiest thing in the world. But when 
there needs to be a plan put in place and some action, boy, that 
makes it a little tough. 
 
Not everyone appreciates the decision I made, Mr. Speaker, and 
I understand their judgment. It has been difficult for them to 
accept my decision — as difficult as it was for me to make it. 
But it was important for me to make that choice, choice that 
honoured that decision I made last year and accepted the 
responsibilities of my commitment. Although I now sit as an 
independent member in the legislature, I will continue to use 
Liberal values and philosophies as I represent my constituents 
in proposed legislation that is important to all the people of this 
great province. 
 
I have made my decisions for good reasons, and I want to deal 
with some of them here today and how they relate to my 
constituents, to this coalition government, and its Speech from 
the Throne. I also want to discuss the innovations in my 
constituency, and inform the members of this House of some of 
the initiatives that they have undertaken and some of the 
undertakings in the ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, challenge and commitment is what I believe the 
Throne Speech is all about. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak about 
my most important role in this legislator . . . in this legislature 
and that is representing the residents and the constituency of 
Melville. 
 
My commitment to them has never wavered nor has the 
principle changed for me since I was elected in 1995. I tour and 
I visit my constituency when my ministerial commitments 
allow and I return daily phone calls and e-mails that come to 
my office. Those are important to me. 
 
Having said that, I would like to welcome any of the 
constituents who might be watching these proceedings in their 
own home, either on channel 13 or through the Internet with 
video streaming at the Legislative Assembly Web site. It has 
been an exciting year for the constituency and there is more to 
come in this coming year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why, you might ask? Because challenge and commitment — 
the residents of Melville constituency are up to any challenges. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

 

And this year they have committed themselves to large-scale 
projects and community events like never before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My constituency, Mr. Speaker, is made up of many small towns 
and villages and the city of Melville. Some are under 100 
people and some only number a few hundred, but they don’t 
view themselves as individual communities; they view 
themselves as a community at large. They look for innovations 
that can help themselves and their neighbours. They don’t see 
living in rural Saskatchewan as a disadvantage, like the 
opposition does. They view it as, rather, as an opportunity . . . 
an opportunity waiting to grow with a level of commitment 
from all of its citizens. 
 
Two major projects have involved the whole constituency from 
Grayson to Neudorf, Killaly to Goodeve to Ituna to Balcarres, 
and to Melville and all the communities in between. 
 
One started over a decade ago, Mr. Speaker, and will come to 
fruition in June of this year. That is the new St. Peter’s Hospital. 
The city of Melville and the surrounding communities have 
fundraised, and they’ve worked and they’ve fundraised and 
they’ve worked for over a decade. With commitment like that, 
they deserve to be rewarded with a new hospital that will serve 
generations to come for the community at large, Mr. Speaker, 
not any single or individual community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The second major project started 
approximately 18 months ago. And then again, it engaged 
volunteers from all communities in the constituency and also 
First Nations neighbours to the south, Treaty Four. The ethanol 
steering committee is formed from some of the finest members 
of our community — and I won’t name them because there are 
too many — and they have engaged interest from investors 
interested in our area for development. 
 
I was pleased to hear the member from Regina South make an 
announcement on behalf of the coalition government on an 
ethanol strategy recently. I was even more pleased to hear the 
mayor of Melville making comments the same day on the 
strategy and the constituency’s commitment to developing a 
plant in their area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also other investment opportunities in 
rural Saskatchewan. My constituents are willing to meet the 
challenge with commitment because they know the 
infrastructure is there for making rural Saskatchewan a viable 
place to do business. 
 
Last year, over $2 million was invested to upgrade the 
highways and roads in the constituency. Over $6 million has 
been invested in the past four years. A CommunityNet 
announcement was made two weeks ago. 
 
We have some of the best schools in the province. Davison 
School was just inducted into the League of Peaceful Schools. 
 
Melville and Hubbard received Saskatchewan infrastructure 
program grants. Community initiatives funding went to Oasis 
Youth Centre, kidsville playground, and Qu’Appelle Valley 
Recreation Association — great recreational infrastructure that 

has again attracted the Canada Cup baseball tournament to 
Melville. 
 
Transit for the disabled funding for Balcarres and Ituna and six 
new housing units for Balcarres. 
 
Just before I move on, Mr. Speaker, I want to again mention the 
expansion of businesses in the city of Melville, as I did in a 
member’s statement here recently. The city of Melville has seen 
significant growth in the commercial sector over the past 
several months in the downtown area and on the outskirts of 
Melville. 
 
Dale and Joanne Holowaty, I want to congratulate them on the 
opening of a new A&W franchise on Highway No. 10 — home 
of good food and an employer, most importantly, to 20 full- and 
part-time staff. 
 
Downtown, Garth Kowalchuk, owner of Kowalchuk Meats, has 
expanded his retail operation. Anchor Water Conditioning, 
owned by a friend, Frank Melanson, has opened a new 
downtown store. Donna Gadica has increased her business 
presence by opening a second store, the Cornerstone Market. 
 
I want to move on to the innovations in my ministry with these 
comments, Mr. Speaker. The constituency of Melville’s 10,000 
residents are a prototype of communities working together for 
success for other rural areas in this province to emulate, Mr. 
Speaker. I think — no, I don’t think, I believe — our 
prestigious editor of the Melville Advance, Lin Orosz, has it 
right when in a previous column he said, and I’ll quote, 
“Economic development isn’t a science, it’s an attitude.” 
 
It is challenge and commitment, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
been just over a year since I became minister in the coalition 
government and indeed it has been an interesting time. This past 
year has challenged me. It has been more complicated, 
technical, and multi-faceted than I ever anticipated. For every 
decision, there has been a range of policy changes and decisions 
to decipher. 
 
But I am always reminded, Mr. Speaker, that despite tough 
times and challenges that we might face within our ministries 
and across this coalition government, it is an honour to serve in 
this coalition government — a coalition of ideas to govern this 
great province of ours. One could be worse off if it were part of 
an opposition bankrupt of ideas like the one across the floor. 
 
In relation to my own ministry, Mr. Speaker, I want to discuss 
some of the challenges and innovations that have occurred in 
Municipal Affairs and Housing. I would also like to talk of 
those who have worked tirelessly to make this province a better 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want at the outset to commend those people who 
have been a great resource to me, the public servants in all the 
three ministries I serve. I know that from our deputy ministers, 
our assistant deputy ministers, and their staffs, they have all 
worked very hard this past year to support the agenda of the 
people of this province. Having been a civil servant for 11 
years, I have great respect for these people and I thank them for 
their efforts and look forward to continuing working with them. 
 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

I want to thank all my staff as well, to the staff at the 
constituency offices throughout the province, to Candace in 
Melville. I want to thank Kim and Jeff and Bonnie in my office, 
and Gloria, and all those people that make our days much 
easier. I’m also very appreciative of the relationship I have 
developed with the stakeholder groups such as the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mission of our department is strengthening 
communities by building capacity. My goal and focus this year 
has been on building better dialogue and building relationships 
with municipal officials. As elected officials and administrators, 
they play an essential role in determining our communities’ 
futures. It is most important to create a strong local government 
system that will represent our communities today and for the 
years to come. I truly value the opportunities I have had to tour 
this province last year and meet and engage each of those 
people in an exchange of ideas. 
 
It pleases me to see that SARM representative for zone 6, Mr. 
Bob Schultz, tell the Lloydminster Booster after a recent 
meeting that, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We have a very good situation with Mr. Osika, where he 
can sit down with us and we can talk face to face over 
problems that we have amongst our association and his 
department. 

 
That is pleasing and very meaningful. And that’s the meaning 
of co-operation and working relationships. I want to do even 
more of that this year, Mr. Speaker, and I want to develop even 
a stronger relationship. 
 
In terms of revenue sharing I appreciate — I truly do — that 
municipalities and communities are faced with having to make 
some tough choices about services and how they will meet their 
residents’ needs. I respect very much their deliberations and 
their considerations of those challenges that those elected 
people have accepted and will meet head on its challenge and 
commitment. 
 
I have brought the concerns of local government officials to the 
government members’ attention and we all recognize the need 
for more revenue sharing. However, that will have to be taken 
in context of the province’s fiscal position, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Finance minister will make it clear in a couple of days just 
exactly what that situation will be for all of us. 
 
I also want to update the members of the House on the status of 
the legislative amendments to The Rural Municipality Act and 
the introduction of the cities Act. The proposed amendment for 
The Rural Municipality Act this year continue on the 
commitment to increase municipal autonomy and authority by 
reducing the involvement of the province in matters that are 
completely municipal in nature. 
 
The cities Act, which was received in mid-February and which I 
commend the cities for, is a proactive approach that they have 
taken in advancing our relationship with this significant 
initiative. The cities’ proposal includes a number of significant 
policy changes. And once the staff for Municipal Affairs and 
Justice have reviewed it, it can be submitted through the 

legislative review process. If these tasks and approvals can be 
completed in time, I would be in favour of introducing a draft 
Bill into the legislature this session. I have made that 
commitment. 
 
The Saskatchewan property assessment system is very 
important to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And this 
province is committed to building a better system for property 
owners by making necessary changes that address the current 
concerns and issues. We all want an assessment system that is 
relevant and responsive to the realities of agricultural property 
owners and property owners in our communities. While we may 
need to examine new approaches in the future, I also appreciate 
that increased funding to SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) is important to help them achieve their 
goals. And I reinforce this with my colleagues. 
 
The two initiatives that we’ve taken up with the Assessment 
Management Agency have been on the agricultural side. An 
amendment has been made to provide grain storage facilities 
under producer control the same exemption as on-farm grain 
storage facilities and grain condominiums. In my constituency, 
this affects terminal T22. 
 
Our ministry has also made inroads in terms of legislation 
necessary for the income approach. Premier Calvert has 
announced that this legislation will be introduced this session. 
The income approach is seen to provide better representation of 
the values of commercial revenue-generating property since it 
in fact reflects the way in which the private sector values 
properties for sale. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Another important program for the ministry and people of 
Saskatchewan has been the . . . on the infrastructure side, Mr. 
Speaker. In 2001-2002 more than 527 project applications were 
received under that program; however only 82 were able to be 
approved. However, having said that, over $54 million in 
projects were in fact undertaken by the three levels of 
government involved in that particular program. Of that, almost 
$30 million were for water and waste water projects. 
 
For 2002-2003 more than 400 project applications were 
received and 156 recommended for approval; once again, with 
considerable investment in this great province of ours. 
 
As the minister also responsible for Sask Water I’d like to talk a 
bit about the importance of quality of water in Saskatchewan. 
Over the past two years all Canadian . . . all governments — 
Canadian, the federal government, the provincial, municipal — 
have been reminded about the importance and the value of our 
water. It is also showed that we need solutions that are 
sustainable and affordable over the long term to address that 
kind of an issue. Costs to consumers must reflect not only 
current infrastructure and operating costs, but also the eventual 
cost of infrastructure upgrade or replacement. 
 
These are once again challenges that we face, Mr. Speaker. We 
are not interested in creating a one-size-fit-all solution to 
drinking water quality issues. Instead, made-in-Saskatchewan 
solutions need to be tailor-made for the individual community 
— whether it’s rural or urban. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

 

Previously, Mr. Speaker, 43 communities in all have worked 
with Sask Water — and in some case with their neighbours — 
to find solutions that meet their needs. And they’ve come up 
with some significant solutions to address their local issues. 
 
More than 50 communities currently are working with Sask 
Water to create custom-made, appropriate, and affordable 
solutions. And several more communities, Mr. Speaker, are 
exploring the possibility of working with the available people at 
the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
I am confident, Mr. Speaker, the communities can find 
appropriate solutions to their particular circumstances — and 
we will be there to assist them. 
 
I also want to say that on this water issue that I enjoy meeting 
with the city of North Battleford this month — the second such 
meeting this year, the first being with my officials as I was 
unable to attend. I appreciated their March 14 letter thanking 
myself, and our ministry, and I want to quote: 
 

. . . a very positive meeting and providing them with 
options. 

 
I am a little disappointed with the member from North 
Battleford who has not fulfilled his commitment to them 
because I’m not sure that he was even aware what was 
happening when this situation became created about a . . . over 
a year ago. But over promising and underperforming is a typical 
of that member. 
 
A further area, Mr. Speaker, where we make strides is in 
Sask911. In January the service was expanded to another 168 
municipalities and in total 477 municipalities, representing 
approximately 80 per cent of the land . . . land line telephones 
now have the enhanced 911 service — important to respond to 
emergencies that people may be faced with. 
 
Completion of this province-wide service, Mr. Speaker, is 
expended to end . . . by the end of this year or the beginning of 
2003. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to leave you with one last initiative through 
our ministry, which is the new municipal tool kit available on 
the municipal Web site. Although the member from Kindersley, 
and his colleagues across the floor, would like to bar technology 
from this province, we are moving ahead, Mr. Speaker, with 
innovative tools for local governments to assist them in their 
autonomy and their authority in developing their communities. 
 
Technology is a part of our everyday life and our department 
wants to explore how that technology can be used to help 
municipalities build capacity and meet all their goals. 
 
The tool kit offers information on partnerships and service 
agreements, on community advisory service, and much, much 
more. Other areas in the tool kit help with self-assessment and 
strategic planning processes to address key communication 
issues. 
 
The ministry of Municipal Affairs is working towards 
developing more effective tools, legislation, and resources that 
will help our municipalities manage local matters. 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, while the Saskatchewan Party would 
like this province not to expand and meet challenges head on 
with innovative solutions, they would encourage us to pack up 
and move west. The coalition government, my colleagues and I, 
will face the challenges that face this great province directly, 
and we will do the work that is needed to expand this province. 
 
That is what this is all about. That’s what the province is all 
about. That’s what the people in this province are all about — 
challenge and commitment. I am proud to take on the challenge 
of creating a better province, Mr. Speaker. I, Mr. Speaker, 
certainly cannot support the amendment, but I certainly will 
support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
And I hear the member from North Battleford. I feel really sorry 
for him, Mr. Speaker. But again, perhaps his day might come. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure for 
me to join in this debate over the Speech from the Throne and, 
of course, it’s a pleasure to be back on the floor of the 
legislature representing the people of Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I have never thought that I . . . that the 
day would come when I would look across the floor and 
actually be glad to see them — members opposite — sitting 
there. Yes it’s true, I wish there were a few less of them and 
that they were sitting over here but nevertheless after some of 
the experiences I’ve been through in the last year, believe it or 
not, I am happy to see those members, along with my 
colleagues, my friends, the Saskatchewan Party caucus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — To all members who may know or may not 
know I was diagnosed with acute leukemia on June 22, 2001. 
Since my diagnosis, I learned that this was one of the most 
serious forms of a very serious illness. And let me assure all 
members, it’s an experience you would rather avoid if you can. 
It’s been said by many others that through the battle with cancer 
you don’t always think you can feel any sicker and then the 
treatments actually begin. I began treatments for the illness and 
after two blasts of chemotherapy, I was discharged from the 
hospital on October 6. 
 
And I have to say that I was probably the only one that didn’t 
give up on myself. Well maybe Shirley didn’t either, but that’s 
all. But I knew that my God and I would get through this and so 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — But I don’t want to dwell on myself, but I do 
want to take this opportunity, my first chance to speak to this 
Assembly since my treatment, and say a few words of thanks. 
 
I want to thank everyone who worked in the hospital. These 
people are nearly run off their feet and yet they can treat 
patients very well. To the doctors and nurses who saw to my 
needs, thank you very much. 
 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

To all my colleagues on both sides of the legislature, I want to 
thank you all for the kind words and prayers many of you 
offered. It really did lift . . . help lift Shirley and my spirits 
during the most difficult days of treatments. Thank you to my 
entire family, who continued to cheer me on as I recover . . . my 
recovery continues. And I have to tell you that I did some blood 
work this morning in Spiritwood and my hemoglobin went from 
91 to 105. So that’s . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — I would like to especially thank my constituent 
assistants in Unity and Battleford who saw their workloads 
increase significantly after I got sick. Their dedication showed 
itself through and they were to be, and they were to be and 
continue to be the real help as I continue to slowly regain my 
strength and energy. And of course, to my constituents, who 
have been so patient, so kind since my illness began. I thank 
them for their understanding and thank them for their good 
wishes. 
 
Now I am convinced more than ever that you will not find a 
better bunch of people in the world than the Battleford-Cut 
Knife people. It’s my honour to represent them in this great 
place, and I pledge to the people of the constituency that I will 
be far more visible this year than it was possible for me last 
year. After the conclusion of this session of the Legislature in 
the summer, I want to get to as many events and functions in 
the Battleford-Cut Knife as I can. I would ask my constituents 
to keep me informed of the many events that they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fighting cancer is not pleasant, and when you’re in 
the middle of treatment, sometimes you don’t know where you 
will find the strength to carry on. But no matter what, you have 
to endure — it is worth it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now more than ever, I believe in this greatest 
province in Canada with the greatest people. To go through 
something like I have gone through — and continue to go 
through — it makes you appreciate every day you have in a 
great province like Saskatchewan. This is the greatest province 
with the greatest people. I’ve always known that, but of course 
now I know even better. 
 
I’m here to bring, I’m here to bring change that makes our 
province even better and stronger. I’m here to bring change to 
our economy that will stem the tide of out-migration and spur 
job creation. Unlike what some of the members opposite would 
have us believe, it’s not Saskatchewan’s place to trail every 
other province economically. Mr. Speaker, this province has so 
many natural advantages, we should be leading the way 
economically. 
 
We have natural resources, we have people, and we have talent. 
However, what we don’t have is a vision and leadership of 
people elected to guide us in this province. They continue to 
make potential investors and employers feel unwelcome in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And for the sake of the children and grandchildren everyone in 
this Assembly wants to see us have an opportunity to grow up 
and lead their lives in this province, I ask the members opposite, 
once and for all, to recognize the harm they are doing. 

And if they can’t do that, call an election and let the people 
decide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members opposite confuse the criticism 
for NDP as criticism for the province. This is totally wrong. We 
criticize the mistakes of the government for one reason and one 
reason alone. The greatest province in Canada deserves better 
leadership, stronger leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every government has to . . . has an expiry date, a 
date in which they stop looking out for the best interest of the 
province and begin to look after their own self-interests. This is 
what’s happened to the NDP. Good intentions have given away 
to political survival. 
 
The greatest people in the greatest province deserve better, Mr. 
Speaker, and I am totally convinced that they will get better 
when those members call the next election. 
 
The greatest people in the greatest province deserve leadership 
driven by vision and hope, not by bare political survival. 
 
I see nothing in this Throne Speech to indicate that the members 
opposite have any intention of changing direction despite zero 
job creation, a falling population, and nearly $500 million of 
deficit. 
 
I see nothing in this Throne Speech to indicate that they are 
prepared to take up once again the Saskatchewan tradition in 
. . . tradition role in leadership in agriculture. 
 
I see nothing from them in terms of innovative solutions to 
problems for growing waiting lists in our health care system. 
 
For 10 years they have played the blame game. Every problem 
in the world was the result of someone else. Now they’ve taken 
to defending themselves by attacking premiers in other 
provinces. 
 
Isn’t it ironic, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite now 
regularly defend their actions by regularly attacking a Liberal 
government in BC (British Columbia) when they themselves 
are clinging to power through the so-called co-operation of 
Liberals right here in Saskatchewan. I wonder what the member 
from Melville or from Saskatoon Northwest have to say when 
the NDP regularly attack their fellow Liberals. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, many issues will come up throughout this session. 
In my constituency agriculture remains a priority, highways 
continue to be a major concern, health care and access to it 
remains top in the list of many people. And of course, getting 
this economy moving again is on the top of people’s minds. 
Everything else is tied to the health of the economy. 
 
Whether the government has adequate funding for health care 
or education or highways is tied directly to the health of the 
economy. A growing tax base means more revenue for 
governments to pay for important services and programs. A 
shrinking tax base means less money available. It’s simple. We 
have to get this economy going if we are to preserve our health 
care system, our schools, and our infrastructure. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

 

I see nothing in this Throne Speech that would indicate to me 
that the members opposite have any idea of how to do this. 
Therefore, I cannot vote in favour of the Throne Speech. Mr. 
Speaker, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m very 
pleased to respond to the Throne Speech of our government. I 
want to begin my remarks by saying, once again, in this 
Assembly that I’ve also been very honoured to have represented 
the people of Saskatoon Eastview over the last, almost four 
years. 
 
Saskatoon Eastview is a very special constituency. It has a great 
mix of seniors, young families, schools, and businesses. My 
colleagues will have to bear with me when I repeat again the 
fact that Eastview has the most seniors per capita of any 
constituency in Canada. It has the very busy Market Mall that I 
am sure many people are familiar with. It has several high 
schools and quite a few elementary schools. It has seniors 
condos, small offices and businesses, seniors complexes, and 
several special facilities such as the Calder Centre, which is an 
alcohol and drug treatment centre, and Cheshire Homes, which 
is a home for the young disabled that fosters independence. 
 
I often have the occasion to meet and visit with many of these 
special people who have helped pioneer our province. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to thank my family for their 
continuing support. My husband tolerates my long absences 
from home and the demands of political life, which he has done 
for many years as I was based in Regina in my previous work, 
and my children are used to leaving messages on my phone. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m connected to e-mail so can be reached 
from anywhere in the world that my children travel. 
 
I want to offer a special thank you to my constituency assistant, 
April Anderson, in Saskatoon, who supports me in everything I 
do. 
 
I want to also thank my staff here in Regina, who also are very 
supportive: Sharon Lyons, Michelle Oussoren, Dolores St. 
Julien, and Gail McNab. 
 
In the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, the government gave a 
broad outline of what we were going to do in the future. That’s 
what throne speeches are for — a broad outline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget will give more concrete details of that 
plan and the budget will be followed by legislation introduced 
in this Assembly in this session. So it goes — Throne Speech, 
budget, legislative change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to highlight several things in the Throne 
Speech. I will talk about some of the good things that are going 
on in the economy and the environment, infrastructure, about 
the importance of education, and about some issues around 
health care, which I can’t resist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s plan is a reasonable plan to deal 
with changing times. Who would have thought that in March 
2002 we would be in this Assembly . . . in this Assembly we 

would have seen what we saw on September 11? How could we 
have known any of this six months ago? We couldn’t, of course. 
No one ever imagined in their wildest dreams what we saw that 
day. 
 
Anyone who pretends that the events of September 11 didn’t 
have an effect on Saskatchewan is ignoring the facts and 
perhaps displaying an insular view of the world. The 
Conference Board of Canada, Mr. Speaker, mentions the 
terrorist attack a number of times as a huge factor in the 
situation we find ourselves in. But we’re bouncing back. 
 
In the United States growth is expected to be well beyond 
predictions. The members across the way are stuck in old 
predictions and doom and gloom. In Canada we’re expecting 4 
per cent growth as opposed to 2 per cent. The National Post 
says that manufacturing shipments are up. People are buying. 
We know this because inventories are down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses are good at keeping track of patients, of 
their heart rates, of their vital statistics, but GDP (gross 
domestic product) and manufacturing shipments are not on a 
monitor screen. 
 
In this job I do read the business pages and more; I note what 
the business pages are saying. Century 21 says the hottest 
housing market in Canadian history is about to have the heat 
turned up even higher by spring sales that are predicted to add 
another 4 per cent to the already new record high national 
average house price. This is good news for Canada. However, 
it’s how we recover in Saskatchewan from external events that 
is most important and that is where our government excels. 
 
We’re taking a measured response rather than going around the 
province spreading doom and gloom, holding meetings closed 
to the public and attended by a handful of people. As it said in 
the Throne Speech, we will maintain our commitment to meet 
Saskatchewan’s immediate priorities and to expand our 
economy. 
 
And to do that, Mr. Speaker, we won’t make unsustainable tax 
reductions, we won’t return to massive deficits, we won’t sell 
Crown assets that provide services at competitive rates. We will 
ask for the co-operation of the public of Saskatchewan. We will 
remain focused and we will remain dynamic. We will 
restructure government to do this. We will enhance public 
services, improve performance, and apply new technologies and 
achieve savings. 
 
In contrast to the bus tour of the members opposite where the 
bus figuratively hit the ditch, our listening tour was a big 
success. It highlighted to us that Saskatchewan people are 
developing their communities, people are opening new 
businesses, people are building, and people have optimism for 
the future. 
 
We saw scientists who relocated to Saskatchewan and have 
contracts with NASA (National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration). We saw home businesses. We saw feedlots. 
Whether it was small businesses, such as bed and breakfasts or 
larger cattle feeding ventures, people have an eye on the future. 
 
Many sectors of the economy in Saskatchewan are moving 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

forward. The plan for our government is to ensure that more 
sectors move. This land of Saskatchewan is where opportunity 
lies. 
 
The economy right now is booming Mr. Speaker, especially in 
my husband’s area of small business — the housing industry. In 
Saskatoon, construction is phenomenal. Everywhere you look, 
there are buildings going up. 
 
In The StarPhoenix, Garth Turner, who is no special friend of 
our government, when referring to the housing market, even 
with increased mortgage rates, says in last Tuesday’s edition of 
The StarPhoenix that, quote: “. . . the economy is getting 
stronger at warp speed.” He doesn’t expect higher interests to 
slow growth too much. 
 
I’ve been told that in Regina last year over 50 R-2000 homes 
were sold. So people are also buying with an eye to the 
conservation of energy. 
 
If people aren’t optimistic, then how is it that they are confident 
enough to continue to buy homes? If builders aren’t optimistic, 
then how is it that they continue to buy lots and build homes for 
sale? 
 
Mr. Speaker, are the opposition’s members smarter than these 
business people who look around them and make decisions 
based on their experience in the market? Being negative suits 
their political purpose, which is trying to make people believe 
that they have the only answers, which are usually only for tax 
cuts. 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, homebuyers have to be 
confident they can afford to buy a house. And bankers — well 
known to be the most conservative types — have to be 
confident that homebuyers can make their mortgage payments. 
Lenders don’t like to be homeowners, having to sell a house 
rather than making considerable profits on a mortgage that gets 
repaid over a number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is something amiss in Saskatchewan today. 
The members across the way and their small group of 
supporters are denying everything good that is happening in our 
province. According to StatsCanada, we have averaged 2,400 
housing starts per year over the last several years. That’s kept 
some construction companies busy year-round for several years. 
 
New housing starts have been worth $146 million to this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, people are showing optimism and buying 
houses. People are buying bigger houses, and people who have 
never bought houses before are buying houses. That shows 
people are optimistic. Small business have indicated they’ll be 
hiring — that is also optimism. Everywhere people are 
diversifying and being innovative as we saw demonstrated on 
our bus tour. We know Saskatchewan is a land of opportunity 
as well as innovation. 
 
Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, consumers are buying. I saw 
a headline last week that said, “Consumers have caught analysts 
off guard” from the National Post. And this morning I was 
reading in the Financial Post that zero per cent financing has 

had a real effect on maintaining the economy. The quote is: 
 

. . . (Give the) consumer what is like a drug to them — 
(which is) free debt — and they just . . . (go) out and . . . 
(do) their Energizer bunny thing. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the economy has remained strong and we are 
benefiting from that in Saskatchewan. 
 
I looked at the Regina Chamber of Commerce report called 
ChamberLink which arrived in my office recently. Here’s what 
the survey results printed in that magazine indicate: 64 per cent 
anticipate business revenues to increase 10 per cent or more — 
10 per cent or more, Mr. Speaker. Two-thirds of the members 
are very optimistic, unlike the members opposite. 
 
John Hopkins, the president of the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce, says that economic development must be the 
number one priority of all levels of government. And it is one of 
our top priorities, and it is why we have an investment 
attraction council in government — to explore opportunities for 
improving Saskatchewan’s economy and diversification 
opportunities. 
 
To help build the economy, we have a vision for making 
Saskatchewan a land of opportunity. But we are doing it by 
harnessing the ideas and innovative spirit of the people of 
Saskatchewan — not by making ideological and perhaps rash 
choices. We have met with Saskatchewan businesses and 
residents over the last year and have listened to their concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Winston Churchill said, quote, “Ponder, then act.” 
We have listened to Saskatchewan residents and now we are 
acting. 
 
So where will change happen? Well the Action Committee on 
the Rural Economy, or the ACRE committee, has made 
recommendations for diversifying the rural economy. We will 
respond to those recommendations. 
 
My colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, has proposed a new 
farm safety net to the . . . program to the federal government. 
Will he get it by going to Ottawa and just demanding something 
of the federal government? No, he’ll get it because he 
understands how government works and how to work 
co-operatively, because he’s an experienced politician. He 
understands the federal direction and how to work between 
levels of government, and he is meeting with the federal 
minister this week and will once again impress the message on 
him that Saskatchewan farmers need the federal government’s 
assistance in the international markets and to help fight the 
effects of the drought. 
 
We need the support of colleagues on both sides to reinforce the 
minister’s message to the federal government. The member 
from Kindersley needs to be onside. As my colleague from 
Yorkton said several days ago, it makes it very difficult to get 
money from the federal government when that member who is a 
farmer says farmers don’t need money. I thought the member 
from Kindersley understood the farm situation. 
 
What is he saying? They haven’t heard his plan. Saskatchewan 
residents must hold the opposition accountable for their ideas 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

 

which so far we haven’t heard, other than better weather. 
 
I was pleased to visit Pound-Maker industries in Lanigan on our 
very successful bus tour last summer. My mother grew up on a 
farm, Mr. Speaker. Like many of my colleagues, I am one 
generation off the farm. My grandparents farmed north of North 
Battleford and I greatly enjoyed and have fond memories of my 
stays there as a child. They had a mixed farm with grain, cattle, 
pigs, and chicken. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Cannington’s 
constituency has a feedlot planned for Carnduff. Apparently, so 
far 184 interested people have bought shares and they plan to 
have 10,000 cattle to start. Someday they plan to have 20,000 
cattle, Mr. Speaker. Land of opportunity and optimism. 
 
I’m told that why Alberta has a more valuable agriculture 
economy than we do is that they got into livestock on a greater 
scale than we have, as has Manitoba. We are into grain. Others 
around the world have been interfering in the grain markets by 
subsidizing their producers and now we need to move to more 
livestock to use some of our natural advantages, one of which is 
having so much land. 
 
It seems Saskatchewan people are ready to move in that 
direction in a big way. People in Saskatchewan are getting back 
into livestock because of the decrease in grain prices on the 
world market and for the chance to use feed grown in 
Saskatchewan. It seems to make sense to me, Mr. Speaker, the 
idea of using your resources in the most strategic way. But 
more importantly, Mr. Speaker, this new direction will provide 
jobs for people in the area. 
 
The article says the norm in the industry is one job per 1,000 
head of cattle; so 10 jobs right away, with the chance of moving 
to 20 jobs. It also says that there are spinoff jobs that will occur 
because of this expansion, such as trucking cattle, hauling feed, 
and veterinary services. 
 
This is a strategy we need: private sector investment in rural 
Saskatchewan, and community members working together to 
keep our younger people in Saskatchewan and to ensure the 
survival of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I also see in the March 14, 2002, Waterfront Press that 
more expansion into livestock of a different sort is occurring in 
my colleague from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley’s constituency, 
where Warren and Cheryl Dodds have moved into sheep, goats, 
eggs, chicken, and cattle. They’re interested in going into 
grass-raised meat because they feel that there’s a market for this 
type of organic beef. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people are interested in organic food here at 
home and around the world. The Dodds have moved to pasture 
land because they feel it is more sustainable than cropland. 
They have free-range chickens already and want to expand their 
operation more as they see the market grow. Sustainable 
agriculture is an important direction for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The economy is diversifying. In Carnduff we see more jobs 
from expansion into cattle, and in Lumsden farmers are 

switching their production to a specialty market that continues 
to develop as does the organic market. 
 
Truly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are optimistic and 
innovative. And I was interested in hearing from my colleague, 
the member from Moosomin, who on Monday talked about 
selling the by-products of hog operations back to housewives or 
to greenhouses as fertilizer. I do wonder what housewives in 
particular would use it for. In any case, there are obviously 
endless opportunities for diversification in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week, my colleague . . . the colleagues, the . . . 
of Energy and Mines, the Minister of Agriculture, announced 
our greenprint for ethanol strategy as part of a larger energy 
development and conservation strategy. It has been well 
received, even by the opposition. 
 
Ethanol can be produced even by using some of the by-products 
of the feedlot I talked about previously, and from established 
places such as Pound-Maker, who already produce ethanol. As 
my colleague, the Deputy Premier, has said, this is one of our 
responses to the ACRE Committee and one of the ways we are 
going to continue to diversify the economy. 
 
And this greenprint for ethanol will help in reducing the amount 
of carbon monoxide our cars emit by as much as 20 per cent, 
and will cut down smog creating components by 15 per cent. 
We are addressing climate change issues. We will continue to 
work with communities to ensure the drinking water supply is 
safe for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Because we are in a technological age, we have the need to . . . 
we have need for the necessary legislation to ensure that people 
who do business on the Internet are protected. We will do that 
with the introduction of new legislation this session. 
 
We are soon going to be benefiting from the synchrotron in 
Saskatoon at the University of Saskatchewan. The synchrotron 
will enable very advanced research to take place in Saskatoon. 
People are already getting into position to take advantage of 
this. I see from today’s StarPhoenix that the synchrotron 
institute is almost ready to open. The institute will provide 
training for researchers at other synchrotrons, such as in 
Berkeley and at Stanford, on how to use a synchrotron. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture research and medical research will be 
the primary recipients of increased research. But Saskatoon is 
not the only beneficiary of more research activity. We are also 
conducting research in Regina at the Petroleum Technology 
Research Centre. The Saskatchewan Research Council 
continues to provide leadership in this area. Doing this kind of 
research will help to recruit and retain important professionals 
in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our policies are pragmatic and not ideological. 
Tax cuts are not the answer to every question. The new wealth 
in circulation from tax cuts can only go so far. I’d like to quote 
Tommy Douglas here: 
 

Expecting tax cuts to transform the economy (Tommy 
Douglas would say) is like saying you are feeding the 
sparrows by giving the horses oats. 

 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

Unrestrained cutting of taxes leads to the massive deficits we 
see in Ontario and British Columbia. Even mighty Alberta has a 
surplus this year because of tax increases. I repeat: most of their 
surplus is based on tax increases. 
 
In fact, here’s an interesting clipping from Wednesday’s March 
20 Leader-Post titled “Taxman jams hand into most pockets,” 
talking about Alberta and the new taxes. Albertans will pay 
more for liquor, cigarettes, health care, education, and other 
services, but corporations and small businesses will enjoy an 
$81 million tax cut. Health care premiums will increase by 30 
per cent. The government will be lifting a freeze on school 
property tax and increasing car insurance by 20 per cent and 
increasing court filing costs and traffic fines. And on it goes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know from history and economics that 
high-income earners always benefit from more tax cuts. 
Trickle-down has been disproven time and time again. 
 
For me and I know for many of my colleagues, it has been very 
important to take low-income earners off the tax rolls. If 
low-income earners have more disposable income, they spend it 
on the basics required to live. They are more independent and 
rely less on government services, and that is important to them, 
to the economy, and to society. 
 
We are spending more on important infrastructure to help 
businesses and people in all of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, 
we have our eye firmly on the ball when it comes to economic 
development and infrastructure. 
 
Before I leave that important area of discussion, I want to talk 
for a minute about the Crowns. Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
says they want to reduce the Crowns to core. What does that 
mean? It could mean a huge loss of jobs in rural Saskatchewan, 
not just in urban Saskatchewan. And my colleague from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow has already touched on some of these statistics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to do it again. SaskPower has almost 
twice as many employees in rural Saskatchewan as they have in 
Regina. What would moving to core services mean to these 
employees in those communities? 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower provides services to the 
people of Saskatchewan and the cost of those services are 
among the lowest in Canada. SaskPower contributes more than 
$675 million to the provincial economy. It provides services to 
432,000 customers and the profits from SaskPower — who, I 
need to re-emphasize, provide service to residents of the 
province at a competitive rate — they come back to 
Saskatchewan in the form of dividends to the province and 
profits from investment. 
 
Here’s a question for all of us to ponder. When would rural 
electrification have taken place if not for SaskPower? Would 
my grandparents have gotten electricity on the farm? Without 
SaskPower would private companies come to Saskatchewan to 
provide the infrastructure for that expensive service? What 
would customers have been charged had they done so? I’ll leave 
people to draw their own conclusions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk about SaskTel. SaskTel has over 3,600 employees 
with 14 . . . 1,423 in rural areas. It has been listed twice as one 

of the top 100 companies to work for. SaskTel has been 
investing 100 million per year in network improvement and 
maintenance. It provides high-speed Internet service to 61 per 
cent of the province, or 191 communities. It is providing 
new-millennium, cutting edge technology to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My colleague, the minister responsible for Culture, Youth and 
Recreation who is also responsible for the Information 
Highway, emphasized in her closing remarks how people in this 
province are part of the community and give of themselves. 
Here’s an example: SaskTel employees have given $1.9 million 
to organizations across the province. They have donated over 
70,000 hours to charities across the province. What would be 
the loss of that . . . What would the loss of that Crown mean to 
many organizations across the province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to briefly highlight one of the partnerships 
SaskTel is involved in and it reflects some of the many ways 
our government shows our commitment to women. If you open 
any DirectWest telephone book in Saskatchewan, you will find 
a Hot Peach abuse help lines page. Inspired by a very 
committed woman by the name of Virginia Fisher, this page 
provides information on abuse and the supports that are offered 
in the community. 
 
I’m very pleased that SaskTel has partnered with the Provincial 
Association of Transition Houses to provide this valuable 
information across our province. And, Mr. Speaker, other 
provinces have recognized the value of this idea and are 
introducing their own abuse help line pages in their telephone 
books — another example of Saskatchewan leading the way. 
 
SaskTel provides some of the least expensive services in 
Canada to our residents across the province. In Alberta, TELUS 
charges rural customers $3.50 a month more than its urban 
customers. Do the members across the way know about that, 
Mr. Speaker? Or do they already know that private companies 
would charge rural folks more? In Saskatchewan, rural and 
urban rates are the same. 
 
SaskTel will soon provide cellular service to more than 90 per 
cent of the population after an investment of over $54 million in 
the next three years. What would a cut to only core services at 
SaskTel mean? Which services would be discontinued? Would 
rates change to reflect real costs, instead of always smoothing 
out charges to customers as SaskTel does? At TELUS, the 
higher cost to service the rural areas is reflected in the charges 
to rural customers. 
 
Let’s talk about SaskEnergy. SaskEnergy has 984 employees, 
with two-thirds of the employees located across the rural areas 
of the province. SaskEnergy provides services to more than 
321,000 customers. SaskEnergy procures most of its supplies in 
Saskatchewan and since 1992 has invested $616 million in 
projects such as extending service to rural and remote areas, and 
in updating infrastructure. 
 
Services to rural areas are costly to provide. Would a private 
company extend services that are costly to rural areas where 
there are few customers? If they did, what would they charge? 
 
The last Crown I’ll talk about today is SGI (Saskatchewan 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

 

Government Insurance). SGI has 1,500 employees, with 500 in 
communities around the province. Last year SGI purchased 
goods for almost 800 vendors in the province . . . from almost 
800 vendors in the province spending almost $250 million in 
the province for commissions and fees, repairs, and goods and 
services. That does not include almost $69 million in employee 
salaries. 
 
SGI provides the second-lowest insurance rate in the country. If 
you compare the rates for a 2001 Ford Taurus across the 
country, insurance rates in Alberta are more than double ours. 
 
SGI is well known for its community work. It supports the 
charity curling classic, the Safety Squad, the charity road race to 
benefit Chili for Children, and programs for youth at risk. In 
2001 the corporation gave over half a million dollars to projects 
and groups in Saskatchewan. 
 
Who among us wants to pay double for our auto insurance like 
they do in Alberta and Ontario, the provinces that my members 
across the way seek to emulate almost in all cases? The 
Saskatchewan Crowns help us to keep the cost of insuring 
automobiles down; offer insurance and other services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. The Crowns were formed to help the 
people of Saskatchewan to provide people with services that no 
private company would undertake without massive government 
investment. 
 
But the members opposite do hate the success of our Crowns. 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns I’ve talked about do provide services 
and infrastructure around the province that private enterprise 
would never provide. And now the opposition wants to get rid 
of them and sell that infrastructure to the lowest bidders. 
 
Let’s talk about Alberta again for a minute. Now several of my 
colleagues have mentioned the Alberta budget and its effect on 
the average Albertan. I’m sure the opposition is not happy that 
their recent role models in BC and Alberta have shown us what 
they’re all about — especially Alberta, where it always seems 
that nothing could go wrong. That province, always used as a 
shining example of perfection, is going to raise health 
premiums. 
 
In Saskatchewan in 2001 a family earning $50,000 paid $794 in 
sales tax, but now in Alberta they’ll pay more than that in health 
premiums. Let me talk briefly about health premiums in the 
system in Alberta . . . (inaudible) . . . Do you want me to repeat 
that? 
 
In Saskatchewan a family earning $50,000 pays $794 in sales 
tax. In Alberta they’ll pay more than that in health premiums. 
I’ll get to the actual cost of health premiums in a minute. 
 
Let me briefly talk about health premiums in the system in 
Alberta. The premiums are a payroll tax that, in most cases, 
must be administered by businesses. It can be difficult and 
expensive to administer. For example, working couples in 
Alberta have to decide which one of them will pay for the 
premium and have it deducted from their pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am told that last year the Alberta government 
had to write off millions of dollars of uncollectable accounts. I 
was told over $30 million — people who couldn’t or didn’t pay 

their premiums. And I’m also told, Mr. Speaker, that it cost 
more to administer the premium program, which cost about 15 
million to administer, than it cost to administer . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Fifteen million to administer the program. 
And it cost $10 million to administer the payroll of health 
practitioners in the province. It cost more than that. 
 
With our tax cuts, our low housing costs, our reasonable 
electricity and auto insurance, and no health premiums, 
Saskatchewan cities remain cheaper than Vancouver, than 
Calgary, than Winnipeg, than Toronto, than Montreal, than 
Charlottetown, than Halifax. All of these advantages don’t seem 
to be of interest to the members opposite; they never talk about 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already mentioned health premiums in 
Alberta. They will be increasing by $44 a month for a single 
person or $528 a year. For a family, it will now cost $88 a 
month for a total of 1,056. Compare that to our 
700-and-some-dollar sales tax. The increase is 30 per cent. And 
despite a 1996 promise to the contrary, 90,000 seniors will have 
to pay the increased payments. 
 
Approximately 153,000 seniors will be eligible for subsidies. 
British Columbia is the only other province to charge premiums 
and it has increased problems as . . . premiums as well; 
problems too . . . (inaudible) . . . I do? Now? 
 
An average BC family will now be paying $1,296 per year in 
health premium and that . . . and housing costs . . . houses that 
cost a quarter of a million dollars, Mr. Speaker. The Edmonton 
Journal reported that inflation in the price of energy last year in 
that city was 133 per cent. That’s pretty scary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a former unionized worker, I worry about the members 
opposite and their attitude towards people who are working that 
are unionized. And I want to remind all members that the 
benefits that union members have fought hard for have 
benefited other workers generally in society. Things like labour 
standards, which the members opposite may not like; things like 
occupational health and safety standards, which may be viewed 
as impediments or unnecessary regulations according to them 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, it is now past the hour of 5 o’clock. 
This House stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


