















































Hansard: March 14, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2421 
 March 14, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker: — Well good morning everybody. It’s my 
pleasure to welcome all the members back to the Chamber for 
the first time this year. I look forward to presiding over the 
upcoming session as the members conduct the business of the 
legislature on behalf of the constituents they represent and I 
hope this session finds all members in good health with good 
wisdom and good humour. Welcome back. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer a certificate of the election and return of David 
Forbes, as member for the constituency of Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
I hereby table the return to the writ. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to 
present to you, Mr. David Forbes, member for the constituency 
of Saskatoon Idylwyld, who has taken the oath, and signed the 
roll, and now claims his right to take a seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Forbes, as you take your rightful place in 
this Legislative Assembly, I’m sure that your time here will be 
one that serves as a record of honour to yourself and to your 
constituents. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Hon. members, I am advised that Her Honour 
is here for prorogation. 
 

PROROGATION 
 

At 10:04 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. 
 
Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislature: 
 
It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the 
Second Session of The Twenty-Fourth Legislature. 
 
In thus relieving you, I would like to thank you for the work 
you have done. 
 
This Session’s work is a positive step towards connecting to the 
future and in partnering with the people of Saskatchewan in 
creating a prosperity that provides opportunities for all. 
 
You recognized the importance of health care to the people of 
Saskatchewan by establishing a Standing Committee on Health 
Care. 

You instructed this Committee to receive and report on the 
representations from interested parties and individuals with 
respect to the Final Report of the Commission on Medicare, 
dated April 11, 2001. 
 
Further, you passed a motion which invited Mr. Ken Fyke, 
Commissioner of the Commission on Medicare, to appear 
before the Committee of the Whole, allowing the Members of 
this Assembly to question Mr. Fyke with respect to the final 
report of the Commission on Medicare. 
 
You maintained your commitment to provide quality health 
care to the people of Saskatchewan by passing several Bills, 
which will strengthen our health system. 
 
The Registered Nurses Amendment Act recognizes the role 
of advanced practice nurses and ensures that they have the legal 
authority to perform advanced services. 
 
These changes will benefit the province by ensuring that nurses 
with the appropriate skills can provide primary health care 
services as part of an interdisciplinary team. 
 
You also passed The Dietitians Act and The Hearing Aid 
Sales and Services Act. 
 
These Bills allow the public to have confidence in the services 
provided by these valuable health care providers, and are in 
keeping with your strong commitment to quality, accessible, 
and responsible health services for our seniors and for all the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You passed several Bills to assist in your work to help families 
and children, to support young people, and to keep our 
communities safe. 
 
You passed The Tobacco Control Act, which reflects your 
determination to reduce youth smoking while at the same time 
offering a practical, workable plan for our province. 
 
You also passed The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 
which allows for the impoundment and forfeiture of motor 
vehicles used in the commission of prostitution-related 
offences. 
 
These amendments came from the hard work of this 
Assembly’s Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade, and will 
reduce some of the major problems that result from this activity 
and will contribute to safer neighbourhoods for everyone, and a 
safer environment for children in Saskatchewan. 
 
In keeping with your commitment to build and maintain safe 
communities, you passed The Police Amendment Act, which 
ensures continued professionalism in the delivery of policing 
services in our province. 
 
You continued to support families by passing The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act. 
 
This Bill increases parental leaves and provides job protection 
for parents. 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2002 

 

It provides benefits to parents, to children, and to families. 
 
As part of a broader truck route management strategy, you 
passed The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 
which allows for a system of truck route management and seeks 
partnerships with rural municipalities to re-route heavy trucks 
off of thin-membraned highways onto gravel roads that can 
better accommodate that type of traffic. 
 
To continue the process of tax reform in our province, you 
passed The Income Tax Amendment Act, which implements 
the income tax initiatives that were announced in the Budget. 
 
Some of the initiatives contained in this Bill are increases to the 
amounts used to determine the education and disability-related 
personal tax credits, provisions to index the personal income tax 
system to inflation, a reduction in the corporate income tax rate 
on small businesses, and an increase in the amount of income to 
which the small business tax rate can be applied. 
 
To support your dedication to providing a responsible and 
effective administration, you passed The Provincial Auditor 
Amendment Act. 
 
This Bill maintains the government’s accountability to the 
Legislative Assembly and improves the Provincial Auditor’s 
independence. 
 
You passed The Partnership Amendment Act and The 
Professional Corporations Act to continue your commitment 
to improving the competitiveness of Saskatchewan small 
business and improving the vitality of rural Saskatchewan and 
smaller centres. 
 
The Partnership Amendment Act provides for limited 
liability partnerships, a benefit that exists for professional 
partners in Alberta and Ontario. 
 
The Professional Corporations Act will allow professionals 
who choose to incorporate to run their businesses in a way that 
is similar to other small businesses and professionals in other 
provinces. 
 
To recognize the contributions Métis people have made to the 
development and prosperity of Canada and Saskatchewan, you 
passed The Métis Act. 
 
This Bill also recognizes the existing bilateral process to 
address issues that are important to the Métis people including 
non-rights based initiatives related to capacity building, land, 
harvesting and governance, and establishes the Métis Nation - 
Saskatchewan Secretariat Inc., as a body corporate, and outlines 
its powers and objectives. 
 
To support your commitment to responsible protection of the 
environment, you passed The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act. 
 
This legislation provides the framework for a comprehensive 
program that will ensure Saskatchewan’s oil and gas wells, 
facilities and related sites are properly abandoned and reclaimed 
once they are no longer needed. 
 

To allow the Government to add to the rich history of emblems 
and honours that help to define the essence of our great and 
wonderful province, you passed The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Amendment Act. 
 
This Bill also allows the province to honour distinguished 
non-residents of Saskatchewan through honorary membership 
in the Order of Merit. 
 
In this regard, in late April, you welcomed the visit of His 
Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales, to the Province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I was honoured to award Prince Charles the first honorary 
membership of our Provincial Order. 
 
Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for the 
diligent manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 
activities of the Session, and wish you the full blessings of 
Providence. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 
Legislative Assembly: it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 14th day of March, 2002 at 2:30 
p.m. This Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 
Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:14. 
 


