















































Hansard: April 23, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 903 
 April 23, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens throughout the 
province who are concerned about the deductible and the 
increase in the deductible for prescription drugs in 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Humboldt and St. Gregor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
stand again today to present a petition from people who are 
concerned about the long-term care services in this province. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people who signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the increases 
to the costs of prescription drugs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Saint-Front, Melfort, Wynyard, and Star City. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Lintlaw, Wadena, and Okla. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the good community of Wadena. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the province’s 
tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Moose Jaw and Regina. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 
who are deeply concerned about the huge fee increases in the 
long-term care services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Humboldt and St. Gregor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens regarding the long-term 
care situation in our province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase on 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many, many people from 
the Yorkton area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
people concerned with this government’s intention to jack up 
long-term care fees. And the prayer of the petition reads as 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 

And the petitioners today, Mr. Speaker, are from Kelvington 
and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here also: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine 
of not more than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioner will pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Craik and Findlater, 
Whitewood, Watrous, Disley, Bethune, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
also have a petition from people who are concerned about the 
outrageous increases that are being proposed by the 
government for long-term care homes. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by many of the 
good people from Kelvington. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from residents concerned about long-term 
care home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Lintlaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

about citizens concerned about the horrible state of Highway 
No. 15, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its Highway budget to address the concerns of 
the serious conditions of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And again, the signatures demonstrate how well used this 
highway is because they are from Imperial, Watrous, Young, 
Simpson, Regina, Saskatoon, Calgary, Alberta, and Brandon, 
Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the massive 
increase in long-term care fees that this government has 
planned. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Markinch and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding our natural resources to the people in the North. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution to the Besnard Lake situation, 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Canwood, from Prince Albert, from Albertville, Spruce Home, 
and Shellbrook. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition from 
citizens that are concerned about the long-term care homes and 
the price increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from people from Lintlaw 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

 

and Wadena. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise with a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
outraged at the cost of the long-term care increase. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Lintlaw. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 18 and 31. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 32 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: what is the current cost to 
SaskPower for generation of electricity from each of the 
following methods: hydro, coal, natural gas, wind, and 
cogeneration? 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 32 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Government of Saskatchewan: what is the total land 
area in Saskatchewan south of the northern administrative 
boundary line, and what percentage of that land is owned 
by the Crown; what is the total land area in Saskatchewan, 
north of the northern administrative boundary line, and 
what percentage of that land area is owned by the Crown? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in the west gallery this afternoon we have 56 grade 7 
and 8 students from Buena Vista School located in the heart of 
our constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. They are accompanied 
by two teachers, Mr. Lloyd Howey and Mrs. Lisa Dyck. 
 
I’d also point out to the Assembly that I also have a special 
person in my life that’s joined the grade 7 and 8 students and 
his name is Ryan Atkinson. 
 
This class, Mr. Speaker, is involved in all kinds of activities, 
sporting activities — basketball, soccer, baseball, hockey, 
volleyball — and many other things. These are students that 

have had great Remembrance Day services in their school. 
 
And I would join all my colleagues in welcoming this very fine 
group of young people to the Legislative Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
should like to introduce to you and through you to the members 
a group of students who are seated in your gallery. This is a 
group of about 23 grade 5 students from Wilfrid Walker School 
from Regina Victoria constituency. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Janis Capewell, 
chaperones Ron Taylor, Wilson Klotz, Laurie Dunne, Dawn 
Hastings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here to observe the question period, tour 
the building, and I’m looking forward to an opportunity to have 
a question and answer session with them later. 
 
I would ask all the members to join me in making them feel 
welcome here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women of Today Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, another 
very successful Women of Today Awards luncheon was held in 
Estevan yesterday. 
 
The funds raised through this went to two very worthwhile 
projects, namely the violence intervention program, which is a 
non-profit, community-based organization that provides 
services and support to persons affected by family violence, and 
to the placement of free field FM (frequency modulation) 
hearing systems in Estevan schools. These systems amplify the 
teacher’s voice through the speaker . . . through speakers to 
allow children to hear more clearly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while all of those nominated were winners, the 
award recipients are as follows: the Ida Petterson Memorial 
Award for outstanding entrepreneur went to Melodye Pierson; 
the SaskPower award for outstanding contributions to the 
workplace went to Carol Cundall; and the Shirley Orsted 
Memorial Award for young woman of today went to Jamie 
Suchan. 
 
All those in attendance enjoyed guest speaker Senator Raynell 
Andreychuk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
nominees and award recipients, and also to thank SaskPower 
and Quota International of Estevan for their sponsorship. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

(13:45) 
 

Canada Book Day and International Book Day 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, once a year we urge 
Saskatchewan people to indulge themselves by doing what we 
hope they do year round. That is, Mr. Speaker, to read Canadian 
books by Canadian authors, of which there is a great and 
impressive number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today is Canada Book Day and International Book 
Day, a day for us to recognize and appreciate the distinctively 
universal contribution our writers make to our national culture 
and to our national economy. Thousands of Canadians are 
involved in the bookmaking and bookselling business. Good 
books are good business as well as good intellectual 
nourishment. 
 
And in a gentle kind of special pleading on this day, we suggest 
our readers get involved with Saskatchewan books by 
Saskatchewan authors, of which I am proud to say there is a 
great and impressive number. With 4 per cent of the population 
in Canada, we can claim a disproportionate number of worthy 
scribes. 
 
The member for Cypress has his favourite author; the member 
for Lakeview has his stable of writers. To the names mentioned 
in this Assembly before, let me quickly suggest a visit to the 
works of Trevor Herriot, Sandra Birdsell, Deanna Christensen, 
Tim Lilburn, Byrna Barclay, Lois Simmie, and a host of others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to borrow from today’s Globe and Mail which 
borrowed from the 18th century’s Richard Steele: 
 

“Reading is to the mind what exercise is to the body.” In a 
word, it is essential. 

 
To which I would add, and fun. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Week 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, this is Volunteer Week and I 
recognize and acknowledge all of the work that goes into an 
event that will have the participation of 4,000 volunteers. 
 
On Sunday, April 21 the Regina Multicultural Council, RMC, 
launched this year’s Mosaic with the theme, “Seeds of 
Understanding.” RMC announced that the honorary 
ambassadors for this event are the Minister of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation, and Mayor Pat Fiacco. 
 
The RMC is hosting the 35th annual Mosaic multicultural 
festival on June 6, 7, and 8. The council’s mission through 
Mosaic is to promote co-operation and mutual understanding 
and respect among all cultural and ethnic groups; to promote 
the concept of multiculturalism; and to further develop and 
promote the cultures and folk arts of all cultural and ethnic 
groups. 
 

There are 18 pavilions featuring music, performances, and of 
course ethnic cuisine. 
 
The Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation was in 
attendance and was happy to take part in the launch of Mosaic 
and accept her appointment as the honorary volunteer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mosaic and its 4,000 volunteers demonstrate why 
Saskatchewan is a centre of volunteer activity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Improv Games Winners 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
they’re the best at making it up as they go along. And no, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not talking about the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) or its latest budget. What I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker, 
is seven very talented students from LeBoldus High School in 
Regina who took top honours April 13 at the national finals of 
the Canadian Improv Games in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the wild and frantic — but always fun — 
atmosphere of improvisation, this energetic group beat out 18 
other high school teams who were competing from across the 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these local improv champs could no doubt teach 
us a thing or two when it comes to thinking fast on our feet. In 
fact, one of the team members was quoted as saying, “You rely 
on each other and everyone’s creativity.” And not unlike 
politics, Mr. Speaker, participants were also judged on plot, 
storyline, and how well they interpret a suggestion. 
 
2002 was a special year for all those involved at the Canadian 
Improv Games, as this year marked the games 25th anniversary. 
 
Congratulations go out to the seven members of the LeBoldus 
team and their coach, Dan Macdonald. Just goes to show you, 
Mr. Speaker, what energy, talent, creativity, and enthusiasm can 
accomplish when it’s given the opportunity. As all members on 
this side of the House know, Mr. Speaker, young people are key 
to growing this province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Book Launch Coincides with Canada Book Day 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. How’s this for synchronicity, Mr. 
Speaker? On Canada Book Day, I’m happy to bring to the 
attention of the Assembly an event taking place this evening in 
my constituency. 
 
The member for Regina Victoria has just promoted 
Saskatchewan books. In a few hours we will have one more 
Saskatchewan title to add to our must-read list. 
 
Suzanne North will be launching the third mystery in her series 
which features the exploits of TV cameraperson, Phoebe 
Fairfax. I hasten to point out to our own press that Phoebe 
Fairfax is a journalist who solves problems rather than creating 
them. 
 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

 

The new book is called Bones to Pick, published by McClelland 
& Stewart. Appropriately it’s set in and around the Royal 
Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology in Drumheller. 
 
And I think I have my information correct, Mr. Speaker — this 
is a murder mystery without a murder. Only a Saskatchewan 
writer could pull that off. As well this book is funny, as are 
Suzanne’s previous two: Healthy, Wealthy and Dead and 
Seeing is Deceiving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Suzanne lives just a block or so off Broadway, the 
cultural and creative centre of Saskatoon. She’s a good addition 
to the mix that makes the Broadway area such an enjoyment to 
represent. 
 
I invite all of you who can make it to head to Amigos Cantina at 
7:30 tonight, have some refreshments, and buy a good 
Saskatchewan book on Canada Book Day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposal for North-South Corridor 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The North American 
Free Trade Agreement, the growth of the central North 
American trade corridor, and the vastly expanding wealth of the 
Northwest Territories due to the new diamond mines and the 
Mackenzie Valley pipeline, all mean that Saskatchewan has a 
strategic opportunity. 
 
The shortest distance from the American Midwest to the Alaska 
North Slope and the Mackenzie Delta is through Saskatchewan. 
According to a report published in The Globe and Mail on April 
8: 
 

Northern expansion will add as much as $77 billion to the 
Canadian economy. 

 
Most of this new wealth is projected to go through Alberta. The 
next largest beneficiary is Ontario. Saskatchewan is not 
mentioned. 
 
If we build a highway connecting our Athabasca region with 
Fort Smith, NWT (Northwest Territories), this province would 
become the natural corridor from Chicago to the Beaufort Sea. 
The tourist and mineral potential of the Athabasca region could 
finally be developed. 
 
George McNevin, a Saskatoon and Yukon businessman, has 
been a prime advocate of an Athabasca highway. He is also 
working to establish air service linking Saskatoon with 
Yellowknife and Inuvik. 
 
It is imperative to our economic future that we become the link 
between the North and the American Midwest. I hope and urge 
all members to support this initiative to build a major 
north-south route through Saskatchewan — a route that, a route 
that will open up our Athabasca region and at the same time 
ensure the wealth of a developing North will flow through this 
province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Scholarship Winners 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it is a joy to share with you and 
members in the legislature some of the achievements of a 
couple of young people today. 
 
Two Saskatchewan high school students have received 
scholarships to attend the world-renowned international 
baccalaureate program at Lester B. Pearson United World 
College in British Columbia. 
 
Kelsey Rose from O’Neill High School in my constituency 
received the annual provincial scholarship worth $55,000 this 
year, sponsored by the Pearson College and by Saskatchewan 
Learning. 
 
Ashley Dubnick from Churchill Composite High School in La 
Ronge received the biannual northern district Lester B. Pearson 
College scholarship, also worth $55,000 and sponsored by 
Cameco Corporation, Cogema Resources Inc., Mudjadik 
Thyssen Mining, and Northern Resources Trucking. 
 
Rose and Dubnick will begin their two-year studies at the 
college in September, Mr. Speaker. Last year’s provincial 
scholarship winner, Nigel Francis from Carpenter High School 
in Meadow Lake, will be returning to the college this fall to 
complete his final year. 
 
I’m sure that all members in this House share the pride that 
myself and the member from Cumberland have in these two 
fine scholars. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and congratulations to 
both scholarship recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Long-Term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, under the NDP’s new long-term care hike, 
Saskatchewan seniors will be forced to pay 90 per cent of their 
income for long-term care. 
 
According to the Department of Health officials, the income 
amount used in this calculation is your total income on line 150 
of your income tax return. Mr. Speaker, your total income 
includes income from all sources, including income from 
dividends. 
 
Will the Minister of Health confirm that long-term care rates are 
based on an individual’s total income which includes income 
from dividends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, many seniors have savings invested in dividend funds 
because these funds provide a regular monthly income. But 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

here’s the problem: for income tax purposes, dividend income 
must be grossed up 25 per cent. Your total income and your 
long-term care fees are then based on this grossed up amount. 
 
That means, Mr. Speaker, if you have $10,000 a year of 
dividend income, you actually have to claim this as $12,500. 
Your long-term care fees are then based on 90 per cent of this 
amount. That’s $11,250 or $1,250 more than you actually 
earned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are seniors with dividend income being 
charged more than they actually earn? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite had 
asked the next question, he would have found that when you 
look at income, if there’s a disparity between the income 
amount that he’s identified and the bottom line income by more 
than 1 per cent, then the matter is reviewed to look at that 
person’s individual circumstances to deal with exactly the 
problem that we’ve talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the general income tax guide, 
Mr. Speaker, states on page 17, it says you have to claim 125 
per cent of dividend income. According to Saskatchewan 
Health your long-term care fees are then based on that amount. 
Ninety per cent of one hundred and twenty-five per cent is one 
hundred and twelve and a half per cent. 
 
That means if you have dividend income the NDP is going to 
take one hundred and twelve and a half per cent of this income 
for long-term care fees. Mr. Speaker, once again we are not 
talking about wealthy people. We are talking about seniors who 
have put away a modest amount of savings and are now using 
that savings to provide them with a steady income of a few 
hundred dollars a month. 
 
And how are they being rewarded by the NDP? The NDP is 
actually going to take more than they are earning — one 
hundred and twelve and a half per cent. Mr. Speaker, this is 
crazy. Will the Premier admit he made a mistake and cancel this 
attack on Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that the 
member opposite didn’t listen to my answer and just went right 
into reading his question that basically didn’t deal with this at 
all. This is once again an example — as I pointed out last week 
— of the members opposite not getting proper advice from 
people to help them write and deal with their questions. 
 
This is a basic point of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this system is set up in a 
way to deal with individual circumstances. And when there are 
types of idiosyncrasies in a person’s income or how it’s dealt 

with, those things are responded to because that’s why this 
system is set up in that way. What we are doing here in this 
particular policy is asking for some of the people who have a bit 
more money to contribute. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers — and I emphasize Saskatchewan 
taxpayers — paid $337 million. That’s only from Saskatchewan 
people. We don’t get federal money in this area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The minister has suggested in the last couple 
of days that people should phone him and he provided phone 
numbers. Today he’s trying to tell people that now you must 
appeal your case on an individual basis. And maybe we’ll look 
at that, Mr. Speaker. You know, some people might say, why 
don’t they just take their money out of the dividend fund and 
put it somewhere else? 
 
It’s not that easy, Mr. Speaker. In most cases this would trigger 
a capital gain which would be taxable income. And the NDP 
would still end up taking 90 per cent of it, all in one year. 
 
So these people are trapped, Mr. Speaker. They thought they 
were investing wisely and putting away some money for their 
retirement, but now the NDP is taking one hundred and twelve 
and a half per cent of their income, and there’s no way out, Mr. 
Speaker. This is grossly unfair. 
 
Will the Premier cancel this attack on Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member is wrong on that 
particular point around taking more than a person earns. That’s 
not how the system works. It’s based . . . this is going to work 
with the practical realities of an individual’s income and that’s 
why people need to work together with the people in the 
system. 
 
Now one of the things that we do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last fall when the Leader of 
the Opposition brought forward some kind of a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last fall when the Leader of 
the Opposition brought some sort of, brought forward some sort 
of economic policy he quoted this, and I quote: 
 

Premier Campbell expects to save millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars through his review, money that will be used to 
finance his aggressive agenda of personal and business tax 
cuts and balance the budget. 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government will launch a similar 
core services review in this province within 30 days of 
taking office. 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members opposite: is that what they’re 
going to do? Are they going to do what’s happening in British 
Columbia today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, many 
seniors have savings in RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings 
Plan). After all, all Canadian are encouraged to save for their 
retirement by contributing to RRSPs. 
 
And now what’s happening to that money? The NDP is taking 
90 per cent of it. The NDP keep saying they are not touching 
people’s savings, but that’s not true. 
 
When you turn 69, you are required by law to start withdrawing 
money from your RRSP. All of the money withdrawn, both the 
principal and the interest, is then counted as income. And then 
the NDP takes 90 per cent of it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP is taking seniors’ savings. They are 
taking 90 per cent of their RRSP income. And this includes not 
only the interest but also the original investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP attacking Saskatchewan seniors 
by going after their life savings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite has a 
problem with the federal Income Tax Act and how income is 
calculated and how dividends are treated under that particular 
legislation, then he should maybe talk to some of his Alliance 
Party friends and have them raise that question in the House of 
Commons. 
 
What I’m saying here is that we look at the income that a party 
has to calculate the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we 
use, as a method of shorthand if you wanted to say it that way, 
the kind of amounts that people record in their income tax 
return. And if that number is 1 per cent or greater different than 
the bottom line on their income tax return, that means that there 
may be some other adjustments that are necessary and that will 
be dealt with at the first . . . it doesn’t involve a review or 
something like that. This is how the original fee is calculated. 
 
So the member opposite needs to do his homework and make 
sure that he understands the Income Tax Act of Canada before 
he asks these questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — For the Minister of Health’s benefit, let’s do a 
quick review. They are going . . . the NDP are going to take 90 
per cent of the RRSP income. That means 90 per cent of the 
interest; that means 90 per cent of the principal. If the minister 
doesn’t understand this, maybe he should get some additional 
advisers on his side. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister should talk 
to an accountant. We have. We have talked to an accountant 
and this is the way it works. The NDP is going to take one 
hundred and twelve and a half per cent of dividend income. 
They are taking 90 per cent of RRSP income. That means they 
are going after people’s savings. 
 
All their lives these people did what they were supposed to do 
— they saved for their retirement — and now they are being 
punished for it. Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP punishing seniors 
by going after their life savings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there was a letter in the 
newspaper today that talked about this particular issue. And I 
won’t read the whole letter, but it was a letter by Kay Antrobus 
to the editor. And basically she talks about the fact that for her 
relative, they had all of their expenses covered except for about 
$150 a month for some drugs and for a haircut, and that 
basically all of their financial needs were covered in that 
particular situation. And the net effect for her was that the 
savings in that family were not touched at all. 
 
But what I guess all of us have to recognize is that these kinds 
of savings that people have do provide them with income and 
they can be dealt with in different ways. What we are asking for 
is those people who have a little bit more income to contribute 
more. Taxpayers of Saskatchewan are putting in $337 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again there’s no way around this problem. Seniors with RRSPs 
can’t just give their money to their children because first they 
have to take it out of an RRSP. It immediately becomes income. 
And then the NDP comes and takes 90 per cent of it. The NDP 
has invented the perfect system for getting people’s life savings, 
especially people who did what they were supposed to do and 
put their money into RRSPs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of seniors in this province thought they were 
saving for their retirement. Maybe they thought they were 
saving for their children. It turns out, Mr. Speaker, they were 
saving the money for the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that fair? Why is the NDP attacking 
Saskatchewan seniors by going after their life savings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is 
saying that the method of calculating is different than it was 
before, then he’s wrong. Because we were . . . Basically we 
were . . . basically before . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the clear point here is 
the calculation is the same. If the member’s only point is that 
the rate of that income that’s from the higher levels goes . . . 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

The Speaker: — Once again I ask for order so the minister can 
complete his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to read the last 
couple of paragraphs of Kay Antrobus’s letter. She says: 
 

In our case it (the amount of extra costs) amounted to about 
$150 per month for drugs and a haircut. These residents do 
not have mortgage costs, car payments or entertainment 
expenses. 
 
Even clothing costs are minor. $500 per month income left 
over after paying the fees would more than cover any extra 
expenses. Income was determined from the tax form of the 
previous year. 
 
When our loved one passed away, his life savings were still 
intact. I was talking to friends in Manitoba at that time 
whose loved one was paying twice as much. 
 
Please check out what fees are in other provinces. I think 
you will find that Saskatchewan treats its seniors fairly. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the NDP 
budget came down which changed the long-term care residents’ 
fee structure from 50 per cent up to 90 per cent, their family 
members and they have slowly been realizing how the NDP’s 
increase is going to affect them. 
 
They are astounded, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP would suggest 
that $166 a month is enough left over to cover all other 
expenses after a person has paid their long-term health care 
fees. They are shocked that a person whose annual income is 
just above the poverty line is described as wealthy by the 
Premier. Spouses of long-term care residents are describing 
themselves as devastated by the NDP’s tax grab that will force 
them to sell assets to pay their spouse’s drug cost or to maintain 
their own independent living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I ask the Premier, will he reconsider 
his decision to increase long-term care fees for Saskatchewan 
residents of long-term care facilities? Will he please change his 
mind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the $166 referred to by the 
member opposite, that hasn’t changed. That’s the same amount 
as it was before. And it goes up based on a cost of living 
amount that relates to the amounts that people receive on their 
old age security and other special supplements. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what I would ask the member opposite, the 
Leader of the Opposition, is if he’s changed his position on the 
core services review that he’s promoting after their election. 
The initial reports from Vancouver talk about reducing the 
number of long-term care beds in British Columbia by between 
6,000 and 8,000 . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You bet we’re 
going to look at the way this government is run. They can play 
money . . . play with taxpayers’ monies on the Australian stock 
market and they do it at the expense of seniors whose income 
they are gouging to a level of 90 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — You bet we’re going to look at what that 
government’s doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children of long-term care residents who look 
after their parents’ interests are outraged that their mother may 
be only left with $20 a month after all of her expenses are 
considered and she has paid the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other seniors are not going to put up with this. 
They are already making plans to move to Alberta where many 
of their grown children already live. Mr. Speaker, it’s a tragedy 
that the NDP are chasing jobs and young people out of the 
province of Saskatchewan. It is a grievous tragedy that this 
government is now forcing our seniors out of the province of 
Saskatchewan because they can’t afford the gouging that the 
NDP is charging them for long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the Premier insist on attacking the most 
vulnerable members of Saskatchewan’s population? Why is he 
attacking the seniors of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this 
province, and this province alone, pay $337 million for 
long-term care — that’s $10 million more than last year. It 
covers 74 per cent of the cost. What do the members opposite 
suggest that we pay for long-term care? Is it $400 million? Is it 
$445 million which is the total cost? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to know where Mr. Truscott and the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation is right now. He’s been totally 
silent on this issue and this relates directly to the kind of 
positions these people take. Where are they going to come up 
with the money to deal with this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Investments Corporation Dividends 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we’re finding out that the NDP’s 
budget doesn’t add up. Crown Investments chief executive 
officer, Frank Hart, is now admitting in a Leader-Post article 
today that the Crowns only made $130 million last year. 
However, the Minister of Finance took a $200 million dividend 
from CIC last year. So they’re $70 million short, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s another big hole in the NDP fudge-it budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did CIC pay a $200 million dividend when it 
only made $130 million? 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very 
strange question coming from that opposition because as it says 
in The Leader-Post in the same article the member’s referring 
to, in the year 2000, the Crown Investments Corporation made 
earnings of $293 million. The dividend that was taken for that 
year, Mr. Speaker, was zero. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we 
said we do not need that money in 2000 and 2001; we will leave 
it in retained earnings until we need it. 
 
You know what that opposition did, Mr. Speaker? They came 
into that . . . this House and they opposed that. They said we 
should spend that money then. We said, Mr. Speaker, we were 
going to plan ahead for the future for when we would need it. 
We are now drawing down those retained earnings, Mr. 
Speaker, and those retained earnings can pay the dividends in a 
planned way. 
 
What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is good management, not a 
plan to privatize the Crowns as they would do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The only way I could substantiate the minister’s 
claims that our argument is all wet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people don’t trust the NDP’s 
accounting tricks, and we certainly knew the minister would 
give the answer that he just gave. Mr. Speaker, we knew that he 
would repeat what the CEO, (chief executive officer) Frank 
Hart, had to say about this information. Because Frank Hart 
said in the paper: 
 

We didn’t pay a dividend in 2000, so instead of spending it 
we just put it in the bank . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers are hoping they didn’t put this 
money in the same bank that the minister put his rainy day fund 
in, Mr. Speaker. You’re familiar with that, you’re familiar with 
that bank, Mr. Speaker — it’s the first national bank of 
never-never land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem is this. Even if you accept the 
Minister of Finance’s argument and Mr. Hart’s argument, he 
didn’t take the $150 million dividend in 2000, so he’s using it to 
make his dividend payments in 2001 and 2002. He says he’ll 
need $100 million of this amount to make his dividend payment 
in 2002, and that only leaves 50 million for 2001. But we know 
that they’re $70 million short in 2001. 
 
So to the minister: where is the missing $20 million in the NDP 
fudge-it budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, just to look at how ridiculous 
the arguments of the opposition are, we’ve now gone from the 
missing 200 million to the missing 20 million. And by the time 

he’s done we’ll be down to 2 million, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say this. One of the other things that Mr. Hart says 
in the article is that the CIC’s (Crown Investment Corporation) 
debt-to-equity ratio is 54 per cent, Mr. Speaker. In other words, 
there’s a lot of equity in the Crowns; they’re well managed and 
they can afford to pay the dividends. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, what the debt-to-equity ratio was 
by the time those people, including that member from Swift 
Current who worked for the Devine administration, was when 
they got through? It was about 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
Because when those people get control of the Crown 
corporations, they strip them of their assets, Mr. Speaker, so 
that they can prepare them for privatization as they tried to sell 
SaskEnergy, as they sold the natural gas fields, and as they want 
to sell SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this government is not going to allow it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House can’t 
believe the sanctimony of that minister. That minister, quite 
rightly, just pointed out the failed practices of the ’80s where 
the government of the day . . . where the government of the day 
racked up the debt . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members will come to order. 
Members will come to order. Members will come to order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I saw that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Hold it, hold it. Members will stay in order — 
come to order and stay in order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . that government up close and it looks a lot 
like this government over here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to suffer the same 
fate. That minister just stood up and decried the practice of 
racking up debts in the Crown corporation to balance the books 
in the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, he then says . . . he then says that 
what they’re doing is sitting on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Well let’s just try one more time here, 
members. I want to . . . I want . . . Order, please. Order please, 
order on both sides. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can tell why they’re 
just a little sensitive. They have become . . . they have become 
what they beheld, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that minister stood up and decried the practice of 
racking up Crown debt in order to balance the books. And in the 
same breath, he confirms they’re sitting on a large savings 
account now in the Crown Investments Corporation — a 
dividend fund — while they have racked up another $470 
million in Crown debt, Mr. Speaker. 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: in the 2002 
budget the minister says the Crowns will pay him $300 million. 
If they were off the target at 200 million, how in the world are 
they going to generate 300 million? Will he table his 
projections in the legislature today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in the course of a few questions, Mr. 
Speaker, now we’ve gone from having a shortage of money to 
sitting on a large dividend fund. So who knows. 
 
But I want to remind the public, Mr. Speaker, that this is the 
same member who came into this House last year and said, why 
are we paying the world price for natural gas, thereby raising 
natural gas prices? Why? Because when that member worked 
for the previous administration, they sold off the natural gas 
fields. They sold off the gas and then say, why do we have to 
buy the gas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say this. Last year when we didn’t take a dividend 
for 2000, they complained about that and said we should take 
the money. This year when we take the money, they say we 
shouldn’t take the money. So it reminds me of the thought of 
the day in The Globe and Mail the other day, Mr. Speaker, 
which is from a Mr. La Rochefoucauld who says: 
 

Little is needed to make a wise man happy, but nothing can 
content a fool. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests before I make my statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the rest of this 
Assembly, a visitor that is seated in your gallery, at the back of 
your gallery, Mr. Sinclair Harrison, who is no stranger to the 
members here. 
 
Mr. Sinclair Harrison served eight years as president of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and he is 
visiting today in his capacity as chairman of the Farmer Rail 
Car Coalition, a group formed a number of years ago for the 
purpose of acquiring a fleet of Government of Canada grain 
hopper cars and operating them for the benefit of western grain 
producers. 
 
Mr. Harrison is in Regina today to meet with myself and others 
to discuss the Farmer Rail Car Coalition’s progress on this very 
important matter. 
 
On behalf of the members of this Assembly, I would like you 
all to join with me in welcoming Mr. Harrison to this Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Farmer Rail Car Coalition 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to make a statement on an issue of critical 
importance to rural Saskatchewan and the grain producers of 
this province. 
 
Last week in Saskatoon, the Farmer Rail Car Coalition held its 
board of directors meeting to discuss the recent announcement 
by Transport Canada that it has resurrected its plan to sell the 
fleet of federally owned grain hopper cars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the continuation of a plan first announced 
by the Government of Canada in its 1996 budget. That 
announcement resulted in the formation of the Farmer Rail Car 
Coalition with the objectives to purchase, maintain, and operate 
the entire federal grain hopper fleet for the benefit of western 
Canadian farmers. 
 
The farmers of Saskatchewan and Western Canada quickly 
understood the ramifications of the federal government’s initial 
plan to sell the hopper cars to the railway companies. Farmers 
understood that having the rail companies completely control 
the supply of hopper cars would result in higher costs to 
producers, and farmers quickly rallied together to ensure their 
interests were protected. 
 
The Farmer Rail Car Coalition has broad-based producer 
support and is comprised of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Canola Growers 
Association, the Family Farm Foundation, Southern Rails 
Co-operative, the National Farmers Union, Keystone 
Agricultural Producers from Manitoba, and Wild Rose 
Agricultural Producers from Alberta. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to acknowledge today that the 
Government of Saskatchewan initially supported and now 
continues to support the objectives of the Farmer Rail Car 
Coalition. And we have demonstrated that support by providing 
financial assistance to the coalition as they organize and plan 
for their bid on the Government of Canada grain car hopper 
fleet. 
 
The federal government allowed the national railways the right 
of first refusal on the sale of the hopper cars for five years. That 
period expires June 30 this year and the federal government has 
indicated its intention to sell the hopper car fleet by the end of 
the year. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason I raise the issue in 
the House today — to clearly state that our government’s policy 
remains firm. 
 
We believe that the federal hopper car fleet must be owned and 
controlled by the farmers of Western Canada for the benefit of 
the farmers of Western Canada, and that this government 
continues to support the Farmer Rail Car Coalition in its efforts 
as it works towards obtaining control of the grain hopper car 
fleet for the benefit of grain producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an issue of tremendous importance to 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

 

Saskatchewan’s grain producers, and I thank you for the 
opportunity to reaffirm our government’s policy in this 
statement today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to respond to the minister’s statement in 
the House today and, before I do that, I’d like to thank him for 
making a copy of his ministerial statement available to me 
earlier today. I appreciate the opportunity to review the 
statement made by the minister outlining the government’s 
position. 
 
I would also like to welcome Mr. Harrison to the Assembly 
today, and I’m sure that he has a great deal of interest in this 
particular issue as indicated by his years of dedicated effort 
toward a resolution to the grain car problem in Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there was ever any doubt, the federal 
government announcement today about its intention to sell the 
grain car fleet indicates once and for all that the intent of the 
senior government is to extricate itself from western agriculture 
forever. 
 
There is no clearer indication of the changing attitudes at the 
federal level toward western agriculture with the exception 
possibly of the failure of the government to offset the 
devastating subsidies that are being offered by our international 
competitors. 
 
The Minister of Highways and Transportation’s statement in 
this House today explains some of the history surrounding the 
ownership of grain cars in Canada and acknowledges the 
importance to the industry that a well-repaired and -maintained 
grain car fleet represents. 
 
Now while I acknowledge the support given to the rail car 
coalition by the Department of Highways and Transportation in 
providing financial assistance now as the group organizes and 
plans for the future, I would add a word or two of caution. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of the fleet that is up for sale is anywhere 
from 20 to 30 years old. It represents a total number of cars 
somewhere in the range of 13,000, some which we know are 
clearly unacceptable for use in a modern transportation system. 
The market value of these cars appears to be depressed 
somewhat, having fallen from $400 million to roughly $100 
million value in the last five years or so. And while it might be 
a good time to buy into a fleet of this size, it might also — at 
that price — present a temptation to buy more than we really 
need. 
 
The official opposition believes that full and regular access to 
grain cars is more important to farmers than outright ownership. 
However, having said that, Mr. Speaker, if a good business case 
can be made for the purchase of the federal cars, we in the 
official opposition would support a farmer initiative to make 
such a purchase. 
 
I would have serious reservations about the provincial 

government involving itself financially to any great extent 
under questionable circumstances. The government’s track 
record in business ventures with which it is unfamiliar is 
sketchy at best, Mr. Speaker, and we would not want to see all 
taxpayers’ dollars put at an unnecessary risk. 
 
The official opposition also firmly believes that the federal 
hopper car fleet ought to be made available to the ultimate 
success of western grain farmers. Ownership and control of the 
fleet needs to be determined under the stringent criteria of a 
best-business-case scenario. If such a situation exists, we would 
be supportive of a farmer-led effort to consummate the sale. 
 
One other word of caution needs to be voiced regarding this 
possible purchase, Mr. Speaker. The question I would like to 
pose is this: does the sale advance the cause of real agricultural 
diversification, or will it perpetuate a system that has kept 
Western Canadian agriculture at the mercy of the export 
market? 
 
Assuming that the purchase of the federal grain car fleet is a 
good idea, a suitable private sector financier ought to be 
available to the buyers. This proposed purchase could be an 
arduous effort, and the task has just now begun. We will be 
following the negotiations with real interest. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for North Battleford on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — . . . Mr. Speaker, by leave to respond. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise to 
say that, on behalf of the Liberal Party, that we wish the Farm 
Rail Car Coalition well. 
 
It seems to me that with all aspects of public services and 
utilities, in our system we require either open competition or 
regulation. And I’m afraid the grain transportation is in grave 
danger of having neither. And so in order for it to make . . . to 
make it work for producers in this country, there needs to be 
direct involvement of our producers. 
 
I think we also need to look at the issue of open running rights. 
I know that the rail companies take the position of private 
ownership, but even the most cursory examination of Canada’s 
history certainly shows that the construction and maintenance 
of our railways was never private enterprise. 
 
It was, from the very beginning in the 1880s, largely financed 
through public dollars, and therefore it is a public enterprise 
which must serve the public in general and western producers in 
particular. 
 
And so I say that we wish the Rail Car Coalition well. We need 
the input of producers into a system which serves the producers 
of Western Canada, and we need to look at the issue of open 
running rights. 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Architects Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 29, The Architects Amendment Act, 2002 now be 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Liquor Consumption Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, The 
Liquor Consumption Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Tobacco Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 31, The 
Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day I would like to advise members that I hereby table the 
financial statements of the Saskatchewan Liberal caucus office 
up to the date of December 2, 2001. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I request 
permission to table written responses to questions 126 through 
135 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The Whip has requested leave and has 
delivered questions 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
and 135. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to move a 
motion related to the constitution of the Private Members’ Bills 
Committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Member on the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 

That the name of Daryl Wiberg be substituted for that of 
Bill Boyd on the Standing Committee on Private Members’ 
Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 5 — Building Independence Program 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and my thanks to my 
colleagues. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce a 
resolution this afternoon relating to the building independence 
program. And at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly endorse the building independence 
program which assists tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 
families every year, and to date has reduced the number of 
families receiving social assistance by nearly 5,000 with 
more than 10,000 fewer children growing up on social 
assistance. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that one of the major initiatives that’s been 
undertaken by this government in the last five years has been 
the introduction of the building independence program. It’s one 
of the initiatives that has been able to make a real difference to 
the lives of families in our province. And it is part, Mr. Speaker, 
of a larger strategy that has been undertaken by this government 
to try to reduce the rate of child and family poverty in our 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to paint this in a broader context for a 
minute, there are at least three important elements in our 
initiative to try to reduce child and family poverty. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Speaker, our government in the last 
three years has moved to significantly reduce the income tax 
burden on lower-income families in Saskatchewan. And the 
result has been, Mr. Speaker, that 55,000 persons have been 
removed from the income tax rolls at lower income levels, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that’s an important accomplishment that 
supplements the work that I’m about to discuss in some detail, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve introduced a provincial 
training allowance that has provided a monthly allowance for 
students who are enrolled in basic education or other related 
courses to be able to move off social assistance and instead, Mr. 
Speaker, receive a training benefit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the third significant step that our 
government has taken relates to what’s referred to as the 
building independence program. And there are essentially three 
critical elements to that program. 
 
One is an employment supplement, Mr. Speaker, that benefits 
working families with children and helps ensure that the costs 
related to child care and child support for those families, that 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

 

they might have been eligible for if they’d been on social 
assistance, continues to be available to them when they go into 
the workforce. 
 
The second important program, Mr. Speaker, in the building 
independence package is a child benefit to low-income working 
families with children that’s paid out on a per child basis. 
 
And the third important component, Mr. Speaker, is the 
principle of extending family health benefits that were 
previously available only to families on social assistance and 
extending that . . . those benefits to thousands of low-income 
working families in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to talk about each of these initiatives in more detail, 
Mr. Speaker. But I want to look at the big picture first in terms 
of what has been accomplished. And one of the 
accomplishments is a very substantial reduction in the numbers 
of persons relying on social assistance in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’ll speak about that in more detail in a 
moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the . . . I think the most significant accomplishment from 
the initiatives that I just made reference to is the fact that we’ve 
now reduced the rate of child poverty in the province of 
Saskatchewan by 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker — by 30 per cent in 
the last six years. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is the most important 
accomplishment. And an accomplishment that no other 
province can point to, Mr. Speaker — a 30 per cent reduction in 
the number of children in the province of Saskatchewan who 
are no longer living in poverty. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn and discuss in a little more 
detail the elements of the building independence program. And 
I want to begin by talking about the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in doing so, I also want to bring to the 
attention of members of the Assembly and to the public that the 
family supplements program is one that is still not fully 
subscribed to. And if there are people who believe that they 
might be eligible for the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, they should contact my office, Mr. Speaker, by 
telephoning either in Saskatoon, 651-2240, or here in Regina at 
787-0985. 
 
And I want to say a little bit more, Mr. Speaker, about this 
employment supplement. This is a monthly payment, Mr. 
Speaker, that supplements the income earned by lower-income 
parents either from wages or from self-employment or for child 
and spousal maintenance payments. It’s a supplement to all of 
those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the supplement assists parents with the child-related costs 
of going to work and supports their decision to work. And for 
families on social assistance, it helps them to move from 
dependence on social assistance to the workforce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
In effect the supplement is meant to top up Saskatchewan 

people’s income to a subsistence level. And the program 
encourages people who have the opportunity to work more to 
take advantage of that and to retain the security of their 
assistance benefits at the same time. And this program, Mr. 
Speaker, came into effect in July of 1998. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report to members of the 
Assembly and to the public that the participation rate in this 
program continues to increase in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Three years ago, Mr. Speaker, we had 5,149 families taking 
advantage of this program. Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
announce that we have 8,200 families taking advantage of this 
program. So an increase, Mr. Speaker, of 3,000 families who 
are participating in this initiative. And the average monthly 
payment to those families, Mr. Speaker, has risen from $160 a 
month to $190 a month. 
 
And I’m also pleased, Mr. Speaker, to tell members of the 
public that effective in this new budget, which started on April 
1 of this year, we’re adding another $1.3 million in funding to 
this initiative, Mr. Speaker. And I might add that we increased 
spending in this area by $1.7 million last year. 
 
So in total, Mr. Speaker, we’re adding to the financing of the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement an additional $3 
million, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, will allow not 
only for an improvement in benefits but it will also allow for an 
increased number of families to take advantage of the 
employment supplement in the coming year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a word more about some of 
the new initiatives that we’re pursuing this year under this 
employment supplement program. First of all there’ll be an 
increase in the maximum benefits available to eligible families 
with children under 18 years of age. 
 
There’ll also be a new supplementary benefit, Mr. Speaker, for 
eligible families with children under 13 years of age to help 
cover the additional costs working parents encounter when 
raising young children. And I think, Mr. Speaker, this is an . . . 
a particularly important initiative because we’ve seen some of 
the highest rates of family poverty being among families who 
are trying to raise very young children. And this supplement 
will be good news to those families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also extending Saskatchewan employment supplement 
benefits across a broader range of incomes. And we’re 
introducing a new $25 a month minimum payment to ensure 
that Saskatchewan employment supplement benefits are always 
large enough to be meaningful to working families and worth 
their reporting effort, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the improvements to the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. And it’s one of our 
anchor programs in this building independence initiative which 
already has reduced rates of child poverty, as I was mentioning 
earlier, Mr. Speaker, by 30 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a second important element of the building 
independence program is what’s called the Saskatchewan Child 
Benefit. And this assists lower-income families with the cost of 
raising children. The benefit is paid to eligible families on 
behalf of each child under 18, and provides for basic food, 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

clothing, and personal needs. It further reasserts this 
government’s commitment to keeping working families in the 
workforce, and reduce financial barriers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that this program — the one that I 
just made reference to — has also been an important financial 
benefit, a concrete financial benefit, for working families — 
low-income working families with children, to make it 
advantageous for them to be in the workplace rather than 
needing to rely on social assistance. 
 
And the third program that I want to make reference to, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think has probably benefited the most families in 
Saskatchewan, in terms of the building independence program, 
is the one that relates to family health benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
Because previous to . . . A few years ago, Mr. Speaker, family 
health benefits were only available . . . only available to 
families who were relying on social assistance, and now they’ve 
been extended, Mr. Speaker, to thousands of other families in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We now have more than 24,000 families who are eligible for 
family health benefits, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say a word 
about these because they include, but are not limited to, benefits 
to help cover the cost of prescription drugs, benefits that are 
related to covering the cost of children’s dental care, and 
optometry coverage in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So low-income working families, with children under 18 years 
of age, have basically got most of their dental costs covered if 
they’re eligible for this program. They also, Mr. Speaker, are 
eligible for no prescription drug charge for Formulary drugs 
that are under the drug Formulary for the province. 
 
They’re entitled to an eye examination once a year with all 
costs for that covered. They also have . . . Children can also 
have their . . . the cost of their basic eyeglasses covered under 
this program. 
 
They’re fully covered, Mr. Speaker, for ambulance services for 
emergency purposes, and they’re also fully covered for 
chiropractic services. And they’re covered, Mr. Speaker, for 
medical supplies which . . . on the prescription of a doctor. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are . . . that is a very significant 
additional benefit to low-income working families in this 
province. 
 
And any family, Mr. Speaker, that is eligible for the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement or eligible for the 
provincial training allowance, Mr. Speaker, or any family that is 
eligible for the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, all of those 
families, Mr. Speaker, are automatically eligible for extended 
family health benefits in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s this package of programs together, combined 
with our income tax cuts to 55,000 lower-income people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that is starting to put a 
real dent in poverty rates, particularly for children and families 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to, I want to also point out that this initiative is 
allowing . . . one of the unexpected benefits actually, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this program has proven very successful in 

reducing the number of people who need to depend on social 
assistance in the province of Saskatchewan. As more and more 
people move into the workplace, fewer people, Mr. Speaker, 
who are able to work are needing to rely on social assistance. 
 
And I want to, I want to report to the Assembly some of the 
progress that has been made in this area, Mr. Speaker. Now let 
me begin by saying that social assistance . . . Well the numbers 
of people who are relying on social assistance are reported in 
two ways. One, Mr. Speaker, is that the number of family cases 
is reported, although that can include single individuals as well. 
But the number of households that are relying on social 
assistance is one way of looking at these figures. 
 
And the second, of course, is the total number of individuals 
who are relying on assistance. And I want to report to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve been making steady progress 
on both those fronts. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, in terms of caseload reduction, the 
number of cases has declined, Mr. Speaker, from 41,058 
households relying on social assistance in March 1994, down, 
Mr. Speaker, in March of this year — in March of 2002 — to 
30,815. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a drop of more than 10,000 
households relying on social assistance in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, the number of individual beneficiaries 
relying on social assistance has also dropped from 83,120 in 
March of 1994 down to 56,074 in March of 2002. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a thirty-two and a half per cent decrease in the number of 
individuals relying on social assistance in the province of 
Saskatchewan over a period of eight years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In effect, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a steady decrease in the 
numbers of persons needing to rely on social assistance in the 
province of Saskatchewan over an eight-year period, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that’s an accomplishment that all the 
people of Saskatchewan can be proud of, Mr. Speaker. And the 
building independence program has helped to make that 
possible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just want to report in a little more detail on 
the fact that this has been a steady decline. For instance, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll start with the year when the building 
independence program was introduced, in March of 1998. At 
that time, Mr. Speaker, we had 72,535 people relying on social 
assistance. Within a year of the building independence program 
having come in, we reduced that number, Mr. Speaker, to 
66,454. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by March of last year the number of persons 
relying on social assistance had decreased to 60,897. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to report that in March of this year the 
number declined to 56,074. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as more and more people enrol in the building 
independence initiative and benefit from the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement and move into the workplace, and as 
more and more people apply for the provincial training 
allowance, and as more and more people are able to take 
advantage of the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, and as thousands 
more people, Mr. Speaker, are able to take advantage of 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

 

extended family health benefits, that combination, Mr. Speaker, 
has resulted in a 30 per cent reduction in rates of child poverty 
in this province and thirty-two and a half per cent fewer people 
relying on social assistance, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that is one of the most significant accomplishments of this 
government, Mr. Speaker, and an accomplishment that I’m very 
proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to touch 
on a couple of other important matters related to this motion, 
Mr. Speaker, before I sit down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to compare this initiative with 
what members opposite, members of the Saskatchewan Party, 
say they would do as it pertains to lower-income families in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we should look at 
their record not . . . both with respect to what they say they 
would do now and what the former Devine government did, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because I can remember, Mr. Speaker, when I was Social 
Services critic during the ’86 to ’91 period, Mr. Speaker, and I 
can tell you what the policy of the former Devine government 
was in effect, and that is to offer a one-way bus ticket out of the 
province to those relying on social assistance. That’s how tough 
conditions were, Mr. Speaker. And I paid for a number of those 
bus fares myself, Mr. Speaker. There was no help coming from, 
from the former Devine government for lower-income families 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what do, what do members of the Saskatchewan Party say 
they would do this time if they were elected to office? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re . . . the Leader of the Opposition said in 
the October 2, 2001 Leader-Post that he would cut $50 million 
from Social Services — $50 million, Mr. Speaker — by 
focusing more on placing people in jobs, is what he said. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a $50 million cut from the Social Services 
budget, I tell you what that translates into. That translates into 
the eradication of the building independence program. And if 
they’re not going to take it from that, Mr. Speaker, are they 
going to take this money away from those, Mr. Speaker, who 
are disadvantaged by reason of mental illness or disability, Mr. 
Speaker? Or are they going to take that $50 million away, Mr. 
Speaker, from child . . . from the child protection budget? 
 
Well it doesn’t matter where it comes from, Mr. Speaker. I tell 
you, $50 million is a very, very deep cut in the budget of the 
Department of Social Services. And what it translates into, Mr. 
Speaker, is less money for those who are less fortunate in our 
society. And we on this side of the Assembly reject that 
proposal categorically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is so disconnected from 
the basic ethic that Saskatchewan people have of their 
willingness to help their neighbour, Mr. Speaker, that this will 
cost . . . this will be one of the reasons why the people of 
Saskatchewan reject the proposals of the Saskatchewan Party in 
the next provincial election. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what else did the official . . . the Leader of 
the Official Opposition say? Well, Mr. Speaker, he said he 
would impose a D-Day on employable people’s assistance 
cheques — a D-Day on those cheques. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our approach has been to work with 
employable people to provide them with the training they need 
first to re-enter the workplace and then to give them the kind of 
supports that they need to re-enter the workplace. And we’ve 
done that with great success as the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement indicates and as the dramatic decline in the numbers 
of persons relying on social assistance indicates — as I 
mentioned earlier — a thirty-two and a half per cent decline. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is a much better approach than 
the kind of workfare approach that I dare say members opposite 
would reinstitute and that we saw from the Devine government 
in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a couple of other 
important matters before closing my remarks. The first, Mr. 
Speaker, is that . . . the first is that I want to say a word about 
social assistance rates themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to in doing that, recognize an important resident of 
Saskatoon who passed away this week, Mr. Earle Mireau. Mr. 
Mireau, Mr. Speaker, was I think known to all residents of 
Saskatchewan as a tireless advocate on behalf of low-income 
people in this province. 
 
He was an active member of Equal Justice For All in Saskatoon 
for many years. And he represented hundreds of people in 
workers’ compensation cases and before various tribunals, Mr. 
Speaker, and he did so at no charge to them. He did this 
absolutely free of charge, Mr. Speaker. At no charge to the 
public purse, and at no charge to the individuals that he was 
helping. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Mireau brought to the attention of 
Saskatchewan people the need for not only the program 
initiatives that I made reference to today, in terms of the 
building independence program, but also the need to also 
remember that social assistance rates need to keep up with 
inflationary costs, Mr. Speaker. And that we must not forget the 
poorest of the poor, those who remain on assistance, and their 
families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize Mr. Mireau today. 
And I want to say that I agree with the cause that he aspired to, 
and that is seeing an improvement in the lot of the very poorest 
in our province. There is a need, Mr. Speaker, I think to 
increase the basic allowance for food and clothing and shelter in 
this province, and to provide transportation benefits for all those 
on social assistance, Mr. Speaker. And to improve the shelter 
allowance of those on assistance. And it’s my personal view, 
Mr. Speaker, that that also needs to be a priority for our 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, in closing my remarks, cite from 
an article entitled “The Saskatchewan Advantage”. It’s an 
article that was printed in the Western Catholic Reporter, which 
is an interesting newspaper, Mr. Speaker, because it’s based in 
Edmonton, Alberta, and it provides an Alberta perspective on 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

what we’ve been accomplishing in Saskatchewan in terms of 
tackling child poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is from the June 18, 2001 Western Catholic 
Reporter based in Edmonton, Alberta. And here’s what they 
have to say about what has been accomplished in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They begin the article, Mr. Speaker, by recalling that the House 
of Commons, in 1989, passed a resolution urging Canadians 
and urging the Government of Canada to work towards the 
elimination of child poverty in our nation. 
 
And they point out that unfortunately although that resolution 
was successful in passing, instead of reducing child poverty in 
Canada, what we’ve actually witnessed is a significant increase 
in child poverty since 1989. 
 
So they discuss that in the article, and then they go on to say 
this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A report released earlier this month (and this of course was 
written in June of 2001, so a report released earlier in June, 
2001) by the Canadian Council on Social Development 
found that Saskatchewan has done a much better job than 
. . . Alberta or Ontario in reducing child poverty, especially 
among single-parent families. 

 
The article goes on to say: 
 

Between 1993 and 1998, Saskatchewan cut the incidence of 
poverty among single-parent families from 51 (per cent 
down) to 20 per cent, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is a significant accomplishment. And 
this is not a Saskatchewan . . . This is not a Saskatchewan 
government release, Mr. Speaker. This is what the Western 
Catholic Reporter, based in Edmonton, Alberta is saying. And 
they’re citing a study undertaken by the Canadian Council on 
Social Development. 
 
The article goes on to say: 
 

In 1998-99, Saskatchewan spent $37 million on child 
benefit programs (get this, Mr. Speaker) compared with $6 
million in Alberta, a province with a population three times 
as large. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that since this article 
was written, as I mentioned earlier in the House, we’re going to 
be investing even more in the building independence program 
to support our children in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The article goes on to say: 
 

Alberta Children’s Services Minister Iris Evans downplays 
the . . . report (by the Canadian Council for Social 
Development) and says (that) her department has doubled 
its budget since 1998. However, we . . . have a long way to 
go (and by we, she’s referring to Alberta, we have a long 
way to go) to match the record of a province with far fewer 
economic resources than . . . (ours). 

 

And finally, she says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The (Canadian Council for Social Development) . . . study 
provides further contrary evidence to the belief that a 
wealthy society will trickle some of that wealth down to the 
poor. What is more likely is that governments that put a 
priority on ending poverty achieve that end more readily 
than those that believe in the trickle-down myth. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think what we see in the building 
independence initiative is evidence of a government that is 
serious about making a priority of ending poverty, Mr. Speaker. 
And ending particularly child poverty and family poverty, 
rather than simply subscribing to the trickle-down myth that a 
strong economy will solve the problems of all people in the 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A strong economy can make a lot of difference in terms of 
creating employment opportunities for a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan. And it’s critical, Mr. Speaker, to any strategy for 
reducing child poverty in our province. 
 
But combined with that, Mr. Speaker, has to be targeted 
initiatives that are designed to specifically help the families and 
their children that are facing poverty in our province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what the building independence initiative is all 
about. I think it’s clear that it’s been a great success, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased to say that it’s . . . although it’s often not 
recognized by members opposite in this Assembly, it’s now 
receiving international and national recognition, Mr. Speaker, 
including national awards and international recognition from 
the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development). 
 
We’ve even had members of parliament from Britain visiting 
Saskatchewan to study this program and look at how they might 
be able to apply it back home in their own country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly endorse the building independence 
program which assists tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 
families every year, and to date has reduced the number of 
families receiving assistance by nearly 5,000, with more 
than 10,000 fewer families growing up on social assistance. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Meewasin. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
second the motion made by the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

 

And I want to repeat again, Mr. Speaker, 88 consecutive 
months, 88 months of decreasing the numbers of families on 
social assistance. I think that’s a record that everyone in this 
House should be particularly proud of, and especially members 
on this side of the House because I believe that our opposition 
members’ plan would have a much different outcome for the 
people of Saskatchewan than to be able to say 88 consecutive 
months of decreasing numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very key part of the social policy agenda of this 
government is a three-pronged solution to families on social 
assistance and in poverty highlighted in the building 
independence strategy which began in July of 1998. And we as 
a government are certainly enjoying the success with this 
strategy, but more importantly, Mr. Chairman, the people of . . . 
the people that are helped by this strategy are enjoying their 
own personal success. 
 
And I want to just make a little note here from the numbers. We 
talked about the numbers, 88 consecutive months of decreasing 
numbers. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that behind 
every number is the face of someone who has returned to the 
workforce and gotten back their dignity as a productive human 
being. 
 
And I believe that that’s what our strategy is all about, is giving 
people the dignity, the right to work in the workforce, the right 
to have the supports that are necessary for them to return to the 
workforce and still have all of the things that they need to raise 
children and to live in dignity. 
 
I want to also quote . . . we have wonderful quotes made by the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone from an Edmonton paper, 
and I think they’re very, very indicative of the success and of 
perhaps some of the jealousy that other provinces feel in the 
success that Saskatchewan has had in reducing its rate of child 
poverty. And I suggest that they could soon join with us if they 
were willing to employ similar strategies and to invest a few 
more of the taxpayers’ dollars in a strategy that is so necessary 
to help children. 
 
But I want to quote from the Minister of Social Services, from 
April 15, 2002, and remind everyone of what our key message 
in this is. And that is, he quotes . . . or I quote: 
 

. . . what you have to do is to look at those things that you 
do that provide supports to enable low-income families to 
enable themselves to achieve the most desirable form . . . 
(most desirable from) income security, which is a job. 

 
(15:15) 
 
And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a quote from Hansard of 
April 15, and I think that sums up very nicely what we’re all 
about, and what it is that we are trying to accomplish for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well certainly this is not a brand new program. It began in 
1998, which is how we’ve been able to rack up 88 consecutive 
months of declining numbers of people on assistance. And I just 
want to highlight again the . . . some of the elements that go into 
the building independence program and some of the very 
necessary elements that are so helpful to people. 

The Saskatchewan employment supplement, I think, is one of 
the finest elements in this program, in that it is a payment that 
supplements income earned by lower-income parents from 
wages, self-employment, and child and spousal maintenance 
payments. And what this does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to allow 
and to assist parents for the child related costs of going to work. 
And it actually supports their decision to work. And for families 
on social assistance, it helps them to move from dependence on 
social assistance into the workforce. 
 
Many times we understand that there’s a barrier to people who 
want to get into a job because they have needs that could not be 
met by a minimum wage or a part-time job in the workforce. 
And they have been on social assistance and they are entitled to 
benefits; they are entitled to health benefits for their children 
and, to a degree, for themselves; and they’re entitled to 
assistance in other ways. And moving into the workforce, with 
. . . in the absence of these child benefit and the health benefit 
that is provided, would make it very difficult for them to move 
into the workforce and give up those very important needs that 
their children have. 
 
And so this is a very important aspect of the building 
independence program because it tops up what they’re able to 
make in the workforce so that they have a subsistence level and 
also it — the other leg of that, the child benefit or the health 
benefit — allows them to live on that wage with the help of the 
employment supplement and still be able to provide the 
necessary health care that their family needs. 
 
The provincial training allowance is certainly something that 
indeed is another piece of the dignity that people are able to 
acquire by enrolling in these programs. People who are able to 
go back to school, to be able to support their families, to be able 
to acquire student assistance, so that they can go to school. 
 
They can have child care that helps them with being able to be a 
full-time student. They can get assistance with their student 
loans or the money that’s required for them to enrol. They have 
the ability and the security of knowing that they can feed their 
children, that their housing needs will be met. And all this time 
that they’re doing that and going to school, they’re securing 
their own future. 
 
And this gives a tremendous sense of dignity to perhaps a single 
parent or a student who might have dropped out of school too 
early and has been living on subsistence wages or perhaps has 
reverted to social assistance. And to be able to move into that 
education field, be able to prepare themselves for a meaningful, 
well-paying career in the workforce, this is a benefit that I think 
is probably one of the most important for employable people — 
to be able to get that education and get into the workforce and 
become self-sufficient. 
 
There’s a tremendous sense of pride that comes with going back 
to school, having somebody help you to do that, and coming out 
of it many times with an honour or a very notable mark in their 
schooling career. Because in many cases they’re adult students 
or mature students and they have a very great sense of why it is 
that they’re going back to school. And in many cases they’re 
going back to school so that they can provide a decent standard 
of living for their children. 
 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

As I said, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit assists lower-income 
families with the cost of raising children. It’s paid to eligible 
families on behalf of each child under 18 and provides for basic 
food and clothing and personal needs. And it further reasserts 
the government’s commitment to keeping working families in 
the workforce and reducing financial barriers. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that families that are eligible 
for support in any of these three strategies are automatically 
registered for family health benefits. So you don’t have to make 
a bunch of phone calls and do a lot of application forms. If 
you’ve filed your income tax and you’re eligible, you’re going 
to be automatically registered in the family health benefit. So 
that is a very important part of the strategy as well. 
 
And these family health benefits include, but are not limited to, 
drug and dental and optometric coverage. And as part of the 
building independence initiative, all the health care costs for 
children and some of them . . . some of the health care costs for 
parents or guardians are covered under family health benefits. 
 
So as the previous speaker said, the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone, we have the Saskatchewan employment supplement, 
the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, and Saskatchewan health 
benefits. And together, all of those things help to improve the 
ability of people to move off of social assistance and into the 
workforce. And it most certainly has shown and proven its 
worth in that we have had, as I said earlier, 88 consecutive 
months of decreasing the numbers of families on social 
assistance. And I’m certainly proud of that strategy. 
 
I think that our strategy and our philosophy is a more 
integrated, holistic approach to building the capacities that 
individuals and families need for independence and 
self-reliance. It emphasizes the principles of inclusion and 
citizenship. People want to be able to look after themselves. I 
think we’re all quite fiercely independent if we’re given the 
tools and the opportunity to be so. 
 
People who leave social assistance . . . who leave the system 
and can get onto work, no longer need social assistance from 
the government. And in many cases this actually breaks the 
cycle of dependence. 
 
We’ve all heard about how quite . . . how the numbers are 
greater, the chances are greater that a child will end up on social 
assistance if he’s been raised . . . he or she has been raised in a 
family that was dependent upon social assistance. So if you can 
break that cycle, if you can get the parents working and the 
children live in better conditions, are more likely to be 
educated, are more likely to be able to make their own way in 
their world and that cycle becomes broken. 
 
And what a compassionate way to break it as compared to what 
we have heard from the opposition and indeed from the Leader 
of the Opposition. And I have here a Thursday, March 21, 2002 
article from the Humboldt Journal where the Saskatchewan 
Party was discussing its plans to reverse the population decline. 
And when he was asked certain questions about the labour 
force, the Leader of the Opposition said, and I’m quoting here: 
 

The party, he continued, would also change labour laws to 
encourage outside investment in the province, he said, and 

get employable people living on social assistance back into 
the workplace by imposing a “D-Day” on their assistance 
cheques. 

 
Now I certainly have no idea what a D-Day is. I think it means 
certain things in war circles. It means certain things in other 
circles. But I’m wondering, does D-Day mean de-insure? Does 
D-Day mean deport? Does D-Day mean disallow? Does D-Day 
mean degradation? What does D-Day mean . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . All of the above, says the hon. member from 
Moose Jaw North. Well I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
defeat for the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
So anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly a contrast I 
might say between this government’s record on reducing the 
number of families dependent on social assistance and the 
opposition’s plan for dehumanising perhaps the people who are 
living on social assistance and who are wanting desperately to 
come off and to be independent. 
 
And I think that our government certainly has the good record 
and that the people of Saskatchewan will trust us to continue 
with our record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Now I think it’s important to note that although 
those are all very good accomplishments and we’re very proud 
of them, we’re not stopping there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We are continuing with our 2002-2003 budget to continue with 
the income security redesign and we have grand plans to 
proceed with that. 
 
Now the first phase, as the previous speaker has said, has 
resulted in 4,600 fewer families relying on social assistance and 
I think that’s certainly a record to be proud of. 
 
Service delivery changes were introduced last year in Yorkton 
and Regina, and those changes were subsequently expanded to 
Saskatoon. And over the course of the next fiscal year these 
services will be offered in Department of Social Services 
offices throughout the province with the exception of northern 
offices where planning of service delivery is still underway. 
 
But early results of the new services indicate that 30 per cent 
. . . that 30 to 40 per cent of those booked to jobs first secure 
employment — 30 to 40 per cent of the people who look to our 
program for help actually are able to secure employment after 
being booked to jobs first. Clients have certainly expressed 
positive opinions about our first-step services and of course the 
result of that is that fewer people need to apply for social 
assistance. 
 
In 2002 and ’03 additional job supports will be available for 
families, for youth at risk, and for people with disabilities. And 
I think that’s an important area that we need to continually look 
at and refine and try to assist people with disabilities to get the 
job supports that they require in order to be effective and able 
people in our workforce. 
 
So the services under consideration for families and youth at 
risk and people with disabilities include things like job mining, 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

 

job coaching, mentorship, post-employment supports, 
on-the-job training, community connections and linkages to 
help them with mentors and people who can help them get into 
the workforce. 
 
The income security redesign is moving forward and we’re 
certainly working on improving supports in the following 
policy directions and these include child care; child care 
including early childhood development which of course is 
another one of the important programs of our government in 
helping children get out of the lower-income and sometimes 
abusive, sometimes not very productive family situation — 
getting them the supports that they need that they can grow up 
and be healthy, productive members of our society. Emphasis 
on healthy. 
 
So looking at policy directions in child care, we’re looking at 
improved standard and . . . an improved standard and 
affordability of housing — housing is a very important issue to 
people who are having a hard time making a go of it — and 
certainly our income supports are very helpful to them. 
 
We’re looking at how adequate our supports are. And I think 
it’s always important to review your progress, to see where 
you’ve been, where you might want to go. And I think the 
review process tells you how to get there. And I think that’s 
terribly important. 
 
We’re looking at expanded employment and training supports. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The government is also looking at opportunities and supports 
available for people with disabilities. I mentioned that, how 
important it is for them to be able as opposed to being disabled. 
I think they need to be assisted to be able — able participants of 
society, able in our workforce — and many times it’s simply a 
matter of making some adjustments that allow them to be very 
productive in the workforce. 
 
We want to support youth. Youth sometimes get a real bad rap 
in our society and many times it’s just a matter of extending a 
helping hand, of being understanding of their needs and helping 
them through a difficult time, and certainly supporting them to 
make sure that they have an education. And skills to join the 
workforce will go a long way to reducing some of the outcry 
against what people think is unreasonable amounts of crime in 
our province. But they need some help to get to where they 
need to go. 
 
We always have to keep our eye on northern initiatives and on 
every community, and we’re doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we also need to take a look at increased federal investment 
in basic children’s benefits. Certainly the federal program has 
been very helpful and very complementary to our Saskatchewan 
program but they should not, by any means, rest on their 
laurels. There is much to be done and we’re happy to help them 
remember that little fact. 
 
I want to move a little bit too because many times people, 
people look at social assistance and think that it’s an inner city, 
urban issue. And many times it is. But helping families is not 

just about inner city, urban issues. And our government is very, 
very proactive in this area. We have an aggressive agenda in our 
2002-3 budget and more money is being added to Saskatchewan 
employment supplement to accommodate the increased 
participation in the program. 
 
And Mr. . . . I mean the member from Saskatoon Greystone was 
talking about the increased participation in the program. And 
that isn’t because more people are living in poverty, that’s 
because more people are learning about the program, are 
becoming aware of the program, and after having filed their 
income tax return, in many cases are automatically eligible for 
one of the prongs of the program. But certainly more money is 
being invested by our province into the employment support 
program. 
 
We are going to be adding $200,000 to the Legal Aid 
Commission to increase maintenance enforcement for single 
parents, and that’s an important issue when you’re talking about 
building independence and about all of the, all of the issues that 
face people who are struggling. And maintenance is an issue. 
And better enforcement . . . legislation is coming from Justice 
that will assist in that, plus money is coming from the 
department to increase maintenance enforcement for single 
parents. 
 
We have job services for families — $400,000 is being put in 
there to assist multi-barriered families on social assistance to 
secure and maintain employment. Job coaches will be available 
and they can provide a variety of job services, including job 
mining, post-employment supports, job mentoring and 
coaching. So there’s $1.28 million is going to be going into that 
particular area of employment supports. 
 
We have increased funding in our budget for child care — 
500,000 for a $70 per month increase in the centre grant, from 
680 to 750; 750,000 for new child care spaces; 450,000 to 
increase grants that support the inclusion of children and 
families with special needs. 
 
And again we talk about special needs, we talk about enabling 
people, and certainly this is part of it. We are certainly going to 
be looking at increased funding for career and employment 
community-based organizations and individualized funding for 
home care services for people with disabilities. 
 
But the other, the other part that I said I wanted to talk about is 
what have we done to increase the program’s effectiveness for 
farm families. And I think that this is an important aspect of the 
program as well because many times the income support that’s 
necessary in the cities and in the inner cities is also necessary in 
the rural areas. And many times it’s so very directly related to 
the practice of farming and to the success or lack of success or 
the drought. 
 
And so our government looked at that and said perhaps there’s a 
better way that we can handle this. So just by . . . In the past, in 
2001-2, the department reviewed this issue of Saskatchewan 
employment supplement eligibility for farmers. And while the 
supplement is not intended to provide farm industry support, the 
department found that the program rules sometimes excluded 
farm families that could reasonably be defined as low income. 
 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

With the declining profitability of family farming, the practice 
of Saskatchewan employment supplement eligible income at 40 
per cent of gross farm income sometimes provided an unreliable 
indication of disposable family income. 
 
So in 2001-2 a new method of determining the supplement 
eligibility was introduced for low-income farm and 
small-business families, allowing them to define net eligible 
income as either 25 per cent or 40 per cent of gross income — 
whichever one provides the greater benefit. And this has 
certainly helped to restore equity in the program’s treatment of 
farm and non-farm programs. 
 
So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re looking at many times 
inner city families but also small town and rural families are an 
important component of this government’s plan to create . . . to 
build independence and create healthy and productive homes. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m happy to stand in my 
place. I’m very happy to second the motion from the member 
from Saskatoon Greystone. I think that our government’s record 
is sound on this. Our government’s record is the envy of the 
OECD, some British MPs (Member of Parliament). It is 
certainly the subject of discussion in an Alberta paper. And I 
think that it is nothing short of a miracle to have reduced 
consistently — 88 months in a row — the rate . . . the number 
of families on social assistance. And I’m proud of the record of 
our government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take a few moments to respond to the motion or speak to the 
motion that’s before this Assembly regarding the building 
independence program that the government is applauding, and 
the endeavour that they are creating to actually help move 
people or assist people in moving from dependence to 
independence. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to applaud the 
government for finally realizing and seeing the light and 
becoming aware of the fact that any individual, regardless of 
who they are, would just as soon be living independently rather 
than totally dependent on somebody else. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think when we talk about dependence, 
unfortunately there are individuals in our society who have to 
look to government for some assistance due to factors beyond 
their control, whether it’s disabilities or what have you. 
 
And I believe and my colleagues believe that governments need 
to be there to assist individuals of that nature and to make sure 
that they’re cared for and that they are treated with respect and 
have the dignity that they, that they rightfully deserve in regards 
to their livelihoods. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this motion before us and 
the building independence program for all . . . in all due respect 
really is what one would have to call a positive program. 
However as we will find, Mr. Speaker, as we get into further 
debate with the Minister of Social Services, there are a number 

of areas, a number of questions that need to be raised in regards 
to not only the program but, Mr. Speaker, the way the 
department operates and functions. 
 
And we talk about . . . the member from Greystone, the member 
from Meewasin talk about the reduction of some 5,500 
caseloads off the welfare rolls in . . . or the assistance rolls in 
the province of Saskatchewan over the last eight years, with 
some 10,000 children not relying on assistance any more, Mr. 
Speaker . . . or Deputy Speaker. 
 
However if that’s the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and the 
members opposite argue about the member from Rosetown and 
my colleagues talking about actually reducing expenditures in 
this department — one would have to ask why over the last 
eight years we’ve actually seen an increase of almost $100 
million expenditure in the Department of Social Services if 
we’re doing such a good job of putting people into job 
opportunities and assisting them and helping them move from 
the roles of need and dependency on the province to 
independence. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we’re really moving them into an 
independent role, if they’re actually moving into areas of 
employment where they are not relying on the taxpayer, then it 
would rightfully seem that there should be reductions in the 
department rather than increases. 
 
And the members, both the member from Greystone and the 
member of Meewasin, brought out the fact that the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar talked about in . . . a reduction of $50 
million. 
 
Well I would like to, I would like to ask the members if they’ve 
actually looked at the estimates in this current budget fiscal 
year. And they both talked about — and I’m sure all their 
government colleagues agreed with them — they both talked 
about the need to have income supports for those who need 
assistance to make sure we meet those needs. But right in the 
Estimates on page 100, income support programs in this 
document, there’s a reduction of $26 million there already. 
 
So I’m not sure exactly what the government members are 
complaining about. Their own document is showing that there’s 
a reduction in the expenditures in this department, and 
unfortunately most of it is coming in income supports to the 
very people, the families and the children in need. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if indeed the government is doing such a 
fine job, one would have to ask, one would have to ask, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, why is the food bank still struggling? Why are 
they continually looking for support and looking for the food 
and . . . to meet the needs of the people who continue to come 
and seek their services? 
 
Why is the organization, the Souls Harbour Mission, continuing 
to meet the needs of so many families through a feeding 
program each day in this city of Regina? In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
just chatting with a number of individuals who are quite 
involved in the mission, that lately they’ve really found it to be 
getting very tight for the foods that they would need to provide 
the feeding for . . . the meal programs that they provide on a 
daily basis. 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

 

And I guess we’ve listened to two members of the government 
opposite. I’m certain some other . . . many others will plan . . . 
are planning on standing and applauding their building 
independence program. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s some 
significant questions that need to be answered. 
 
If we have moved people from assistance to independence and 
given them the tools with which to find some quality 
employment so that they can provide for themselves totally, 
then why do we continue to see the need for the food bank 
program and the different programs that charitable 
organizations like Souls Harbour are doing to meet the needs of 
individuals who are lacking and, as a result, seek the services of 
these programs? 
 
Mr. Speaker, just the other day we met with the members of 
SARC, Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres. 
Here’s an organization that is reaching out and assisting people, 
especially individuals with disabilities, to feel like they have 
some independence in trying to meet their needs. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we talk about . . . They were telling us of the problems 
they are facing with the amount of funding they need for the 
program to continue to exist, for the opportunity for them to 
actually assist people in . . . who need their services. 
 
(15:45) 
 
We’ve talked to community-based organizations, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who find that they’re having difficulty employing 
individuals with the skills that are needed to meet the needs of a 
number of the disability . . . people on disabilities that they 
provide services for. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the building independence 
program, certainly my colleagues and I do not have a problem 
with assisting people from dependence to independence. We all 
believe in that. We feel very strongly that we need to work to 
give people a greater opportunity to provide for themselves and 
feeling fulfilled in their own lives, in their own well-being and 
to look after their families. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know 
of any parent who does not want to have the opportunity or feel 
that they are able to provide for the needs of their families. 
 
But every time we turn around, the government talks about their 
employment programs and I believe just last year the 
government talked about a work first program and their 
implementation of this work first program and I believe what it 
says is, it’s placement of jobs first, pilots matching low-income 
people directly to jobs. And this was a program that was 
commenced last year. And it’ll be interesting to see what that 
program has done to actually assist people. 
 
We talk about . . . When we talk about jobs first or skills 
training benefits — and I believe those are necessary if we’re 
going to assist people moving from assistance into 
independence — but when we talk about those programs, I 
noticed by an order of the Assembly to a question that was 
posed to the Assembly on April 4, that the work placement 
program is now eliminated, the skills training benefit program 
has been reduced by $2.2 million. And that came directly from 
the minister. 
 
And both members that just spoke in this Assembly talked 

about how those programs are working well and how the need 
to provide skills training and yet all of a sudden the work 
placement program is now eliminated and the skills training 
benefit program is reduced by $2.2 million. 
 
So we need to know exactly what happened there. Or was the 
reduction maybe in the Department of Social Services but has 
that moved into another department and so the expenditure is 
still there but it just . . . as far as the Department of Social 
Services, their numbers look better? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we realize that the need to work 
with people, to assist them actually into a real job opportunity. 
 
When we talk about building independence income security . . . 
and I’m quoting from the Social Services annual report: 
 

(The program is to) Work with individuals . . . toward 
preparation for and linkage to jobs. 

 
And it says: 
 

In this way, all Saskatchewan people may enjoy prosperity, 
opportunity, security, and an improved quality of life as a 
result of full participation in a growing provincial 
economy. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to ask you, where is that growing 
provincial economy? 
 
We agree, you need the job opportunities, but the job 
opportunities are only going to be there if we indeed have a 
growing provincial economy. But what have we seen over the 
last . . . the last few years — in fact, the last few months? Is this 
economy growing? Mr. Deputy Speaker, have we seen jobs 
increase in the province of Saskatchewan? No, we haven’t. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 1999 election, the NDP 
went into that election and promised the people of 
Saskatchewan that if elected, if re-elected they would create 
30,000 new jobs or we would see the creation of 30,000 new 
jobs in the province of Saskatchewan over the next short period 
of time. 
 
But the statistics show us that actually, Mr. Speaker, rather than 
a creation of, we have lost almost 30,000 jobs — 24,800 jobs 
have been lost in the province of Saskatchewan. So one has to 
ask if indeed we’re going to meet the needs of people who 
would like to move to independence, we need to have job 
opportunities for those individuals. And not just a 
minimum-wage job, because a minimum-wage job in many 
cases . . . in most cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does not even put 
the equivalent amount of funds in a person’s pocket that they 
could receive on assistance. 
 
And that’s why, over the period of years when people have 
looked at going to find a job, they’ve decided . . . once they 
found a job, the one that was available and happened to be a 
minimum wage or barely above, and they looked at what they 
had left after they’d paid their rent and all the other fees and 
provided for food and clothing, they had less to work with than 
they did on assistance. And therefore, there wasn’t a lot of 
incentive to move into the workplace and to actually gain . . . 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

find gainful employment. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could say . . . when 
you talk about the independence program and the 
implementation of the Saskatchewan employment supplement, I 
think that was a positive move. But I think it should be 
considered a positive move in view of assisting someone, if the 
first opportunity they have is a low-income job, of 
supplementing until they get the job training or the skills 
training or the opportunity to move ahead in life. 
 
And so in some ways, that program is probably assisting some 
people who would probably never have moved off assistance 
and their dependence on the people of Saskatchewan to provide 
for them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, coming back to creating real job 
opportunities. Mr. Speaker, this government rather than just 
bragging about people leaving dependence, we need to begin to 
look at where they’re going to. Did the numbers go down 
because people just finally left the province? They got tired? 
They get fed up with a government that every time they turned 
around just kept taxing or taking away from them — such as 
we’re seeing with the senior population in the province right 
now? Or did people just get tired of the fact that they were 
running around in circles and going nowhere because the 
government doesn’t seem to have a vision for growth in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re really going to assist people, we’re going 
to have to build job opportunities. We’re going to have to have 
a vision to grow the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s important that we begin to look at ways in which we can 
grow Saskatchewan. It’s important that we begin to look at 
methods and at our taxation programs that hinder the creation of 
job, real job opportunities by focusing and discouraging 
corporate entities and businesses from really establishing in the 
province that would create the quality jobs so that people could 
look at moving from dependence to independence. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important that they . . . 
that, as elected officials, we don’t just look at how we can 
create opportunities for people to depend on the taxpayer, 
depend on government. 
 
And as I listen to the member from Greystone and the member 
from Saskatoon Meewasin, they were almost talking of . . . well 
they were bragging about how their building independence 
program supposedly has worked and moved people off 
assistance. On the other hand, if you listen to their speeches 
very clearly, it almost talked . . . they were almost basically 
talking about how well they were doing at bringing people on to 
assistance. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Greystone said . . . invited people 
to call his office if they weren’t . . . if they thought they might 
qualify for the Saskatchewan employment supplement program. 
And the member from Regina northwest, the member from . . . 
if he was listening to the member from Saskatoon Greystone, he 
would have heard the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
inviting people to call his office just in case they might qualify 
for the Saskatchewan employment supplement. 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think, if people wanted to, they 
would be calling. But I think people don’t want to be living off 
the taxpayer. They want to be dependent, living on their own, 
and they just want the opportunity for some real job creation 
and job opportunities and quality jobs that give them the ability 
to go out and find gainful employment to provide for their 
families. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important that this 
government then really take a look at what they are doing to 
create the economic climate in this province that would create 
job opportunities, rather than the government doing all the job 
creation, allowing the business community, allowing the 
corporate sector, even outside of this province . . . is look at this 
province as the place to invest in. Because I believe this is an 
excellent province. I believe this is a great province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it was the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone a few years ago when we were . . . 
actually we were on the verge of moving into an era of really 
developing the uranium industry and the job opportunities that 
would have evolved from the development of that uranium 
industry, opposed any development in that sector. 
 
And it’s unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because had we 
moved forward and rather than, rather than just being the hewer 
of wood and the drawer of water, mining our uranium and 
sending outside of our province for further development, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we could have created the jobs here. We could 
have created the opportunities. 
 
And we would have created quality jobs in . . . right throughout 
Saskatchewan so that we could actually see a greater reduction 
of people living on assistance. So that at the end of the day, the 
only need for assistance would be for those who truly needed it 
because they had no other alternative. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe job creation and growth in this 
province is important. And therefore I move an amendment to 
the motion, seconded by the member from Estevan: 
 

That the following words be added to the motion after 
“social assistance”: 
 
“but urges the government to finally recognize that the best 
social program is a job and to abandon its negative 
economic policies that have led to negative economic 
growth and job creation.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am pleased to stand today and enter debate on this 
motion that was put forth by the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone, his motion being to endorse the building 
independence program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I, as well as my colleagues, have some 
grave concerns regarding the structure and responsibility of this 
program. It would be of interest on this side to receive 
information as to what happened to the people no longer on 
assistance. As your motion claims the reduction of 5,000 
families on assistance, did these people actually find 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

 

employment, or is it because of the out-migration that these 
families needing assistance have decreased? Are they part of the 
continuous stream of people leaving this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Or did nearly 5,000 families find jobs in the 
workplace? 
 
Just where do these numbers come from? Perhaps some could 
have been channelled over to education, as once they are in 
training they are no longer social services statistics. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, when saying that 
tens of thousands of Saskatchewan families were assisted, are 
we talking two or three or more tens of thousands? And if the 
number of families requiring assistance is that high, Mr. 
Speaker, how did we ever reach that point? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is very important that the people are 
independent and become part of the workforce. But many times 
when people don’t have a lot of training and work at minimum 
wage jobs, they make less dollars at those jobs than they did 
when they were completely reliant on social services. So it is 
very discouraging for them. It is also very important that people 
have access to training so that they can qualify for employment 
that provides a reasonable quality of living. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps most important is the fact 
that people, once they are trained, that they have a job to go to, 
a job here in Saskatchewan. We have to start by growing our 
economy, having an attractive business climate, making our 
personal tax exemptions comparable with our neighbouring 
provinces so that people will come here, invest in our province, 
start businesses which in turn provide employment for the 
people of this province. 
 
StatsCanada population figures show that we are above the 
national average until the age of 25 years. Then people leave 
this province when they are in their very productive years, the 
years where they pay the taxes that allow social programs to 
happen. They leave. So we must find ways to keep them after 
we educate them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
According to the 2001 StatsCanada figures, Saskatchewan has 
the lowest population in over 20 years. Also we have seen 
thousands of jobs lost in the past couple years. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is from a government that in 1999 promised to 
create 30,000 new jobs over four years. So the NDP really have 
no problem in making promises, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they 
certainly have a very hard time in keeping the promises. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Meewasin was 
talking about farm families. And I am a farmer myself — my 
husband and I have farmed for many years — and farmers don’t 
want or expect social assistance. They want the barriers 
removed that prevent expansion into value added, and then the 
government won’t have to subsidize them. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And it was interesting when the member from Meewasin was 
talking about how the farmers can get assistance from the 
government . . . And this is the same government that upped the 
crop insurance premium, removed spot loss hail, and also took 
away the 25 per cent rebate on the education tax portion of their 

land taxes. And now this same member talks about receiving 
social assistance from their government. Well farmers don’t 
want that. Rest assured, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know I can 
speak for many of them. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleagues are aware that 
there are ways that can be . . . we can assist lower-income 
families to better themselves and that all options should be 
looked at. And therefore I am pleased to second the amendment 
put forth by my colleague, the member from Moosomin. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
extremely pleased to be able to support the motion before the 
Assembly to endorse the building independence program, and 
also to speak against the amendment as posed by the member 
opposite — not for the idea that he is encompassing in his 
amendment to state that the best way to have people be 
involved in the economy with dignity is to provide jobs, but 
because this isn’t something that we finally discovered, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s something that we saw go terribly awry in 
the ’80s with unemployment numbers skyrocketing, people 
leaving the province in record numbers, and, I believe, that 
member being a part of a government who believed in a 
trickle-down theory of the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that we should be supporting with full 
hearts the thrust of the motion, providing support for a program 
that assists tens of thousands of Saskatchewan families and to 
date has reduced the number of people receiving assistance by 
nearly 5,000 with more than 10,000 fewer children living in 
families that are growing up in the social assistance cycle, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So that in essence speaks to the kinds of things that the member 
opposite says when we’re moving people from dependence to 
independence, but not saying to them that once you do that you 
become a member of the working poor and all of your 
assistance that’s provided to you drops away and somehow you 
fall off the edge of a cliff. That leads you to be very frustrated 
and to feel very isolated and feel it’s better to be back on an 
assistance program with the kind of supports that would be 
presented to them there. 
 
So it is allowing people to see the benefits of the program, to 
reach out for employment opportunities, but to stay there. 
 
And also it is for those people who, through no fault of their 
own, are employed in jobs that might now lead them to be 
looking at assistance programs to say, why am I not there 
instead of trying to slog my way through a job that’s not 
providing the kinds of supports and strengths that I need for my 
children and my family. This program is also avoiding people 
having to come onto social assistance rolls. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is all about providing dignity to 
people, dignity to families, and particularly to have children live 
in families where that is provided to them, and the supports are 
in place that they have a quality of life that we all appreciate 
and recognize as important to healthy families in our 
communities. 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

The background to this program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, goes 
back many years in my life. And I know there have been other 
opportunities in the Assembly where I’ve mentioned in debate 
that this goes back to the years that I was working as a member 
of Regina City Council. 
 
During 1980s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many, many people from 
the community were coming forward and presenting briefs to us 
concerning hungry children and families in poverty. 
 
They wanted us to take an in-depth look at the issue, and 
therefore, we constituted a board of inquiry into hunger and 
poverty. And I was a member of that board of inquiry, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
After many, many hearings, we could not believe what we were 
seeing as a result of the policies of the Tories in the ’80s in this 
province. But we could also, on the other hand, not believe that 
we were hearing from the likes of Jack Klein, a Conservative 
minister at the time, who said that there were no hungry 
children in Saskatchewan. If you just ignored the problem or 
denied that it existed somehow it would go away. 
 
Or the minister at the time who said that people who are hungry 
should just grow gardens like his wife did — we would all 
know that the name of that man is Mr. Grant Schmidt — and 
they had the ability to be a part of a rural community who 
would have garden plots and an ability to grow some food for 
their families. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what if you are a single parent, living 
in a core of a city, in an apartment? Do you have the same 
ability to grow a garden and feed your family as a rural farm 
person might have? I think not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What would lead us to believe that the members opposite — 
although they’ve changed their names — would be any 
different from the Conservative policies that they sat beside, 
that they supported, they provided advice to, particularly the 
member opposite from Estevan? I have no hope that their 
viewpoints or their ideas would change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And in fact another member has mentioned, and I quote from 
the Humboldt Journal, that Hermanson said that his party . . . 
he would continue to: 
 

. . . change labour laws to encourage outside investment in 
the province . . . 
 

But he also said: 
 

. . . get employable people living on social assistance back 

. . . (to work) by imposing a “D-day” on their assistance 
cheques. 

 
We’ve seen that before, Mr. Speaker. We saw, during those 
years in the ’80s, about 300 or more ways that you would have 
people cut off social assistance. And where would they end up, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? At the food banks, in poverty, living off 
the avails of prostitution and other things. 
 
And somehow the members in those days didn’t see the 
connection, and I’m not hearing the members today seeing the 

same connection to hunger and poverty and many of these 
issues either, from some of the comments that they’ve made 
before in this Assembly. 
 
And I certainly haven’t heard the commitment when they said 
that they would look at reducing the Social Services budget by 
$50 million. All this does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to say, we 
will try and put out the fraud squad once again. 
 
Now I don’t know if any members in this Assembly remember 
the fraud squad, but it was people armed with cameras and 
following people around with lists of the many, many different 
ways you would be cut off social assistance. And what we 
found were there were people who were lined up at the appeals 
boards who lost their dignity, who had to go to great lengths to 
talk about how they could have any kind of support to dig 
themselves out from the bottom of the rolls, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Well not today. Not today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was under 
this government that the minister of Social Services, who’s now 
our Premier, listened to the outcomes of the inquiry at Regina 
and the other communities who were saying the same kinds of 
things. And the recommendations that were put forward were 
presented in the new building to independence strategy. 
 
We now have circumstances that are beginning to turn things 
around. This is a strategy that has received national and 
international recognition. And with what results, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Declines in social assisting caseloads for 88 straight 
months. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, put that alongside of the kinds of things 
that I mentioned, in the ways that people were cut off social 
assistance and living in the depths of poverty, trying to appeal 
to people to give them to support, trying to appeal to the 
government at the time to feed their children or find them a job. 
Put that beside a decline in social assistance caseloads for 88 
straight months, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Not only that, the numbers of children living 
in poverty has dropped by 30 per cent. 
 
And we look at the report cards of people who keep an eye on 
these things across the country, they will tell you that we’ve 
been leading the country for three straight years in this area, that 
we’re seeing the reduction of numbers of children living in 
poverty in negative figures for three straight years in this 
province. That is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m more than 
pleased that I would be there with this government to make an 
even greater investment in the building to independent strategy. 
 
Building independence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is more than a 
series of programs. It is a philosophy. It’s a way of thinking 
about these things that is geared more toward integrated holistic 
approaches to building the capacities of individuals and families 
and their need for independence and self-reliance. It’s one way 
to look at life that says that we emphasize the principles of 
inclusion and citizenship in all of our communities in this great 
province. And it’s one that recognizes each individual has both 
the right to a reasonable opportunity, be part of economic and 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

 

community life, and has an obligation to contribute to the fullest 
extent of their abilities. 
 
Building independence is a way we support families in not only 
just one way, but in so many different ways. And that’s why 
I’m pleased that I’m part of a government that sees the whole 
picture and understands the interrelatedness between not only 
the building to independent strategy but the areas where we also 
invest in families. 
 
$1.3 million more for the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement as part of building to independence. This program 
helps families leave assistance to the world of work and, just as 
importantly, makes it worthwhile for people to stay working 
and off of assistance. 
 
One of the members opposite said, well, how can you do that? 
We see in your budget you’re reducing the numbers of dollars 
available. Well of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look 
at the numbers for 88 straight months where the caseloads are 
dropping, you can assume that your program is working. You 
can make assumptions that you’re able to help even a fraction 
of those people, that you’re being able to then reduce some of 
the dollars available to that program. And we estimate that 
would be about $15 million worth of savings. That’s reflected 
in our budget. 
 
That’s a very good number, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it 
reflects the optimism of our province and the people who are 
becoming involved in this program being off assistance and into 
economic opportunity and employment in the province. 
 
The other comment the member made was the national benefit 
program for children and he’s wondering why we’re reducing 
the numbers in that program. Well we could all tell him if he 
took the time to ask us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that because we 
were in the forefront of developing that program — one of the 
first new social programs in this country in more than 50 years 
— because we were in the forefront of development of that 
program and all of the pieces were in place, we decided upfront 
to put our money where our mouth was. And until the national 
government was ready to put their share on the table, we put our 
share and theirs there too, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What we’re seeing now is over the years, as the federal 
government is making their commitment to this program, that 
we’re able then to take that money that the federal 
government’s putting in and use that for further ways that we 
could support families and we could support the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s easy as saying, we put all our money upfront, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. As the federal government comes forward 
with their monies, we’re able to take that money and put it into 
even more programs and services that help this great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — And as one of my colleagues would say, and 
we’ve all said, we invest in people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now other ways that we would support families who are using 

the building to independence strategy might be to see an 
increase of about $200,000 for legal aid to increase maintenance 
enforcement for single parents. A colleague of mine talked 
about how important that is because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
you’re looking to support a family and you’re a single parent, 
you want the other member of that family to have the 
commitment and maintain that commitment, and we’re seeking 
to do just that. 
 
There’s an investment of $1.28 million in employment 
supports, including $400,000 for families to secure and 
maintain employment, for job coaches, and mentoring; 
$380,000 for young people and that will assist high-risk youth 
for adequate housing, on-the-job training, life skills, all with the 
focus of getting a job and keeping a job. I’d rather spend the 
money on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than I would on the 
proposals put forward by the members opposite to address 
high-risk youth — and that’s boot camps. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s also $500,000 more for people 
with disabilities who are currently receiving social assistance to 
gain attachment to the labour market. I applaud the member 
opposite for speaking about the SARC initiatives and things that 
people are doing to assist people with disabilities into the labour 
market. 
 
But there’s more than just one approach. And again I fail to see 
where they address this issue in a very holistic manner. On this 
side of the House, that’s our commitment, to make certain that 
all of the pieces fit together and all of the supports are there for 
families. 
 
There’s an increase of $1.7 million for child care. Included in 
this is a total of $500,000 to increase the early childhood 
services grant from $680 to $750 a month, which means higher 
wages for daycare workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker; $750,000 to 
develop 150 new child care spaces for families being diverted 
from welfare to employment. 
 
Because of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it makes sense. When 
people are employed and they’re able to work outside the home 
for pay, they need to be assured that their children are looked 
after. The community looks at that and says that there are 
daycare spaces available to them. 
 
There’s also a $450,000 increase for grants that support 
children with special needs. There will also be funding for 15 
special needs buses to provide transportation for our disabled 
citizens. 
 
And you can see our municipalities talking about how important 
that is. Because of course people who are going to be employed, 
they’re going to be off social assistance, they’re going to need 
transportation, they’re going to need a way to get to their job. 
And we’re committed to being able to provide greater 
assistance in that way through the special needs transportation 
grants, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What do all these investments have in common? They are all 
intended to support people’s ability to attach themselves to the 
labour market. And it makes the amendment by the member 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

opposite redundant. 
 
Because we have not just seen that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
you look at this budget but budgets before. Each and every year 
we’ve been able to increase the budget for those people who 
need greater assistance in our communities, not just to keep 
them at the bottom or to see ways we can drop them off the 
social assistance rolls by cutting them off of assistance 
payments, but by actively working with them to get them into 
employment and to jobs and into an active involvement in our 
economy. 
 
Investment in child care means parents have the freedom to 
work while knowing their child is receiving the best care 
possible in a safe environment. Disabled transit means that 
those with disabilities have another barrier removed to keep 
them from taking their rightful place in the job market. More 
than ever before, low-income people, the disabled, those who 
haven’t been traditionally present in our labour force, now have 
the opportunity and the right environment to take their place in 
the job market. 
 
By investing now we will be enabling people to have an 
independent, taxpaying citizen in our community. So each one 
of the people that we’re assisting now have the road to 
independence, to pay taxes, to be contributing to our 
communities and our economy. 
 
Another key of course is safe, affordable housing. And that is 
why the government is working with the federal government to 
develop a partnership to provide affordable, quality housing to 
low-income people. And I would say in the broader context of it 
all, that is also another building block in building independence. 
And it’s the way we look at issues — encompass the whole 
array of quality of life supports that people need to get off the 
social assistance rolls. 
 
This partnership along with the federal government will allow 
construction of 1,000 new housing units in urban and northern 
areas, in addition to 3,200 . . . or I’m sorry, 32,000 homes 
constructed already in Saskatchewan. We are eliminating the 
barriers to employment and providing tools for self-reliance. 
 
Now a colleague has mentioned that they’re probably against 
that too. Well I would say their record speaks for themselves. 
We put forward these programs, we put forward these ideas in 
the budget, and I have never seen a member stand up and say, I 
support that. They vote against it. Consistently they’ve been 
voting against these measures and when they’re formulating 
their budget what do they say — $50 million less. 
 
But in important areas like education and health, what do they 
say? As someone mentioned, the Popsicle party says freeze. 
We’ll freeze those because we’re going to give people major tax 
reductions and we can’t afford to support people like this any 
longer. That’s their party platform. 
 
I urge them the next election to take that out and see what 
people think of a Popsicle party who freezes education, freezes 
health care, freezes all areas of the government that are so 
important to people, including seniors housing that we have 
been debating at great length in this Assembly. 
 

As much as the members opposite love to complain and moan 
about taxes, there are many Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who would love the opportunity to pay taxes. These 
investments will create even more taxpayers to support our 
social programs. 
 
Well building independence is not only just a strategy we talk 
about and the program that we love to support today. It’s also 
being able to talk about for the fifth straight year Saskatchewan 
residents see their personal income taxes go down as well. In 
2002, an average Saskatchewan family will pay almost 
one-third less in income tax than in 1993 — one-third. That’s 
greater than any promise I’ve heard from the members opposite. 
And I know that they couldn’t deliver on the way their tax cuts 
have been formatted. 
 
So let’s not lose sight of the fact that the tax reform in 
Saskatchewan means that 55,000 low-income earners have been 
taken right off the tax rolls altogether. 
 
We have also invested in those who do the work at the 
grassroots level providing services to the most vulnerable in our 
communities — those that work in community-based 
organizations. The government knows that CBOs 
(community-based organization) have a challenge in recruiting 
and retaining their valued staff, and we’ve responded in the past 
by increasing CBO wages by 23 per cent between 1997 and ’98, 
and 2001 and 2002. We’re going to continue along this path by 
increasing funding for wages to CBOs another 4.5 per cent. 
 
I know that CBO workers want a multi-year commitment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, however, the financial situation in this 
province is . . . and the way we’re addressing that, the only 
multi-year commitment that I could be making at this point, 
would be that . . . one that neither I or the CBOs in our 
communities would find acceptable. And they are working with 
us to see that we’re able to have people who work in these areas 
as well and provide dignity and supports to people living in our 
communities. 
 
This budget doesn’t forget the needs of high-risk children and 
the building to independence strategy doesn’t neglect them 
either. There is $2.1 million increase for foster care and services 
for at-risk children. 
 
Some of the most at-risk youth in our province are those who 
are exploited in our streets. While we’ve introduced legislation 
to deal with this repugnant crime, this budget also includes new 
money to provide services for these victims, most notably 
300,000 for a new safe house in Regina. 
 
We were questioned about why there’s more money in the 
budget for social assistance if we’re seeing people taken off the 
rolls, and then people say well why is there less money on the 
line for this certain area. And I’ve explained that. 
 
But to say there’s more money is because there’s more 
emphasis on programs like building independence, but it also is 
more money for programs and services that will address some 
of the serious needs we have, particularly the repugnant issue of 
exploitation of children on the streets of our communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also know that building 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

 

independence also talks about nutritional issues, parenting 
skills, adult education, cultural activities that are provided in the 
schools. And most importantly, this concept allows teachers to 
teach and the freedom to teach about these issues and provide 
those kinds of supports. And I include them in building 
independence because it’s further supports for families. It’s at 
school and where children are that they learn these kinds of 
needs that are important to all families to make them healthy 
families in their community. 
 
And while I’m on that subject, I would also put in the very good 
program that we’ve developed and worked with the community 
to come forward and expand our community schools and the 
SchoolPLUS program that’s tackling these issues to ensure that 
children have the ability to get the most out of their education. 
 
These are all building blocks. They’re all cornerstones that 
support the building to independence strategy. You can’t say 
one without the other because they all have an impact. They all 
build to the kinds of numbers we’ve seen — 88 straight months 
of reductions in numbers of people living on social assistance. 
 
And that’s why I’m not voting for the amendment that’s been 
put forward because the members opposite, I don’t think, 
understand that we’re already there. Maybe they need to get to a 
new place in this issue or it’s just come to the light for them. 
 
But consistently in what we’ve been doing around this strategy 
since 1998 would be all included in what’s needed to help to 
build to independence in our society. At the end of the day, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this is what this program is really all about. By 
meeting the short-term challenges that we face today, we’re 
making Saskatchewan the province of opportunity for 
tomorrow. We’re investing in education and economic 
development and in health of families. 
 
The building to independence program invests in these as well 
and they’re doing it through three key areas where information 
is readily available. I would note that the department has 
developed some very good informational pamphlets that people 
could access if they want to know more about the building 
blocks for this one particular program. 
 
There’s the provincial training allowance and some very good 
information that says: 
 

Saskatchewan is investing in its people and taking a 
leadership role in the country by introducing a series of 
unique programs. These programs will provide income and 
training supports to lower-income families and they will 
significantly change the social assistance program so that it 
assists rather than prevents families in making the leap 
from dependence to the workforce. 

 
And here’s just one part of that, the provincial training 
allowance. It’s a monthly allowance for students enrolled in 
adult basic education or related courses. The allowance assists 
lower-income families or families receiving social assistance to 
move into the workforce. Much good information available on 
the provincial training allowance. 
 
Now the other or the second pillar in this program, the 
employment supplement, I’ve already talked a lot about and 

I’ve already talked about where we’re projecting this will go. 
But the employment supplement is something that the member 
opposite referred to without even knowing that he was talking 
about it. 
 
It’s a monthly payment that supplements the income earned by 
lower-income parents from wages, self-employment, and 
child-spousal maintenance payments. This supplement assists 
parents with the child related costs of going to work and 
supports their decision to work. 
 
For families on social assistance it helps them to move from 
dependence on social assistance into the workforce. And it’s 
also a part of the program that allow them to avoid going on 
social assistance if they happen to be coming into a workforce 
that allows them a working-poor wage — brings them up; it’s a 
top-up. It tops up your income to a subsistence level. 
 
The program encourages people who have the opportunity to 
work more to take that opportunity and retains the security of 
their assistance benefits. And this began in July of 1998. 
 
It takes a number of years from the time that Regina City 
Council identify this as an issue that we’re able to look at how 
we can wrest some monies out of the kind of economic gloom 
and doom that was created in the ’80s by the members opposite. 
 
To be able to develop the employment supplement is another 
cornerstone of the building to independence strategy. 
 
And of course throughout our deliberations, Children First, 
there’s a Saskatchewan Child Benefit. It assists lower-income 
families with the cost of raising children. The benefit is paid to 
eligible families on behalf of each child under 18 and provides 
for basic food, clothing, and personal needs. It further re-assists 
. . . asserts this government’s commitment to keep families 
working and in the workforce and reducing financial barriers to 
do that. 
 
Families that are eligible for either of these three strategies are 
automatically registered for the family health benefits. These 
include, but they’re not limited to, drug and dental, optometric 
coverage, and more. As part of this building independence 
strategy and initiative, all health costs for children and some for 
parents or guardians are covered under the family health 
benefit. 
 
This three-pronged approach provides each client with the 
ability to draw on the general program but tailor it to suit their 
needs to move them out of the program as soon as possible. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Essentially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the program is designed to 
offer specialization without the bureaucratization of this issue, a 
personal approach to people of Saskatchewan to assist them and 
to assist the children in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many accomplishments that we 
have seen since 1998 in the building to independence strategy. 
And I want to say them once again, because I find it very, very 
important — 88 consecutive months of decreasing numbers of 
families on social assistance. 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

A key part of the social policy agenda of this government is the 
three-pronged approach, the building to independence strategy 
and program that we are discussing today. But it’s much more 
than that as I’ve stated earlier. It’s an integrated, holistic 
approach to building capacities of individuals and families and 
their need for independence and self-reliance. It’s one that 
emphasizes the principles of our society that are inclusion and 
full citizenship. People who leave no longer need social 
assistance from the government and in many, many cases this is 
breaking the cycle of dependence. 
 
If these people have children, they now become role models for 
those children. It decreases the level of social assistance and 
diminishes the chances that these people will return to the rolls. 
This program returns human capital, human investment back 
into the workforce. 
 
But not only that, Mr. Speaker. Behind every number that we 
talk about in this Assembly today is the face of someone who 
has returned to the workforce and the pride that someone has 
that’s been restored to their lives and the face, the smiling face 
it gives to the children that live in those families. They’ve 
gotten their dignity back and the feeling that they just know 
they are being productive in our workforces. 
 
But also many of them then can turn around and share this 
knowledge with other people and can share the idea that anyone 
can become a productive member of our society. And this 
program gives them the tools to do just that. 
 
It’s what I like to call — and I would like to bring the 
Assembly’s attention to, as the Western Catholic Reporter did 
from Edmonton, Alberta — “The Saskatchewan Advantage.” 
 
Too often in this Assembly we’ve heard of the Alberta envy 
from the members opposite. Now, you know, it’s been calming 
down recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they stood up and 
said, hear, hear, we’re going to be like the British Columbia 
government; you just wait and see what we do; we’re going to 
do the same things they do. We haven’t heard that. 
 
When we hear what’s happening in Alberta recently with the 
pulling out of the foundations and the pillars that have been 
important to Saskatchewan society such as health care and 
education, we don’t hear as much Alberta envy, but it still 
creeps in over there once in a while. 
 
We’re going to be like the government in Alberta. Well this 
person talks about, in 1998 and ’99, Saskatchewan spent $37 
million dollars on the child benefit program. What did Alberta 
do? It said, Alberta, in comparison, spent $6 million — a 
province with a population three times as large as 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the minister of social services then, Iris Evans, 
downplayed the Canadian Council on Social Development 
report saying her department has doubled its budget since 1998. 
So that would be a whopping $12 million, 12 million compared 
to the 37 million we spent — and more — since then in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The CCSD study provides further contrary evidence to the 
belief that a wealthy society will trickle some of that wealth 

down to the poor. 
 
We’ve heard it in America. We’ve heard it from the Tory 
government. Now they’ve changed their name. We hear it from 
the Saskatchewan Party government. It’s the trickle-down 
theory in the economy. 
 
Well this group in Edmonton knows it doesn’t work. And what 
do they say? What is more likely is that a government that puts 
a priority on ending poverty will achieve the end more readily 
than those who believe in this trickle-down myth. 
 

The Alberta government frequently trumpets the Alberta 
Advantage . . . (and) that’s only one side of the coin. (I say) 
the other side (of the coin) is . . . a healthy community 
(that) not only provides economic opportunity, it also 
provides a helping hand to those least able to help 
themselves. 

 
And it’s what the Western Catholic Reporter from Edmonton, 
Alberta calls “The Saskatchewan Advantage”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m supporting the motion before us because 
everything we’ve talked about, we’ve worked for, we’ve built 
and put into the building to independence strategy, is there. This 
program works. It’s part of what I’m proud to call the 
Saskatchewan advantage. 
 
I stand in support of the motion before us and against the 
amendment that was placed by the member opposite. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure this afternoon to get up and speak to my 
colleagues in the House in this motion that’s been brought 
forward by the NDP in regards to their so-called building 
independence program. 
 
It’s certainly interesting, as I’ve listened to the debate this 
afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the many members who have 
spoken both for and against the amendment that’s come forward 
to strengthen the motion that’s been brought forward by the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the reason we needed to bring that 
amendment forward, we need to strengthen this motion. It is 
wishy-washy. It is leaving out a great detail in what is important 
in helping people to attain the independence, to attain the pride 
that they feel when every morning they rise and, with great 
enthusiasm, go out to help take on the world, a world that has 
been given to us to look after and a world that we take a great 
deal of pleasure in in being the stewards for. 
 
Building independence is one of the most important things that 
we can do in a society. We need to build independence to create 
dignity and not, and not, Mr. Speaker, building a dependent 
workforce. 
 
We need to have people understand that what they can 
contribute to society is important. People do not want to be 
treated as work horses where they are rousted every day, fed 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

 

their oats, sent off out in front of the plough, packed off into a 
barn at night. They want the independence that can be created 
by allowing them the choices to pick and choose the career that 
they’re suited for — a career that people find fulfilling. 
 
Many of us in this Assembly of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are fully aware of the importance of being able to feel fulfilled 
in a career. And it’s important that fulfilling yourself as an 
individual and that independence, that pride that we’re . . . be 
passed on to everyone in society. 
 
What we see here by this program, a program that kind of is not 
very well taken by the province of Saskatchewan, by the people 
of Saskatchewan . . . In fact what we hear is that the NDP 
government actually had to do a poll to find out that the people 
of Saskatchewan don’t believe in their building independence 
program. 
 
Well why wouldn’t they believe that? Well what do we see, Mr. 
Speaker? We see a government that is losing people, losing 
jobs. And so then people are thinking well, if there’s jobs not 
being created in this province, jobs that were supposed to be 
30,000 more today than what was . . . there was in 1999. In fact, 
there’s almost double that . . . or almost that amount lost in this 
province, almost 24,000 jobs were lost since 1999, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
It would leave people of Saskatchewan with the uncomfortable 
feeling then, is that if there’s job losses, then maybe the rolls on 
. . . for social assistance are actually increasing. 
 
So let’s take a look at how this government, not only in their 
creativity to fudge a budget, is probably using the same type of 
accounting techniques to show the people of Saskatchewan that 
they’re actually lowering the rolls for social assistance in this 
province. 
 
Now they have been saying that in the past few years, since the 
summer of about 1998 or so, since these programs first came 
into force, is that welfare rolls in this province have actually 
been reduced by 5,000, Mr. Speaker. But as we watch this 
government over the last several weeks and certainly last year 
again also, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of Saskatchewan are 
very suspicious of the numbers that the government uses. 
 
This year they said they balanced the budget. There’s a 
significant shortfall, but it’s still balanced. Well, who bought 
into their story, Mr. Speaker? Well nobody in this province. 
 
In fact we found out very clearly that when the government 
starts throwing numbers out, that the people of Saskatchewan 
become extremely suspicious of where they’re being led — 
down the garden path for the most part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talked about 5,000 people being removed from social 
assistance rolls in this province. But we know that some of the 
programs that are being used, where young people who have 
ended up on hard times, have ended up having to draw 
assistance for a period of time, the Department of Social 
Services is . . . seems to be quite willing to help those young 
people try to re-educate themselves, finishing high school if 
need be, moving them on into the technical schools if need be. 

And further yet, Mr. Speaker, they’re even moving them into 
university level. Mr. Speaker, they’re still on social assistance. 
But what we’re trying to understand here, Mr. Speaker, is that 
does this government still count them on the social assistance 
rolls? 
 
Well, according to what we’re hearing from the Department of 
Social Services — no, they don’t; they don’t count them. They 
count these people as being gainfully employed. They’re going 
to school; they’re drawing assistance to do so. They’re trying to 
better themselves — which we fully support — but the reality 
is, is that this government counts them as employed. 
 
And we see then by their numbers is that although they’re 
saying that employment opportunities in Saskatchewan are 
dropping, if we list people as being employed who are actually 
not employed, it actually creates a false number. So even 
though it shows that we’ve significantly lost jobs in the last few 
years, especially since 1999 when this government promised 
30,000 new jobs primarily in the forestry industry. And then we 
found out through Statistics Canada, actually in the forestry 
industry right across the main in Saskatchewan, we actually lost 
5,000 jobs in forestry alone. 
 
And where are all those people now, Mr. Speaker? Because 
maybe they’re drawing unemployment insurance, are they then 
considered employed? Is that how they get some of their 
employment numbers? Or because they’re in school, then are 
they considered gainfully employed and therefore we don’t 
need to count them under social assistance? When the fact of 
the matter is that in order to get through every day and every 
week and to pay their bills, that society — rightfully so — is 
helping them along. 
 
And maybe that’s why people of Saskatchewan were highly 
suspicious, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government did their 
polling on the building independence program and found out 
that nobody actually believed them when they said that social 
assistance rolls had actually declined. 
 
What is actually needed in this province, Mr. Speaker, is 
another step. Not only do we need to help people achieve their 
independence gainfully through education, but there has to be 
something there waiting for them afterwards. And as we’ve 
noticed, specifically this year by far has been the worst in the 
three years since 1999 when this government — through its 
behind closed doors and in the dark of night — managed to 
sneak back into power again with the help of their so-called 
friends, that we’ve actually lost jobs. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Was anything created in this province, Mr. Speaker? No. 
Twenty-four thousand jobs lost. That’s what we’ve heard. 
 
More people have left Saskatchewan in the last three years since 
the 1930s, since the depression of the 1930s. It’s the worst, it’s 
the worst population decline that we’ve seen in this province. 
And what have we had for the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker? 
We’ve had an NDP government. And so then, when you add up 
two and two, you get four. There’s no one else to blame but the 
NDP government. 
 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we take a look around the rest of the country, 
we take a look at our neighbours to the east and to the west . . . 
and certainly the member from Regina Wascana Plains clearly 
outlined her envy of Alberta this afternoon, to the job creation 
that’s going on there, the wealth that’s being created for people 
there. And people on this side, the members on this side of the 
House are very, very curious as to why we cannot have that in 
Saskatchewan here; that why do we need to brag about a 
building independence program when the reality is we should 
be bragging about job creation going on in this province. 
 
We take a look at other provinces throughout the country. You 
take a look at, you know, Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island; 
two small provinces — very small in physical size compared to 
Saskatchewan — two provinces that have been heavily 
devastated by the cutbacks in fishing that had to take place in 
order to, in order to maintain the fish stocks on the East Coast. 
 
And yet we take a look back at what’s going on in those two 
provinces. Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s job creation going on in 
those two provinces. They have decided that they are not going 
to follow the old path of this is the way we’ve always done it 
and that’s the way, just going to keep going that way. They’ve 
decided that because of what’s happened to the fish stocks that 
they have to retool their provinces to take advantage of some of 
the things they already have there. 
 
Prince Edward Island, one of the most beautiful provinces . . . 
places . . . one of the provinces . . . one of the most beautiful 
places in the world, and they’ve decided to up the ante on 
tourism. What has this province done to encourage tourism? 
Virtually nothing. 
 
The fact of the matter is, when you watch any of the programs, 
the Canadian programming on the . . . on television, Mr. 
Speaker, you see . . . who’s advertising on it? New Brunswick, 
Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland, Quebec — they’re 
inviting people to come there, that there are great things 
happening there and come and see the beauty of our province. 
 
Well so what’s happening here? This . . . (inaudible) . . . fact of 
the matter is if you go to Quebec, Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, 
New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, what are they showing 
there? Everybody else except Saskatchewan. You can’t see this 
government promoting Saskatchewan anywhere. In fact what 
they’ve done — and you take a look at this program, this 
building independence program — all it does is build a wall, a 
cement wall around Saskatchewan to keep everybody out. 
 
Well in some . . . (inaudible) . . . we’re a little worried they’re 
trying to keep people in. Except of course the member from 
Athabasca. He has his harum-scarum program of developing an 
exit strategy. 
 
This is how you would build independence in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You create an exit strategy for 
northerners. You put together a program, looked like pretty 
good on the surface, until you got down to about the third line 
when you’re . . . we were reading the proposal, and there it was. 
We’re going to educate the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
train them for quality jobs in Alberta. 
 
Now the members on the other side are always complaining that 

members on this side have Alberta envy. Well we don’t have 
Alberta envy. We don’t have Manitoba envy. We have 
Saskatchewan envy. And we have no intention of developing 
exit strategies for people to move to Alberta or Manitoba or 
North Dakota or Quebec or Ontario or Newfoundland for that 
matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about what this government has done, losing jobs 
would be of course number one. We take a look at health care; 
they promised in the 1999 election to hire 500 more health care 
workers. Sounds like a pretty good promise. In the campaign 
we couldn’t argue with it and decided that . . . and agreed with 
them that this would be a good . . . But what did they do? They 
made the promise as in typical NDP fashion, Mr. Speaker, made 
a promise with no intention of keeping it. 
 
So what have we . . . what’s happened here? When it comes to 
building independence, the independence, Mr. Speaker, is being 
built in Alberta for Saskatchewan nurses. Now how does that 
build independence, I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
We need to build independence in Saskatchewan, and we need 
to build it for the people of Saskatchewan so that they will stay 
here, raise their families here, and pay taxes here to support the 
social programs that are necessary in today’s society rather than 
building independence for people to move to Alberta, 
Manitoba, or Quebec, or Newfoundland where there’s actually 
jobs for them. 
 
Now when the NDP talk about this promise to . . . of how well 
this building independence program is going, how do they be 
able to establish the credibility that’s necessary to promote this 
program to those of us in Saskatchewan who believe that it’s 
incumbent upon all of us to help those that are less fortunate, 
less fortunate than ourselves. 
 
They can’t balance the budget. That destroys their credibility. 
They promised to cut the debt; they didn’t do that, which again 
is an attack on NDP government credibility. So how is this 
going to be, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to the building 
independence program and their promotion — actually having 
to advertise that it even exists to people — that there’s any 
sense of credibility in Saskatchewan for a program that may 
have some potential? 
 
Of course, from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, building 
independence is absolutely crucial. And we see that 
jurisdictions throughout the country, there’s a national program, 
provincial programs to build independence, to help people to 
get out from underneath that yoke of social assistance. It’s . . . 
and is mentioned several times by the member from Wascana 
Plains, the degrading effect that that has upon lives, whether it’s 
the adult members of the family or the children of the family. 
 
And so how does this credibility for this program ever get 
established in this province when the people of this province 
have already decided that this government has no credibility? 
And so then why should we believe them when they say that we 
have actually reduced social assistant rolls by 5,000 people 
when we can’t believe them on anything else that they are 
saying, Mr. Speaker? 
 



April 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

 

And of course as we see and we see from the members opposite 
and certainly from the letters that we’re getting on this side of 
the House — and of course their copies, Mr. Speaker, from the 
letters that the members on the other side of the House — is that 
certainly the people of Saskatchewan are starting to wave the 
white flag everywhere and they want an election so that 
programs such as this, this building independence program, can 
be held up to the light and people make a decision in the voting 
booths of Saskatchewan. 
 
We would need less, Mr. Speaker, less opportunities for a 
building independence program if there was real jobs in this 
province. This government has decided that they don’t . . . even 
they won’t invest in this province. 
 
Where are they investing? Where are they investing, Mr. 
Speaker so that the jobs are here in Saskatchewan for the people 
who are in the building independence program then have the 
jobs that are necessary to keep them off the social assistant rolls 
for the future? Well let’s see. They have a dot-com company in 
Atlanta. So how many people who are on social assistance that 
are in the building independence program are going to be able 
to take part in that? Well there’ll be none, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No one in Saskatchewan, whether you are already gainfully 
employed or whether you’re in the building independence 
program, are going to be able to take advantage of this 
government investing in a dot-com company, Retx, in Atlanta, 
Georgia. 
 
Now how many people in the building independence program 
are going to benefit from this government, from this 
government, this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, investing in 
the stock market of Australia? How many jobs are coming to 
Saskatchewan so that people in the building independence 
program are going to have jobs in Saskatchewan? Well the 
reality is, Mr. Speaker, none of them. 
 
Not one single person in Saskatchewan, not one single person 
who is already gainfully employed, not one single person who 
is in the building independence program is going to be able to 
have a job because of this NDP government’s investment in the 
stock market in Australia. 
 
Now if we’re going to take that kind of investment and pour it 
into foreign countries those dollars could have been gainfully 
used — gainfully used — Mr. Speaker, in this province. What 
could they have done? We could have lowered taxes so that 
there would be job opportunities for those in the building 
independence program. We could have cut taxes for companies 
so that they would have moved here to create jobs for people in 
the building independence program. 
 
Now is any of that happening? No. In fact what we’ve seen in 
the year 2001 is that there’s actually fewer companies operating 
in Saskatchewan than there was the year before. So how are we 
supposed to have the jobs for the people in this building 
independence program in Saskatchewan if the companies are 
actually leaving this province? 
 
People are leaving this province in droves, which is a way of 
voting with your feet, Mr. Speaker; which is passing an 
extremely negative connotation on this province that there’s 

nothing here. And yet this government wants to talk about a 
building independence program, and then have someone like 
the Minister of Northern Affairs, the member from Athabasca, 
put together a strategy — an exit strategy to go to Alberta. 
 
So what kind of building independence does that create to help 
Saskatchewan? So we’re building independence to help 
Alberta? Are we building independence to help Manitoba? Are 
we building independence to help the Northwest Territories? 
Are we building independence to help the Yukon Territory? Or 
are we building independence to help the United States? What 
are we building independence for? 
 
Well we’re certainly not building independence to help 
Saskatchewan. We have fewer jobs, fewer people. And yet this 
government wants to brag about their building independence 
program which has no jobs for these people to go to. In fact, 
what this government is doing is helping to manage the 
Department of Education’s decline. 
 
They talk about a building independence program for people 
that aren’t going to be here. And a building independence 
program when, on the other side of the coin, the Department of 
Education is actually . . . created a strategy, Mr. Speaker — a 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, where there’ll be 30,000 fewer kids in 
this province. 
 
And yet the members on the other side, and most specifically, 
the member from Moose Jaw North, is talking about how 
they’re a party of the kids. Well how come that they have 
designed a program where there will be 30,000 fewer kids in 
this province in the future in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members, it now being slightly 
past the hour of 5 o’clock, this House stands adjourned until 7 
p.m. this evening . . . pardon me, this House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 5 — Building Independence Program
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 5 — Building Independence Program

