















































Hansard: June 25, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2317 
 June 25, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to rise to present a petition on behalf of people who are 
concerned about the tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence should be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Langenburg, 
Churchbridge, Tantallon, Binscarth, and Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the deplorable and dangerous 
condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make the necessary repairs to 
Highway 58 in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the prescription drug hike by this government. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Indian Head 
and Wolseley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Yellow 
Grass, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and 
also to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Strongfield and Elbow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the 
boundaries of the new regional health authorities. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
Regional Health Authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Strasbourg and Bulyea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

commercial fishing on Besnard Lake. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives to 
bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation and 
to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Southey, from Saskatoon, Bjorkdale, and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the recruitment and retention of 
registered technologists and combined laboratory and x-ray 
technicians; 
 
a petition concerning Swift Current’s request for a new 
hospital; and 
 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 11, 23, 59, 129, 132, and no. 134. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you and through you to other members 
of this Hon. Assembly three people who are very important to 
me. 
 
And seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, firstly, my parents, 
Charlie and Verna Stewart. They have farmed all of their adult 
lives, firstly in the Chamberlain district and later near Pense, 
where I was raised. They are now retired in Regina. They still 
take a great interest in agriculture and agricultural issues and 
particularly in what happens on our farm. 
 
And with them, Mr. Speaker, is my sister, Cheryl Perry, who is 
an accountant by profession and who moved from Regina to 
Calgary four years ago to pursue a second career as an 
accounting consultant to the oil and gas industry. and they’re 
doing very well at that. I hope that all members will welcome 
my family members to this Hon. Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, sitting in the west gallery, 18 students from St. 
Margaret School in Moose Jaw. Accompanying the students are 
Monique Byers and Lana Hebert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say thank you to the grade 5 
class from St. Margaret’s for deciding to spend one of their last 
afternoons of grade 5 here at the legislature to watch 
proceedings. And I look forward to meeting with you at about 

2:30. So all members, please help me welcome the grade 5s 
from St. Margaret’s. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, a friend of mine sitting in the west gallery, who’s 
Dr. John Conway. And Dr. Conway is from Saskatoon. That 
name may take people by surprise because there is another Dr. 
John Conway who’s the Chair of the Regina Public School 
Board, but this is Saskatoon’s Dr. John Conway. 
 
And he is a retired professor of psychology from the University 
of Saskatchewan, has also helped the provincial government 
giving out some advice over the past few years. I believe he’s 
now retired from the University of Saskatchewan but still very 
active in the community. And I’d like everyone to join with me 
in welcoming Dr. John Conway to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with members opposite in welcoming the 
Stewarts here today. 
 
They’re my neighbours in Regina and I have to say I see their 
regular interest in agriculture when they dig up their yard every 
year and replant it in a new way. 
 
And I would also like to mention that Ms. Stewart was an active 
part of my congregation of St. James when I was there and was 
a very strong support. So I’d like to welcome them here and 
have others join me as well. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

SIAST’s Employment Rate Tops 90 Per Cent 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the crops are not the only things growing this summer. 
Opportunity is also ripening with the sweet fruit of enthusiasm 
and it’s our young people that stand to benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with the newly created 11,000 jobs 
in the Saskatchewan economy, we are starting to see the full 
cause of the effect. SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) 2002 grads recently reported in a 
survey that they continue to find jobs at a rate in excess of 90 
per cent. Graduates have also once again given the institute top 
marks for program quality and report that 91 per cent of the 
graduates have entered the labour force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the survey also showed that 92 per cent of the 
employed graduates are working here in Saskatchewan. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, some naysayers may claim that these are in 
low-paying jobs with no future. That’s not true. The survey 
discovered that the graduates’ annual training related salary 
increased by almost 5 per cent to $2,146 monthly. 
 
More than 3,700 students graduated from SIAST’s certificate 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

 

and diploma programs last year. SIAST has 41,000 full- and 
part-time students and an annual operating budget of $133 
million. Over the years, SIAST has evolved to become a 
pre-eminent institution for post-secondary education and skills 
training in Saskatchewan and an innovative leader in technical 
education. 
 
I am sure all members of the legislature join me in 
congratulating this institution on its well-deserved success. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Briercrest Grain Buys Grain Elevator 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A group of local 
farmers has purchased the abandoned Wheat Pool elevator at 
Briercrest. Briercrest Grain paid Sask Pool their asking price of 
$171,000 for the facility which includes a 26-car spot. 
Briercrest Grain is in the business of cleaning grain to export 
standards and loading producer cars. 
 
According to their feasibility study the farmer shareholders of 
Briercrest Grain indicate that the loading of 150 cars a year will 
put the new company in a break-even position, and according to 
their business so far, they are likely to be far in excess of 150 
car loadings in their very first year. 
 
The company also does custom seed cleaning. Producers can 
save 18 cents a bushel by using the Briercrest Grain facility or 
about $1,600 for a hopper car of wheat. And producers from 
outside of the immediate area have shown interest in utilizing 
the company’s facilities. 
 
The facility is served by Southern Rails Co-op short-line 
railway and this initiative will certainly help to sustain them as 
well. 
 
Congratulations to the farmer shareholders of Briercrest Grain. 
We appreciate your efforts to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Restoration Projects Win Awards 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there are some small but 
significant stories that have their own kind of pleasant 
synchronicity. Such a story occurred on Saturday evening in 
Saskatoon at that castle on the riverbank — the Bessborough 
Hotel. Next to the Legislative Building, the Bess is, I would 
guess, the most recognizable heritage structure in 
Saskatchewan. It has appeared on a postcard or two in its time 
as has the legislature. 
 
At the Bessborough, the Saskatchewan Architectural Heritage 
Society held its annual awards ceremony. Four awards were 
announced including one for, quote, “the Lieutenant Governor 
of Saskatchewan’s Award for Heritage Architecture Excellence 
in Restoration and Renovation of Landmark Property”. That’s 
quite a mouthful, Mr. Speaker, but it is this award I wish to 
speak to because it is for a project we in this building are quite 
familiar with: the restoration and conservation of 
Saskatchewan’s most well-known government building — this 

one. 
 
Named in the award are SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), PSW Architecture and Interior 
Design Ltd., and Dominion Construction. We know what a 
monumental task this was, and it is good that it be recognized. 
 
Other awards were made for, quote, “Adaptive Reuse” of the 
old CP Telegraph Building connected to Casino Regina, 
Adaptive Reuse of the old Eaton’s department store in 
Saskatoon by the Saskatoon Board of Education, and for 
excellence in educational and community programming to the 
town of Whitewood for the Whitewood Heritage Walking Tour 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are a young province with few buildings of 
heritage quality. We can all applaud efforts that are being made 
to preserve our heritage for future generations. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Celebrity Sports Dinner and Auction in Unity 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday evening 
Shirley and I were pleased to attend the Curtis Brown celebrity 
sports dinner and auction in the Unity arena. 
 
The Unity Arena Project Committee spent the year planning 
and finalizing several fundraising events. The supper and 
auction were well attended by over 400 people. This is a 
tremendous credit to the whole community, but especially to the 
volunteers on various committees for their hard work to 
renovate their arena and curling rink. 
 
Special mention also for their guest of honour, Curtis Brown, a 
hometown boy who is achieving his own goals in the NHL 
(National Hockey League), currently with the Buffalo Sabres. 
He was pleased to be able to assist Unity with this special event. 
 
Thanks also to Eldon Ducherer who did a fine job of emceeing. 
 
I would like . . . I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Unity and district for a job well done. Just 
another example of how rural Saskatchewan keeps their 
communities going. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chief Page of Canadian Senate 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
former Page with this Legislative Assembly and Luther College 
university student and former resident of Regina Sherwood, 
Melanie Bratkoski, is today the Chief Page of the Canadian 
Senate. Currently she studies political science and Canadian 
studies at the University of Ottawa and she has been a Senate 
Page for the last two years. 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

Melanie works at least two days a week, serves in Senate 
committee meetings, and attends university on a full-time basis. 
She also recruits, trains, and schedules all other Pages of the 
Senate. But this busy schedule does not faze her. She says that 
it is all about planning and time management, and the Senate 
has plenty of surprises that can really throw off her game plan. 
 
Melanie keenly appreciates the significance of her position and 
loves the fact that she gets to witness history in the making. She 
also likes meeting Pages from throughout the country and says 
it gives her a real idea of the rich cultural flavour of Canada. 
 
Melanie plans to attend one more year at the University of 
Ottawa and then, Mr. Speaker, plans to return to Regina to 
finish her degree at Luther College, University of Regina. 
 
Melanie served during the last session of the previous 
legislature in 2000 and in the fall session of the first . . . of the 
current legislature in December 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members look forward to joining 
with me in saluting the accomplishments of this very, very 
well-deserving young woman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Angela’s Academy 2002 Graduation 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, St. 
Angela’s Academy at Prelate, Saskatchewan held its graduation 
exercises. St. Angela’s Academy is a Catholic residential high 
school for young women in grades 9 through 12 where the 
Ursuline Sisters and the lay staff educate for life. 
 
At St. Angela’s Academy students experience a lived-in 
Christian community and a well-rounded Christian ethics 
program that empowers students for effective witness and 
service to others. Students also experience a wide range of high 
school credit courses qualifying students for a university 
admission along with much appreciated individual help outside 
of class. 
 
The academy also offers the fine arts as a vitally important 
component of the curriculum, fully incorporated into the daily 
schedule. Students experience the development of the whole 
person through a comprehensive sports and activities program 
while experiencing an opportunity for growth and fundamental 
life skills in everyday living, as well as becoming good leaders, 
followers, and innovators. 
 
Students also experience a unique opportunity to meet many 
other girls and to form deep and lasting friendships. 
 
Congratulations to Lisa Jo De Bussac, Tanya Guran, Bernadette 
Hamilton, and my daughter, Lacey Weekes. All four girls from 
Biggar made the honour roll. Tanya Guran also received the 
excellence in math for grade 10. I’m very proud of my 
daughter, Lacey, who also became . . . was named Miss 
Congeniality for the grade 10 class and also Sportswomen of 
the Year for 2002. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the students, staff, and 
Ursuline Sisters for another outstanding year. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High-speed Internet Service Expands 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
more good news as we build the new Saskatchewan. 
 
SaskTel High Speed Internet is now available in Lampman, 
Saskatchewan. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, Lampman is the latest 
Saskatchewan community to join SaskTel’s High Speed 
Internet service network. 
 
Thanks to the CommunityNET program implemented by this 
government, SaskTel has been able to expand its commercial 
High Speed Internet more quickly than was originally intended. 
You may ask: does this expansion benefit the people of 
Alberta? No! Maybe the urban populations? Well not directly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This latest expansion to 191 Saskatchewan communities 
benefits the citizens and businesses in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, once this latest expansion is complete about 71 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s population will have access to 
SaskTel’s High Speed Internet service. 
 
Since 1995, SaskTel has invested more than 56 million to offer 
a high quality, price competitive, high-speed service. 
Saskatchewan residents and communities in all locations of the 
province are receiving high-speed access sooner than . . . 
sooner, Mr. Speaker, than many large urban centres in Canada 
and North America. 
 
As usual, Mr. Speaker, this is simply more good news for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

National Agriculture Framework Agreement 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the federal, provincial, and 
territorial Agriculture ministers will meet this week to continue 
work on the new federal-provincial agriculture framework 
agreement in principle. It’s one that they developed one year 
ago in Whitehorse. At that time and at the follow-up meeting in 
Toronto this past January, Saskatchewan’s Agriculture minister 
fully participated and agreed with the plan for the new national 
agriculture programming. The only dissenting voice at the table 
was Quebec, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: does the Saskatchewan 
government and our Agriculture minister still support the 
framework agreement in principle as reached in Whitehorse one 
year ago, and will the minister be working in good faith toward 
finalizing the new framework agreement at the meetings that he 
will be attending this week? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member is absolutely 
correct that this Minister of Agriculture, the member from 
Yorkton, has worked hard over the course of the past year with 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

 

his colleagues, other ministers of Agriculture across Canada, to 
build the agriculture policy framework, longer term safety net 
programs, and so on. 
 
Given the context, Mr. Speaker, of the current discussions in 
Halifax, however, we know that this legislature and the 
producing organizations of Saskatchewan and farmers in 
Saskatchewan have said very clearly to us that we should not be 
signing any deal that ties this province or this treasury or these 
producers into trade support payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken that position; we’re taking that 
position to Halifax and we’re going to be fighting hard for the 
federal government to assume its full responsibility for their 
area of responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
Premier’s answer reminds me of a show that my teenage 
daughters used to watch. It was called Clueless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new national agriculture framework agreement 
is not the trade support that we’ve been lobbying for. And it 
states that the federal and provincial governments are 
committed to the current review of farm safety nets with the 
aim of completion in 2002. The communiqué states, and I 
quote: 
 

They agreed that work on the long-term direction, in close 
consultation with industry, will build on safety net funding. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our provincial Agriculture minister agreed to this 
statement one year ago. You’d think that as a result of that, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture would have started preparing. You 
would think they would have started looking ahead at what 
Saskatchewan would be expected to contribute financially to 
their commitment to, quote: 
 

. . . build on safety net funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: if the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government, and specifically the minister, still supports 
the national agriculture framework agreement, why did the 
NDP slash $50 million out of the provincial Agriculture 
department’s budget this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I will remind the member and all 
members of the House again that as a provincial treasury, on 
behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers, we are supporting programs 
in agriculture at a rate four times the national average. Four 
times the national average. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That support, Mr. Speaker, is coming 
from taxpayers across this province. That’s twice as high as any 
other province in Canada. Now, Mr. Speaker, the member will 
know that in this year’s budget some of the funding for those 
programs of support to agriculture have been paid out last year. 
She will know that, while the federal Government of Canada 

has been reducing its financial support for crop insurance, this 
government has been increasing its support for crop insurance 
by a total of $14 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, so we are there, we have 
been there, and we will be there financially, Mr. Speaker. But 
where we will not be financially is taking on the treasuries of 
Washington and Europe. The Chancellor of Germany is this 
week, these days in Canada admitting that the Europeans have 
been subsidizing their farmers to a state which makes them 
embarrassed to talk about it. Well we’ll talk about it, Mr. 
Speaker. We need an end to those European subsidies. We need 
an end to those American subsidies. But in the meantime we 
need a national Canadian government that will stand up for 
Canadian producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 
is typical of the NDP government. On one hand they support 
the federal-provincial agriculture framework agreement, leading 
the farm families of this province to believe that they’re 
working in their best interest. But on the other hand, as the 
Premier should know, here at home they cut the agriculture 
budget by $50 million. They slashed millions out of the crop 
insurance program, and they hiked up the premiums; they cut 
the property tax rebate program; and they are losing the fight 
with the federal government for trade injury compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP slashed provincial programming 
for Saskatchewan farm families at the same time they’re 
supposedly committing to building a national, long-term safety 
net funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member, the 
Agriculture critic in the opposition, has asked this question 
repeatedly over the last several days. The Minister of 
Agriculture has answered this question repeatedly. I have 
answered this question. 
 
So I think then, Mr. Speaker, it is time for the member opposite 
to start answering some questions. How about answering this 
question? When they sought government in the last provincial 
election, how much did they commit — how much did they 
commit — to new funding for the farm families of 
Saskatchewan? Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite became the 
Agriculture critic, she stood here in the corridor and said no, 
they do not have an agricultural plan; they do not have a plan 
for the farm families. 
 
We’ve been in this session how many days now — 70 or 
something — 69 days. Have we heard one word of a 
progressive plan, a new idea from the Saskatchewan Party in 
regard to the farm families of Saskatchewan? Not a word, not a 
dollar in the campaign. It’s time for that party to stand up and 
start putting out some policy. 
 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Settlement with John Popowich 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Justice. We have to get these in before July 1. 
 
Last week the Justice minister announced the NDP would settle 
a lawsuit with Saskatoon police officer, John Popowich, by 
paying him $1.3 million. The Justice minister told the reporters 
the government settled the malicious prosecution lawsuit 
because they would likely lose the case in court and face an 
even higher payout. 
 
Mr. Speaker, malicious prosecution is an extremely serious 
breach of conduct for any government. It means the government 
pursued an investigation and laid charges and persecuted a 
Saskatchewan resident without proof and with the purpose of 
abusing or perverting the Justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, are the Crown prosecutors involved in the 
malicious prosecution of John Popowich still prosecuting cases 
for the provincial government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the issue 
raised by Mr. Popowich and responded to by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, a settlement was reached whereby the 
government paid a sum of money to Mr. Popowich in 
settlement of his dispute with the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was done in the normal course of doing 
business. You fight hard for a case but, Mr. Speaker, sometimes 
rather than let it go to a court, you decide to make a settlement. 
That’s what happened here without the admission of any guilt 
or anything of that sort, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I made it clear today that with regards to the prosecutors, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have faith in the prosecution service, those 
prosecutors in particular, and they remain prosecuting cases on 
behalf of the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister has admitted the government pursued a case against 
John Popowich without reasonable and probable cause. The 
minister has also admitted the government prosecutors had 
improper motives in pursuing the Popowich case that involved 
the perversion or abuse of justice in Saskatchewan. And in 
doing so, the minister has admitted his prosecutors abused their 
office and the office of the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government’s malicious prosecution of 
John Popowich, who the minister has clearly stated is an 
innocent man, has now cost the taxpayer $1.3 million. And that 
kind of abuse of office and incompetence by the NDP may cost 
millions more when the government settles with the people, 
with other pending lawsuits. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what steps have been taken to discipline the 
prosecutors who abused their office in the malicious 
prosecution of John Popowich? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me just read what I 
said to the media earlier on today when I indicated that I wanted 
to clarify some of the things I’d said earlier about this 
settlement and which, on reflection, I see have conveyed the 
wrong impression. Mr. Speaker, I said the following: 
 

Firstly, the pre-trial judge did not express any conclusion 
that our prosecutors had acted maliciously in this case. I 
cannot go into the detail . . . (of course but) . . . I think I can 
properly clarify that it is not the role for a pre-trial 
conference judge to express conclusions, and Mr. Justice 
Baynton did not do so. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also said that: 
 

. . . the government is satisfied that our prosecutors did not 
act maliciously and, indeed that they not only acted 
honestly, but that they exercised their best professional 
efforts in a highly stressful situation and at a time when we 
knew much less than we know now about how to deal with 
such cases. In short, I want to make it very clear that we 
have the utmost confidence in our prosecutors’ integrity. I 
regret very much that I failed to convey that sense of 
confidence in my statements last week. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister 
did convey is that if he stayed in court he would have lost and it 
would have cost the taxpayers more money than paying as if he 
was guilty. That’s what he admitted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister won’t take responsibility for the 
views of his office that resulted in the malicious prosecution of 
John Popowich. The minister doesn’t appear to be concerned 
about the fact that the NDP has devastated the lives of Mr. 
Popowich and many other innocent people by accusing, 
charging, and then prosecuting them for crimes in which they 
had no part; by building cases for which the government had no 
reasonable proof and for purposes that perverted the justice 
system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, all Crown prosecutors in 
Saskatchewan are responsible to the Saskatchewan Law Society 
for their professional conduct. 
 
If the NDP refuses to take action against the prosecutors 
involved in the malicious prosecution of John Popowich, will 
the minister turn the full and complete file over to the 
Saskatchewan Law Society for them to investigate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let me clear the member’s confusion on one point. By 
the settlement with Mr. Popowich, the Government of 
Saskatchewan plainly admitted its responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

 

And that is, I think, only proper when things have taken place in 
the way they did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that does not mean that a person who’s called 
upon to make thousands of judgment calls in their work as a 
prosecutor on a daily basis — 84,000 cases a year, about 18 
going to court, Mr. Speaker — with only about, with five, with 
five, Mr. Speaker, becoming problematic over a 10-year period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have faith in our prosecutors. They’re doing a 
good job for the province and they will continue to do a good 
job for the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Involvement in Cable Television Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For some time we’ve 
been trying to find out how much the government, through 
SaskTel, is going to spend getting into the cable television 
business. 
 
And what we found out, Mr. Speaker, today at Crown 
Corporations Committee, is that they’ve already spent $50 
million getting into the cable TV business and they have plans 
to spend 21 million more dollars, Mr. Speaker, for a total of 
over $70 million to get into the cable television industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan, to pursue a venture that one of the 
senior officials, that the senior official at SaskTel characterized 
as follows. 
 
He said nobody’s quite certain of whether or not there is a 
sound and valid business case here. That’s what the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of SaskTel said about them getting into cable 
television. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that other telephone companies across 
this country have looked at this. They’ve spent millions of 
dollars looking at cable TV and they’ve walked away, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The question to the minister is, has the NDP learned any lessons 
at all from those experiences? It looks like they’re going to 
spend over $70 million to get into cable TV to compete against 
businesses already offering the services, including co-ops, 
including a business that they own shares in, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re going to get into this business, spend $70 million. Does 
the minister think that’s the right decision for the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well we’ve answered this question a number of times. But you 
know I’m going to refer to this again. 
 
When I get my monthly cable bills, Mr. Speaker, inserted in 
with the bill, Mr. Speaker, every month, every month, Mr. 
Speaker, along with the bill is an advertisement from — I see 
here we’re partners with Rogers AT&T — from Access cable, 
is a picture of a cellphone, a cellphone right on the front, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They’re supposed to be a cable company, Mr. Speaker, but 
they’re diversifying like many other companies are 

diversifying, Mr. Speaker. The facts are that we are in a 
deregulated, highly competitive industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have two options, Mr. Speaker. We can either choose to 
tell SaskTel to entirely get out of business — shut down, sell, 
full stop, period — or compete, just like they wanted SaskTel to 
compete, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just to be helpful to 
the minister, you know he’s been speaking about that bill and 
holding that bill up in the House for well over a month and a 
half. We would advise him to pay the bill, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to cut his cable off, Access Communications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year in Crown Corporations we raised a 
concern about why SaskTel and the NDP would pursue this 
venture, why they would pursue this venture when other telcos 
have spent millions of dollars looking at it and they’ve walked 
away. We’re not even asking about the competitive side of this 
right now; that’s what the minister was answering. We’re 
asking about the expenditure of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Now in defence of this the CEO at the time, Mr. Ching, said, 
well those companies had walked away but there was a 
company in Atlantic Canada called Aliant, and Aliant was 
doing the same thing. And they used this to justify their 
investment. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, last week Aliant announced that they are 
getting out of the cable TV business, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
going to give all 3,300 of their customers a satellite dish, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the question to the minister is this: in light of what’s 
happening in this industry, in light of the fact that SaskTel’s 
ready to spend another $20 million, in light of the fact that other 
telcos are walking away from major investments, will the 
minister stand in his place and tell the Assembly if he thinks 
this is the right decision for Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, irrespective 
of what that member might think, or what that party might 
think, or what the member from Wood River might think, Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you what the public of Saskatchewan think 
about SaskTel and the services that that corporation provides 
for them, Mr. Speaker 
 
We’re rated amongst the highest of any company in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada, Mr. Speaker, bar none compared 
to any private sector company, Mr. Speaker. And we should be 
proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell you just because some private sector company is 
choosing to get out of that business doesn’t mean that SaskTel 
should get out of that business. In fact SaskTel’s history will 
show, I think, that they’ve been highly successful in many areas 
that lots of companies have not been, Mr. Speaker. And we 
should be proud of that, not chastise them for it. 
 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister tries to 
tell this Assembly what the people of Saskatchewan are 
thinking about things like this. Here’s what they think about this 
deal. 
 
From a government that pleads poverty, that cuts the agriculture 
budget in the middle of a crisis, from a government that takes 
away spot loss hail, that yanks away the property tax rebate on 
farm land, but has $80 million to invest in Australia and 70 
million more for a hare-brained scheme in cable television. 
That’s what the people of the province object to, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what they object to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister touched a little bit on 
his answer just now. He seemed to say, well Aliant . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister touched on in his 
answer the fact that while Aliant is maybe different than 
SaskTel, that’s why they’re backing away and giving everyone 
a satellite dish that used to have their cable TV service. They’re 
different. Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what Don Ching says about 
Aliant. He says: 
 

. . . remember there’s another telephone company out in the 
Maritimes called Aliant . . . Aliant is very much into the 
same type of project as we are . . . They’re trying to do it in 
the same way as we are too, not only using essentially the 
same technology, but also approaching it with the same 
care and caution. 

 
Their care and caution dictated to Aliant . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member go directly to the 
question, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Aliant has done the right thing and backed away. 
What is this minister going to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, in fact, the member is not 
accurate as he often is not accurate in representing the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I can tell you that TELUS is looking aggressively at this 
process, Mr. Speaker. In fact, Aliant is right, they . . . he’s right 
when he says Aliant is backing away. But they’re backing away 
from the delivery of the service through cable, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact, what they are pursing then, they’re giving satellite dishes 
to people, as he says, so they can deliver the service via 
satellite, Mr. Speaker. MTS (Manitoba Telecom Services) is 
looking at this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point is is that this is a highly competitive industry. 
SaskTel excels in this area. SaskTel has become now a 
competitive company just like those members wanted SaskTel 
to become. The problem is, I think, they don’t like to see 

SaskTel to become successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, the minister says 
TELUS is looking at getting into this. And his own officials at 
SaskTel talked about TELUS getting into this, Mr. Speaker, and 
here’s what they testified before the committee. He said he 
wanted to talk a little bit about the TELUS and Bell projects. He 
said: 
 

I know TELUS launched into . . . (this is a quote) it was a 
$60 million trial of video, cable-like services. 

 
And he goes on to quote. He says: 
 

I think Ted Rogers, who’s the Chairman of Rogers Cable, 
said it would have been easier . . . (for) TELUS (if they) . . . 
just bought everyone of their . . . customers a car (Mr. 
Speaker, because of the performance of this particular 
pilot). 

 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to competing with businesses in the 
province, co-ops in the province, if they proceed with the $70 
million deal they’re also going to be competing with a company 
called Persona Inc., a cable television company. And guess who 
owns 1.2 million shares in Persona, in that cable company? 
SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the minister please stand up in the Assembly and tell this 
House whose plan it was to start a cable television company to 
compete against the cable television company it already owns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
I’ve tried to find out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, to the dot-com expert. I 
have tried to find out what their policy was on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The members know full well 
that any time they’re referring to a member of the legislature, 
they should refer them only by title or by name of constituency, 
even, even though it may be in jest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Not to engage in debate, Mr. Speaker, 
but I certainly was not referring to that individual when I talked 
about a dot-com expert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tried to find out that party’s policy on anything, 
Mr. Speaker. So I did what they do. I looked up on the Web site 
what their policy was. I couldn’t find their Web site at first. So I 
finally found it and I say to the people of Saskatchewan, you 
dial up www.saskparty.flatline.com, Mr. Speaker, and you’ll 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

 

find their policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Their policy, Mr. Speaker, I tried to find it on, as the example, 
on agriculture. Up comes the nice, smiley face of the Leader of 
the Opposition with a link to the weather channel, Mr. Speaker, 
with a link to the weather channel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tried to find out what their policy was on 
external investment. Up comes a nice picture of the opposition 
leader, Mr. Speaker, with a link to the weather channel, Mr. 
Speaker. Everything is contingent on the weather, Mr. Speaker. 
They have no solid policy on anything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 79 – The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 79, The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melville on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now that we 
have some calm, I’m very pleased to introduce a young lady to 
the Assembly, something that I feel is very important for our 
students in not only grade school but high school, to participate 
in our democratic process and to watch the proceedings in this 
Assembly. 
 
And I’d like to introduce today Ms. Josie Steeves who attends 
the Estevan High School and has just entered into grade 11. 
 
She’s here to watch our proceedings as well as participate in 
some of the activities in my office, Mr. Speaker. And she’s with 
my very capable and competent staff person, Kim Emerson, 
seated in your gallery. 
 
And I’d like everybody to welcome them here this afternoon, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 16 — Economic and Contractual Relationships 
Between Government, Workers, and Taxpayers 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be introducing 
the following motion and it reads: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party’s 
endorsement of the BC approach to radically alter the 
economic and contractual relationship between 
government, workers, and taxpayers by unilaterally 
abolishing long-standing collective agreements and 
decreasing essential services. 

 
This will be moved by myself and seconded by my colleague, 
the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
All right, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a rare day and 
a rare opportunity that we get to look into a crystal ball and see 
what the future holds for us. We often would like to have that 
but you know sometimes the future is kind of scary. And here 
we have a chance to see, look into a future ball . . . into a crystal 
ball, and see what the future might look like if the 
Saskatchewan Party were to take power. 
 
Now this is really scary stuff, Mr. Speaker, and we have a rare 
and gloomy and very much black future ahead of us. Now how 
do we know this? Well we can see the things that are happening 
out in BC (British Columbia) and they are indeed very scary but 
how can we assume that this will happen in Saskatchewan? 
 
Well I want to read this quote into the record because I think 
it’s very important. It’s kind of lengthy but it really tells us what 
might happen here and what we have to do to change a 
situation. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition, on October 2, 2001, 
speaking to the North Saskatoon Business Association said the 
following, and I quote: 
 

I’ve been watching closely what is happening with the new 
government in British Columbia. Voters in BC have given 
their new government an overwhelming mandate to make 
changes . . . 
 
One initiative that I believe holds tremendous value for 
Saskatchewan is a project launched by Premier Campbell 
called the Core Services Review. 
 
The BC government is reviewing every government 
program, service, board, commission, agency, and crown 
corporation. Premier Campbell expects to save millions of 
taxpayer’s dollars through this review . . . money that will 
be used to finance his aggressive agenda of personal and 
business tax cuts and balance the budget. 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government will launch a similar 
Core Services Review in this province within 30 days of 
taking office. 
 

And this is what he said,  Mr. Speaker, and it is alarming,  and 
it is something to be concerned about. We have a very, very 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

scary future ahead if this were to come true.  We don’t have to 
worry, but we better reflect on this because it is very, very 
scary stuff. 
 
So what’s been happening in BC for the last year? What kind of 
things have been happening out there? Are things really 
positive? Now this quote from the opposition leader is kind of 
dated, it’s a few months old. Now this may be a chance for 
them to reflect on what’s happened over the year. 
 
Well in BC this is the year of broken promises by Gordon 
Campbell and the BC Liberals. 

 
Gordon Campbell promise(s) . . . tax cuts would pay for 
themselves (does that ring a bell here) but they’ve created 
the largest deficit in BC’s history. 
 
Gordon Campbell promised that he wouldn’t cut our 
education system — but schools are closing, class sizes are 
increasing, programs are being eliminated and teachers are 
getting laid off. (Indeed, very alarming stuff.) 
 
Gord Campbell (as well) promised he wouldn’t slash (the) 
public services (out there) — but he started the largest 
public services layoffs in Canadian history and he’s cutting 
programs by an average of 25 per cent. 
 
Gordon Campbell promised he wouldn’t rip up signed 
contracts (and) that’s exactly what he did. (He ripped them 
up). 
 
Gordon Campbell (also) promised he wouldn’t reduce 
welfare — but he’s cut benefits and made it harder to 
qualify for assistance. 
 

And those folks over there probably would like to see 
something like that too. They’re looking with interest on that 
one. 

 
Gordon Campbell promised to put the needs of children 
first by providing adequate funding — but he’s cut $490 
million from the budget (of) the Ministry for Child and 
Family Development, and eliminated the independent 
office of the Child, Youth & Family Advocate. 
 

This is of great concern for all people in Saskatchewan when 
you have the Leader of the Opposition saying: 
 

One initiative I believe holds tremendous value for 
Saskatchewan is a project by Premier Campbell called the 
support services review. 

 
He thinks these things have merit. And I would argue we have a 
lot to be concerned about. 
 
Now what’s happening here in Saskatchewan about welfare? I 
think we’ve got some very innovative, very progressive things 
happening. The month of May was our 90th month in a row that 
we saw welfare caseloads decreasing. In here, we need to keep 
that going. We are going in the right direction. We can’t go the 
way of BC and we definitely can’t let the Sask Party turn that 
around. 
 

Now our minister, what did he have to say about this? Well he 
said: 
 

For seven and a half years, fewer Saskatchewan people 
have relied on social assistance than compared to the same 
month in the previous year. 

 
This unprecedented reduction is the result of focused 
government efforts that assist welfare recipients to enter the 
workforce and provide additional support for low-income 
earners. 
 

Since 1997, (the minister says) building independence has 
helped 6,000 families, including 13,000 children, leave the 
welfare rolls. Furthermore, non-agricultural sectors of the 
economy has produced 35,000 jobs over the last six years. 
This is good news; this is encouraging. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what are the key ingredients to the success? Well 
one of them definitely has to be building independence, an 
outstanding program that we’ve been recognized for. And it 
works because it removes the barriers people on welfare 
experience when they try to take advantage of the economic 
opportunities that exist in our province. Now that’s very 
important that we support people as they enter the workforce. 
We can’t take away those barriers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening in BC? Well on April 1, 
here are some of the things that happened out there. And I got 
to tell you, Mr. Speaker, April 1 was no laughing matter out in 
BC this year. 
 
All right. What happened? Well first of all, the first thing they 
did — and here’s a little twist of irony — they introduced a new 
three-week waiting period before welfare benefits kick in, 
during which time the applicant is expected to look for a job. 
 
Well that’s interesting. What happened that same day? The 
supports for doing that kind of thing is taken away. The work 
entry assistance program and the transition to work assistance 
program is cut. 
 
So they introduce, you have to wait three weeks, but is there 
any support for trying to find a job, anything like that? No. It’s 
cut, slash, taken out of the picture too. So here we have people 
stranded, stranded in BC. And the same thing might happen 
here in Saskatchewan; we hope not. 
 
Now what about single parents? Single parents with more than 
one child will receive a reduced welfare benefit. Single parents 
. . . Now here’s something. I think this is right out of the 1800s. 
This is incredible, the heartlessness of this. Single mothers are 
expected to seek work when their children reach the age of 
three. It used to be, under the NDP government, the age of 
seven. They’ve cut that down to the age of three. 
 
And what about this, Mr. Speaker? What about working . . . the 
students trying to find a job in the summer? What’s the BC 
government doing about that? Here we have the elimination of 
training and work experience programs for students. This 
summer, Mr. Speaker, the elimination of the students’ summer 
works program and the youth community action program and 
the Job Start program were cut, effective April 1, 2002. What 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

 

an April Fool’s Day joke for the students thinking about 
summer work. How cruel. That’s unbelievable. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one other area that I want to talk a little bit 
about, and it’s interesting we might be talking about this later 
on in the session, but it’s the education. And what is the 
potential here in Saskatchewan if the opposition were to take 
the blueprint from Gordon Campbell in BC? What would be 
left, what would be left in the schools and the universities and 
post-secondary institutions here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Well what kind of things were happening in BC before this? 
Well BC had quite a proud track record. They were opening up 
a new school every 19 days. They had over 4,000 additional 
teachers hired since 1991 and in the last 10 years, 4,000 new 
teachers, 3 new universities — Northern BC, Royal Rhodes, 
and Tech BC. Some very exciting, innovative things. 
 
So what’s the story now? Well in BC Gordon Campbell 
promised they wouldn’t cut education. Gordon Campbell 
promised that he would cut taxes and still keep his commitment 
to balance the budget, protect health care and education 
funding. 
 
Well during the election campaign he assured the BC School 
Trustees Association that a Liberal government would not cut 
education funding. And he says, and I quote: 
 

You can count on it. You can guarantee it; it’s not going to 
happen. 

 
And he said that on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), 
April 21, 2001. 
 
Well what’s the reality; what’s the sad reality? Well since then, 
the Liberals have imposed a three-year funding freeze on our 
. . . on BC’s education system. Because of inflation and 
increasing costs school boards are left with no choice but to cut 
programs, close schools, and layoff thousands of teachers. 
Those 4,000 teachers that came on since 1991, they’re gone. 
Thousands of teachers are laid off. Class sizes are increasing 
and children in some communities have to be bused up to 80 
kilometres each way to get to school. 
 
This is not a happy thing and this is not something we want to 
see in Saskatchewan. So we can just tell the Sask Party, leave 
that plan out in BC; we do not want it here. 
 
Well what are some of the editorials saying about this? 
 

Protected is not an . . . 
 
This is from the BC School Trustees Association president, 
Gordon Comeau, the Vancouver Province, April 28: 
 

Protected is not an accurate reflection, it’s just a play on 
words. Cuts are happening and they are happening in every 
. . . in the classroom. Schools are going down. 

 
And what did the Vancouver Province have to say about this? 
 

March 27, 2002 Burnaby school trustees want an apology from 
Premier Gordon Campbell for breaking his promise for not 
cutting education funding. And what about the same paper on 
May 7, 2002, school boards, and I quote: 
 

School boards across BC are proposing to close as many as 
57 public schools at the end of the school year to balance 
their budgets, according to a survey by the BC Teachers’ 
Federation. The survey also found that (over, well) 1,857 
teaching positions will be cut. 

 
This is serious news, Mr. Speaker. This is sad news. This is 
alarming for our province if this kind of thing were to happen 
here. 
 
We see the results out in BC, we cannot let that happen here. 
And so that . . . we just have to say when we hear things about 
the program out in BC having tremendous value, we have to 
sound the alarm bells. 
 
Now the other thing that’s very interesting, and I’ll talk a 
minute about this, is what our initiative is here in Saskatchewan 
with the SchoolPLUS. But I want to go on for a minute. What are 
some of the other cuts that’s happening out in BC to what I 
believe are the essential services to having a very good 
province? 
 
Well Gordon Campbell promised to put the children first with 
proper funding. In his campaign literature, Gordon Campbell 
and the BC Liberals promised to devote the resources to the job 
needed to put the interests of kids first. 
 
Instead they cut $460 million from the budget for the ministry 
of child and family development. And they eliminated the 
independent Office of the Child, Youth and Family Advocate. 
That’s $460 million. That’s almost half a billion dollars. 
 
This is very serious stuff. And as Paul Wilcox in The 
Vancouver Sun says, “it’s a profound, profound betrayal of 
children, of families, and of voters who believe the Liberals’ 
promises.” A betrayal for sure. 
 
Now what’s happening here in Saskatchewan? Well around that 
same particular time we announced the response to the schools, 
the Role of the School initiative. And we talked about . . . we 
announced and endorsed the SchoolPLUS model. The SchoolPLUS 
model is very innovative because it talks about how we have to 
be sure that kids, that students are ready for school. 
 
Schools can be and should be much more than just a 
transmission of information. They can be rich learning 
environments. But for them to be rich learning environments 
there should be the supports for the basic underlying services so 
kids come to school well fed, in good health, and meeting . . . 
getting all the services that they need to have to have good 
productive days in school. 
 
Now our Minister of Education at the time, now the Minister of 
Learning, says the province recognizes that schools must have 
two primary functions: to educate children and youth and to 
support human services delivery at the community level. 
 
So he’s recognizing and our government is recognizing that 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

school should be much more, can be much more. And if they 
are, we’ll have greater results. They can deliver community 
services and they can also have rich learning environments. 
And this is very, very important. 
 
He goes on, the minister goes on to say a variety of students’ 
needs must be met so they are ready to learn. And this is what 
the SchoolPLUS is all about. 
 
He goes on to say while the focus of the task force dialogue was 
on schools and education, the heart of their work identified the 
critical need to improve the life opportunities for all of the 
province’s children and youth. We are pleased to adopt this 
SchoolPLUS vision of the task force, where schools serve as 
centres for education and integrated social supports to nurture 
children’s well-being and learning. 
 
This initiative, now I want to quote the Minister for Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, because I think this is important as this 
is an integrated model and many, many departments are coming 
together to support this initiative. She says: 
 

This initiative marks the beginning for Saskatchewan youth 
as they strive to reach their full potential. 
 

She goes on to say: 
 

Enhancing links between school initiatives and activities 
outside the schools will go a long way in providing 
maximum opportunities for child and youth development. 

 
So we have a plan and we see the wonderful opportunities that 
are out there for our children, for our youth. And we’re talking 
about embracing all children, the children at risk, very — very 
important to support them — and children who enjoy school 
and learn in the typical way. We have a plan that will embrace 
the whole gamut. Having a strong, strong school is our goal. 
 
But what’s happening, what’s happening out in BC? Well 
they’re cutting schools, they’re cutting schools. And this is a 
really dangerous sign. We’re on the verge of doing some 
wonderful things and if we look in that doom and gloom crystal 
ball what are we going to see? Cuts to that program. 
 
SchoolPLUS will be left to wither on the vine and what will that 
mean to our children? And we know we are on a crossroads 
here. We have children who are at risk. We have children who 
are looking for opportunities to grow and bloom in schools. 
 
And I’m thinking particularly of the Aboriginal community. I 
think we all need to be alarmed about the potential catastrophe 
that awaits here if we are to import the BC blueprint via the 
Saskatchewan Party. We have a lot of things to worry about. 
 
Now when I was doing a little research here, I just want to 
quote . . . I want to talk about one very tragic, tragic story about 
some of the things that we, we struggle with here. And there are 
challenges here, in Saskatchewan. And when we balanced our 
budget, we had to make some tough choices. 
 
But boy, would we ever have a horrible situation if we were to 
bring in some of the style of how some of the practices, some of 
the things that’s happening out in BC. And I want to talk about 

what happened on Thursday, May 30. Here, we have the BC 
Human Rights Commission scrapped, tossed, under a new 
proposed law by Gordon Campbell. This is very alarming. 
 
BC Human Rights Commission to be toast — to be tossed. This 
is, this is outrageous. This would leave this province the only 
province — and I’m talking about BC — the only province to 
not have a Human Rights Commission. Now they’re rolling it 
into another, another portfolio, but this is, this is just not doable. 
 
Now I just want to read from this news article here: 
 

The BC government (and I quote, the BC government) 
introduced draft legislation Thursday that would scrap the 
province’s human rights commission leaving only a 
tribunal to deal with complaints. The move would make the 
province the only one in Canada without such a 
commission prompting outrage from anti-racism and 
disability groups and the opposition. 

 
And I think they have a lot, a lot to be outraged about. This is, 
this is outrageous. 
 
The NDP leader, Joy MacPhail, is quoted as saying, “It will put 
British Columbia on the map with the biggest black eye it’s 
ever had.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is not good news. And this is the style, 
and I worry about the style, how governments operate. 
 
What happened to the human rights commissioner? Well, 
although the draft legislation won’t be introduced until the fall 
sitting of the legislature, the government fired Harinder Mahill, 
the acting chief commissioner, who had been in the office — or 
with the office — for 10 years. Mahill was ordered to vacate his 
office immediately and hand in his cellphone. He was escorted 
out of the building by 10 a.m. 
 
What style, what kind of government would do that kind of 
thing? And this is a kind of respect that this government in BC 
seems to have — no regard for the people who work for it, no 
regard for the professionalism, no regard for the services that a 
government should be providing its people. 
 
Now part of the motion before us today talks about how this BC 
government treats signed contracts. 
 
In November 2000, Gordon Campbell assured the health 
employees’ union that he would respect agreements that had 
been negotiated and signed by public sector workers and their 
employers. He said, and I’m quoting: 
 

“I am not tearing up any agreements,” he assured the 
HEU’s newspaper. 
 

And then you fast-forward it to January 2002 and Gordon 
Campbell is ripping up the very agreement he promised not to 
touch. 

 
He promised not to rip up this agreement and he went 
ahead and did it anyway. 

 
Said the Vancouver Sun, January 29, 2002. He didn’t even try 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

 

to negotiate first. Now how can anyone trust a deal signed by 
that government? 
 
And if we’re using the same standards, importing that 
standards, the Sask Party, how would anybody stand . . . or how 
could anyone trust the Sask Party? 
 

If this government . . . 
 
And this is a quote from the editorial from the Victoria Times 
Colonist, December 6, 2001: 
 

If the government’s aim is to increase business confidence, 
tearing up contracts, even labour contracts, isn’t the way to 
do this. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, today is January . . . or June 25. It’s six 
months to Christmas. And when I was thinking about this, this 
almost reminds me of Charles Dickens A Christmas Carol. We 
have an opportunity here to look in the future. 
 
Now if you look at the Saskatchewan past, what do you see? 
You see a strong province. A strong province with rich 
traditions of overcoming adversity, putting aside the doom and 
gloom. 
 
And what’s the Saskatchewan present? Well Saskatchewan 
present — 11,000 new jobs. I spoke earlier about the 
outstanding success of SIAST. Saskatchewan present is 
growing well. It’s doing well. We are building a strong, strong 
province in spite of the doom and gloom. 
 
But what I am really worried about is the Saskatchewan future, 
especially if the Saskatchewan Party is part of that. What would 
the Saskatchewan future look like? Well we have a chance to 
see what that would be when we talk about what the leader said 
last October. Very alarming, very alarming stuff. 
 
Now we have the opportunity to fast forward from last October 
to now, and we have the opportunity with this motion and I 
would ask the members opposite to join in condemning what 
they said last October. Be on the record. Say that was not right; 
it was a mistake. Get onside. I ask them to get onside; say, well 
you know, we saw what’s happening out BC; it’s not the right 
thing; we have changed our minds; we are not going to embrace 
Gordon Campbell’s blueprint. I think this is the time to do that. 
 
And I would say to the members opposite, put down your 
torches that you would burn up the contracts with. And I would 
say to the members opposite, to put away the fire sale signs, the 
garage sale signs that they have all ready for our Crown 
corporations. That’s what we’re worried about. Put away those 
garage sale signs, all right? I think it’s really important for us 
. . . So this is an important issue here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
We have an opportunity for the members opposite to come 
clean on this very important issue. Where are they on this? Are 
they with BC or are they with Saskatchewan? Are they with 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people who work, sign 
contracts in good faith? Or are they with Gordon Campbell, 
who would rip up those contracts, who doesn’t care about the 

people of BC, doesn’t have respect for contracts. Where are 
they on this? 
 
And I see . . . You know, we struggle every day in this House 
with the doom and gloom and the negativity of the opposition 
party and we say, before we take a break and before we go for 
the summer, let’s get on board; let’s do the right thing here and 
give a clear sign that we are here for Saskatchewan people, we 
are here for Saskatchewan opportunities. This is the 
opportunity. 
 
We see what’s happening out in BC and it does not have . . . it 
does not bode well. What about those 57 schools that will be 
closed? What about the post-secondary institutions? And I can 
tell you one about the Kootenay School of the Arts — that I 
know of students who are facing uncertain futures because that 
school is being closed. It’s being axed. Here you have 
post-secondary institutions being closed down. Unheard of in 
this province. Is that the kind of thing that we’re talking about 
here? This is alarming stuff. 
 
What are the other plans? And this is only the first year and it’ll 
be very interesting to see the final, the final outcomes of 
Gordon Campbell. Very alarming things. 
 
We have an opportunity here to do some innovative things. The 
Role of the School, the SchoolPLUS model, very exciting stuff 
when we had all sorts of people come into the consultative 
process. We had, through many hearings throughout the 
province, a whole year of dialogue. Will they rip up that 
contract? Will they rip up the social contract that we will do our 
very best by our children? This is alarming stuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that we have an opportunity and, once again, I 
would say, come on to our side, opposition. Rip up those garage 
sale signs. Rip up those garage sale signs. Put away that torch. 
And I’m going to stand here and make this motion here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very happy to join in on this because I think it’s a very 
important, important issue that the people of Saskatchewan 
need to consider as we approach an election time, which could 
be any time between now and 2005. So as we approach that 
window, I think it’s very important that people understand 
where the opposition stands on this topic. 
 
And so I want to, I want to join in. I want to reiterate some of 
the things that the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld said. And 
they need to be said. They need to be repeated a number of 
times so that people get the full impact of what it has. 
 
I’m going to quote again from a speech that the Leader of the 
Opposition made to the North Saskatoon Business Association 
wherein he says he’s been watching very closely what has been 
happening with the government in British Columbia. He says 
that they’ve given . . . 
 

(The) Voters in B.C. have given their new government an 
overwhelming mandate to make changes . . . 

 
Well I don’t think they gave that government the mandate to 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

make the type of changes that they made. And certainly the 
member from Saskatoon Idylwyld has outlined a great deal of 
the broken promises that the Campbell government in BC has 
made. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that what the opposition is 
saying when they endorse the policies of the BC government is 
that they too would adopt the same mantra and then that leaves 
you to wonder, does that also give them the liberty to break 
promises that they make in the election campaign? So I think 
you have to ask yourself that question. 
 
If they’re so proud of the job that the BC government has done 
and proud enough indeed that they say that their initiative . . . 
they say that one initiative that they believe holds tremendous 
value for Saskatchewan is a project launched by Premier 
Campbell called the core services review. 
 
Now they are adopting the direction of the BC government. 
They say that the BC government is reviewing every 
government program, service, board, commission, agency, and 
Crown corporation. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that I’m going 
to have quite a bit more to say about their position on Crown 
corporations as the afternoon carries on. 
 
Premier Campbell, they say, expects to save millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars through this review, money that he says will 
be used to finance his aggressive agenda of personal and 
business tax cuts and balance the budget. 
 
Well balance the budget I think is not exactly what turned out. 
In fact I know that they have a very significant deficit in BC 
and that they’re . . . And now so is that what the opposition says 
they would do? They would go through these massive tax cuts 
which they have been spouting about ever since they became 
the opposition — through a very strange process I might add, 
but nevertheless that’s not part of the motion. That was a very 
strange circumstance that I think we might also want to know 
about. 
 
They were elected as one entity and suddenly became another, 
and that was kind of a broken promise, I would think, as well. 
And regardless, they say that they would use this money to 
finance the aggressive agenda of personal and business tax cuts 
and balance the budget. 
 
A Saskatchewan Party government — which isn’t ever likely to 
happen, Mr. Speaker; not ever — once the people figure out 
what it is that sits across the floor and what their policies are, 
what they say about a Saskatchewan Party government is never 
going to come to pass. Because the people of Saskatchewan — 
the people of Saskatchewan — are far too smart, far too smart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Far too smart to endure the types of promises 
that these people across the way are proposing. 
 
So they say though that they would launch a similar core 
services review in this province within 30 days of taking office. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very interesting that 
a lot of the discussion, a lot of the comments made by the 
member from Saskatoon Idylwyld talked about broken 

promises. 
 
And I think what’s really interesting is the contrast. Now the 
member talked about promises that Gordon Campbell made, 
things that he would not do. And I’ll point out a few of those 
things that Gordon Campbell said he would not do and 
subsequently did. 
He said: 

 
Gordon Campbell promised that he wouldn’t reduce 
welfare. 

 
And then it goes on to say: 
 

But he’s cut benefits and made it harder to qualify for 
assistance. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the opposition says and 
that’s not what the Leader of the Opposition says. In fact, I 
believe that we have the Leader of the Opposition on record 
saying that he would eliminate some $50 million from the 
Department of Social Services. And I think that’s really 
shameful. 
 
That is indeed shameful. Because when the people of BC, when 
the people of BC are upset with Gordon Campbell for saying he 
wouldn’t do it and then he did it, just imagine how upset they 
would be with someone who says they will do it and then do it. 
 
So I think it’s interesting to note the contrast, don’t you? That 
the contrast is that he said he wouldn’t; people are ripping mad. 
And this opposition across the road says they would do it. They 
don’t hide. There’s no need, they say, to hide. They just yes, no 
kidding. 
 
Another thing Gordon Campbell said, another thing that Gordon 
Campbell said that the opposition has endorsed, the opposition 
has endorsed, says that he wouldn’t . . . Gordon Campbell 
promised that he wouldn’t privatize health care services. But 
he’s turning hundreds of millions of dollars worth of services 
over to the private sector and looking at building a private 
hospital in Abbotsford. Well . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member from 
Moosomin on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re just 
joined by a number of students and teachers and chaperones 
from Grenfell School— grade 8 students; we have 13 of them. 
 
They’re accompanied today by their teachers Rennette Edgar 
and Neil Theisen; chaperone Patty Wahpoosewyan; and Gary 
Cole is the bus driver. And we’re pleased to have the students 
today. 
 
I’d like to thank the teachers for taking the time to bring their 
students into the Assembly. I see they’ve chosen to come in 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

 

when the Assembly is just a little more serene. We’re currently 
in private members’ debate and that’s the debate that is taking 
place on the floor this afternoon. 
 
I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to joining the students in a few 
minutes for pictures and just to answer a few questions. So 
would the members join me in welcoming these students to the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 16 — Economic and Contractual Relationship 
Between Government, Workers, and Taxpayers 

(continued) 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When I left 
off — and I’d also like to welcome the visitors introduced — 
when I left off I was saying that Gordon Campbell promised 
that he wouldn’t privatize health care services, but he’s turning 
hundreds of millions of dollars worth of services over to the 
private sector, and looking at building a private hospital in 
Abbotsford. 
 
Now that certainly created a whole lot of chaos and uncertainty 
in BC. But let me contrast that to one of the candidates for the 
leadership race back in 1998, and here’s what he says back in 
March of . . . March 23, 1998. The World Spectator from 
Moosomin wrote an article about Sask . . . “Where the 
candidates stand” it’s called, Mr. Speaker. And it talks about the 
Sask Party leadership hopefuls, explaining their views. 
 
So I compare that to Gordon Campbell who created all sorts of 
chaos in BC when he broke his promise not to privatize health 
care services, to the member from Wood River. The member 
from Wood River, when he was running for the leadership, said 
this. He said: 
 

The whole health care system needs a review. I’m in favour 
of private clinics. 

 
That’s what he said. He said right out front, right up top, “I’m 
in favour of private clinics.” 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, health care is probably one 
of the most important topics to Saskatchewan people that you 
will ever find. And certainly it has been a cornerstone of 
government policy. It is taking tremendous effort to revamp it 
and restyle it and modernize it and make sure that we are able to 
continue delivering services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And it’s a very important part of our Saskatchewan heritage. 
 
And the member from Wood River says, well not me — I’m in 
favour of private clinics. 
 
And Gordon Campbell, who they endorse, says he wouldn’t 
privatize them but once he got in there he is planning on turning 
over those services to the private sector and looking at building 
a private hospital in Abbotsford. 
 

So if you can imagine the people of BC being upset, you can 
imagine how the people of Saskatchewan would feel, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another important and interesting aspect of what the opposition 
talks about . . . And constantly in this House every day, they 
stand up and they ask question after question after question 
about the operations of government and about finances. 
 
I’ve served, Mr. Speaker, on the Public Accounts Committee. I 
serve on the Crown Corporations Committee. I know how 
interested the opposition members are in public accountability 
and, Mr. Speaker, I am too. 
 
I think it’s very important that the people of Saskatchewan are 
able to have faith in the accountability, in the policies, the 
programs, the sound financial management of our government. 
It’s a very important factor and I don’t fault opposition 
members for wanting to probe and delve and do the work and 
reveal things and assure the voters that the government and its 
agencies are doing a good job for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think, as I say it’s important, and as I know the opposition 
believes that that’s important, Gordon Campbell promised to 
run the most open and accountable government in Canada. But 
they’ve shut down or reduced funding for independent offices, 
restricted the flow of information, and failed to consult British 
Columbians on important decisions. 
 
So now how do you think that fits in? They would follow 
Gordon Campbell’s lead. That’s what they said. They believe in 
what . . . The leader of the Saskatchewan Party said that they 
would implement a core services review and that it appears that 
the BC government is on the right track. That’s what they say. 
 
In fact, we have the member . . . Let me see now, where is this 
member from . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Lloydminster. We 
have the member from Lloydminster and he’s on record there. 
He says if in BC . . . he says if BC is doing the right thing, we 
want to learn from that. 
 
And the radio announcer says, “Do you think BC is doing the 
right thing?” 
 
And the member from Lloydminster says: 
 

We understand they are doing the right thing to attract 
business, trying to make opportunities. If they are doing the 
right thing, we would certainly implement it. 

 
Now that’s from a rather gentle member of the opposition. 
That’s a rather gentle member of the opposition. And I’ll tell 
you that from my experience, there are some who would not be 
as gentle. And yet that’s what he says, Mr. Speaker. If they’re 
doing the right thing, then they would want to do it too. 
 
And so how does that fit in with the opposition’s demand for 
public accountability and this government’s desire to provide 
public accountability? How do you suppose that adopting 
Gordon Campbell’s approach to this could possibly fit in with 
our desire and our agreement and our implementation of many 
programs, many of the recommendations of the Provincial 
Auditor who has set about to improve public accountability, and 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

the members of the opposition who have set about in the 
committee meetings to ensure that there was public 
accountability? 
 
Now how, how, how . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well they 
can’t be serious if they’re going to approve of what Gordon 
Campbell has done, because he has cut services in those 
departments. He has made it sure . . . he has made sure. 
 
Now I want to go into another little promise, I want to go into 
another little promise that Gordon Campbell made. And he said 
that they promised that they wouldn’t slash the public service. 
Now this is just another, just another minor little promise made 
by the Premier of BC not to slash the public service. 
 
He says, Gordon Campbell says — and I quote from the 
Victoria Times Colonist on April 26 — he says: 
 

“Our goal is not to go in and slash the public service,” said 
Campbell in March of 2001. 
 

Christy Clark said: 
 

We’re not planning massive layoffs in the civil service. 
 

And that was from the Voice of the Province, February 14, 
2001. 

 
While seeking votes from government workers and 
small-business owners in Victoria- Beacon Hill, Jeff Bray 
told Concerned, “There’s not going to be massive job cuts.” 

 
This was quoted in the Victoria Times Colonist, April 26. 
 
And Sheila Orr, who also needed to win votes from workers 
concerned about the future of their jobs, said: 
 

I have made it very, very clear. We have no intention of 
going out and firing the public service. 

 
But we all know what happened once the Liberals managed to 
win their seats . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What happened? 
 
Ms. Jones: — You want to know what happened? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us what happened. 
 
Ms. Jones: — All right. What happened is, even though BC has 
the second leanest public service in Canada, one-third of the 
public service workers — almost 12,000 people, Mr. Speaker 
— will be laid off in the next three years. One-third. 
 
Now the opposition, the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about public safety? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Yes, what about public safety? What about law 
and order? Well this law and order opposition that we have 
across the way — what about law and order? What about 
delivering services to people? 
 

But I want to compare that because in Saskatchewan, if we were 
to lay off one-third of our public service, it would amount to 
about 4,000 jobs. It’s interesting to me to note that around 
11,500 jobs being lost in the public service in BC is equivalent 
to the 11,500 jobs that we just created in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — So I think that’s quite a contrast, Mr. Speaker. 
But I still want to speak to the difference between the 
government in BC and what the opposition in Saskatchewan 
talks about. Because we have some things on record about what 
they promised back in 1998 when they were vying for the 
leadership of this party. 
 
Although Gordon Campbell said he would not lay off the public 
service, we have another one of our . . . the same . . . we have 
the leadership hopefuls from the other side. The member from 
Wood River says, the member from Wood River says, the 
whole bureaucracy . . . Mr. Speaker, he says, the whole 
bureaucracy, the whole civil service has to be cleaned out, every 
socialist system under the world. He says, I can wield a pretty 
good sized broom and you know what I would do with a broom. 
 
Now that’s the member from Wood River who promises to gut 
the civil service. He’s promised to gut it. 
 
Now Campbell said he wouldn’t do it. 
 
One of our leadership hopefuls back in 1998 who did not win 
but nevertheless he was hopeful at the time, was running around 
— men with brooms, I say — running around with his little 
brooms; men with brooms trying to get rid of all the public 
service. 
 
And then we have the Leader of the Opposition and his 
statement wasn’t very much nicer than the leader from Wood 
River. He says: 
 

Before I agreed to run for the leadership I asked the MLAs, 
do you know who the deadwood are? Do you know who 
the skunks are? They assured me they know who those 
people are. 

 
Isn’t that, isn’t that interesting? I think that’s very interesting. 
Now skunks and deadwood. Committed, dedicated . . . 
committed, dedicated public servants and the Leader of the 
Opposition calls them skunks and deadwood. 
 
Well okay, I’ve just been handed another good quote. Oh well I 
forgot about this one, but I’m going to come to that one because 
this is a very interesting quote. 
 
So we have, we have the leader of the . . . or the Premier of BC 
who has a pretty, a pretty tough row to hoe because he has 
implimated a lot of policies that he . . . that have broken 
promises and made the people of BC quite upset — quite upset. 
 
But our leadership hopefuls and those who would be 
government, if ever the people of Saskatchewan could stomach 
any of their policies, he has said that they would do it. They’re 
not, they’re not hiding it. They’re right upfront about it, right 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

 

upfront about it. 
 
No problem decreasing civil . . . essential services. No problem 
with this law and order opposition getting rid of a whole bunch 
of Legal Aid workers. No problem with closing court houses. 
No problem with gutting the budget of the Human Rights 
Commission. No problem with gutting health care. 
 
The opposition’s . . . Well this is an interesting one. The 
opposition’s economic development critic says that they would 
implement BC’s plan. So here’s what most people could expect 
from a Sask Party government. 
 
One third of the civil service fired. Now that I translated earlier 
would be about 4,000 of our dedicated Saskatchewan workers. 
 
You have to remember that BC, when they promised to cut 
provincial sales tax, they actually increased provincial sales tax. 
So if the opposition, if they were ever government, which they 
won’t be, is . . . was going to follow their BC lead, then they 
would have to increase the provincial sales tax because they 
said they would gradually decrease it, but we know that since 
they adopt and endorse the BC plan, that they would actually 
increase it. 
 
They would have to . . . they would increase the fuel tax, Mr. 
Speaker, because, because we’re endorsing the . . . we’re 
endorsing BC over here, so they increased the fuel tax, so the 
opposition would have to increase the fuel tax. 
 
Now it’s a really interesting thing that BC has health care 
premiums, and they increased their health care premiums, Mr. 
Speaker. And so I think that an opposition party would probably 
also increase health care premiums. 
 
But first they’d have to implement health care premiums, and 
then they’d be able to increase them. I think that would 
probably be the way it would have to work. Because under a 
New Democratic government, we don’t have health care 
premiums, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if the opposition was to follow BC’s plan of increasing 
them, first of all they’d have to implement — they’d have to put 
it in and then they’d have to increase them. 
 
The department spending outside of health and education in 
BC, Mr. Speaker, is going to decline by 25 per cent over the 
next three years. Education spending is going to be frozen . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well that’s the same thing they promised 
in that platform. 
 
Ms. Jones: — They did. That’s the very same thing as they 
promised. I think it was zero. Even if, even if you allowed that 
— as they claim — that they said, well we would raise it by the 
rate of inflation, just doing that is still zero. Either it’s zero or 
it’s less because you have to add money to it in order to 
improve it and maintain it. 
 
And indeed, they certainly have . . . had seen some increases in 
post-secondary tuition fees. And I acknowledge and recognize 
that so has Saskatchewan, but Saskatchewan has done a much 
better job of funding its post-secondary education institutes than 

BC has. 
 
Now another interesting thing that they promised in BC was 
that they wouldn’t reduce the minimum wage. Now one of the 
things, Mr. Speaker, that we hear from the opposition all the 
time — and heaven only knows what it could mean — they talk 
about fair labour policy, fair labour laws. They talk about that 
all the time — fair labour laws. 
 
What they really are talking about . . . And of course, we’ve had 
a bit of an opportunity to have a look at some of their proposed 
legislation in terms of The Trade Union Act. And I have here an 
article from Wednesday, April 11, 2001 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Some more platform stuff, yes. I know they 
really don’t like to talk about it. They talk about it to their 
friends, their little crowd that comes out — the committed. But 
when it comes to sharing it with the rest of the public, it would 
appear to me that they really, really don’t like to talk about it. 
 
So on the economy the Leader of the Opposition says that a 
Saskatchewan Party government — which I have to say again, 
Mr. Speaker, like this isn’t going to happen; it’s a dream. It’s 
just not . . . it just isn’t going to happen because the people of 
Saskatchewan are too wise. They are far too wise to buy the 
types of policies, when you have people ripping mad in the 
province of BC when they said they wouldn’t do something and 
the Sask . . . or the Saskatchewan Party opposition here 
admitting that they would do it, endorsing it, and endorses 
breaking promises as well, as far as I can tell. 
 
In any case I’m reading from April 11, 2001 where the Leader 
of the Opposition said that: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government (dream on) would spur 
the economy by eliminating the small business tax, 
changing labour legislation, and altering the makeup of the 
Labour Relations Board. 

 
Now . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well here’s their labour legislation. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Yes, I kind of wouldn’t mind having a look at 
the labour legislation because I read it and I filed it, which is 
exactly where it ought to be. And in there they try to make out, 
Mr. Speaker, that unions are not democratic organizations. 
 
And I am here to tell them — that as a former labour union 
representative for 12 years and longer if you consider the not 
full-time paid part of my job but as an elected representative of 
the union that was in the place, at the workplace that I worked 
at — I can tell you that unions are some of the most . . . among 
the most, if not the most democratic organizations in the world. 
They have constitutions and by-laws and rights that are set out 
in legislation and they are very democratic. 
 
But they would say to their . . . they would say to their 
community that they’re trying to support that there’s a problem 
with trade unions because it isn’t democratic. Well I’m here to 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it is — that their rights of employees, 
employers, and unions as organizations are set about and set out 
in legislation. 
 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

And to change that legislation to make it less democratic is like 
changing the Human Rights Code to make it less protective. 
And that’s what it’s about. 
 
There is an imbalance of power that is inherent in any 
workplace in that those who hold the capital have a greater 
amount of control than those who sell their labour for wages. 
It’s simply that simple. It has been that way since time 
immemorial. 
 
And what we have done in order to equalize that balance is to 
set up organizations that represent employees, to recognize 
those organizations in law, to recognize the rights of individual 
employees to participate or to not participate, as they choose. 
 
And yet we have an opposition who continually, continually 
attacks workers and the organizations who represent them. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a very dangerous road that 
they’ve embarked upon. And they try to soften it, you know. I 
guess the part that’s so interesting to me is how they try to 
schmooze over that with saying that, you know, things like they 
hope that the workers will join with them in . . . I think I have a 
little quote here. 
 
It says . . . it says here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . you want 
to participate in the debate you can do that, but right now I’m 
on my feet . . . It says Saskatchewan businesses . . . 
 
Here’s from the speaking notes of the Leader of the Opposition 
on February 12, 2002, and he says: 
 

Saskatchewan businesses today are facing labour 
legislation that is a major barrier to business growth and is 
a major barrier for new capital investment. 

 
And then . . . and then he goes on to say: 
 

I hope our province’s labour leaders will join us in reducing 
the barriers including the barrier of unbalanced labour law. 

 
Now first you go out and accuse working people and the 
legislation that protects their rights of being a barrier, and then 
you ask them to take the barrier down. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t consider by any stretch that I’m the wisest person in the 
world. However, I don’t consider for a moment that working 
people would be foolish enough to accept that premise, not by 
any stretch of the imagination. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — I don’t think one of the things that . . . now we 
all know that in BC it tends to be a lot wetter than the climate in 
Saskatchewan. Although we do have a little bit of rain for 
which I think everyone in every corner in every city, town, 
village, hamlet, and rural community is grateful, grateful for the 
rain that we’ve had. 
 
We do know however that BC has a lot more rain than we do. 
But in April 6, 2001 I want to just outline the Leader of the 
Opposition’s new plan, new plan for stemming the outflow of 
the population in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
yes, plan of the day. 
 

He says in this April 6th edition of the Leader-Post: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party wins the next election. 
 
Now I know I’ve already referred to that a few times, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s just not going to happen. I mean, that’s a pipe 
dream. He says, Hermanson said: 
 

. . . the population outflow would be stemmed within a year 
or two and the province would then grow if (if — this is the 
big if — if) the weather and the national economy 
co-operated. 
 

And probably with each other, says the member from 
Saskatoon-Idylwyld. Well I think that is without a doubt the 
best — the best — plan. 
 
I talked a little a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, about the 
private hospital in Abbotsford that was part of one of the broken 
promises where the BC government said that they weren’t 
going to do that. And I found this article in the National Post. 
 
And I want to read some of this into the record because I think 
it’s very important. The headline says, “For-profit hospitals 
have a higher risk of death.” And this was a study done. And it 
says: 
 

Patients in the US for-profit hospitals face a significantly 
higher risk of dying than those who enter not-for-profit 
hospitals, a Canadian study has found. The research 
concludes that if private for-profit hospitals were 
introduced in Canada, hospital deaths would increase by as 
many as 2,200 a year (Mr. Speaker, 2,200 increased 
deaths). 
 
In an accompanying perinatal study, researchers found 
there was a 10 per cent increased risk of death among 
children under 28 days in private . . . (for hospital private) 
for-profit hospitals. 

 
Twenty-eight . . . a 10 per cent increase risk for children under 
28 days old. Now that is tragic: 
 

The authors of this report say results should send a sobering 
message to those supportive of letting the private sector 
into Canada’s ailing health care system. The report is likely 
to provide new fuel to the debate over whether to permit 
more private, for-profit health care delivery in Canada. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have more that I want to read into the 
record, but I just want everybody to keep in mind that the 
member from Wood River says that he believes in private 
clinics. 
 
So this article goes on to say and I want to continue reading this 
into the record because I think it’s an important point. It says: 
 

A 17-member research team, mostly based at McMaster 
University in Hamilton, Ontario, examined 15 studies 
comparing death rates in for-profit hospitals to those in 
not-for-profit facilities. About 38 million patients in 26,000 
American hospitals were included. Conducted over a 
13-year period, from 1982 to 1995, it found that residents 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

 

had a 2 per cent higher relative risk of dying in a for-profit 
facility. 

 
Now 2 per cent might not sound like much but if you’re the 
patient, it’s a high risk. 
 
Going on though to read this into the record: 
 

The Canadian health care system is at a critical juncture 
with many individuals suggesting that we would be better 
served by private for-profit health care delivery, the 
research concludes. Our systematic review raises concerns 
about the potential negative health outcomes associated 
with private, for-profit hospital care. 

 
Going on a little further, it talks about Dr. Deveroe, and he’s a 
cardiologist at the McMaster University and he was the paper’s 
lead author, and it goes on and says: 
 

Dr. Deveroe said for-profit hospitals must typically achieve 
a 10 to 15 per cent profit margin to deliver bonuses to . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just like to bring to the 
member’s attention that the motion before us is . . . relates to 
the Saskatchewan Party’s endorsement of the BC approach and 
the member should relate her remarks to the topic at hand. And 
it sounded to me, is the member had gone on for some time 
about another issue dealing with hospitals. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
actually, although I certainly accept your ruling, I was talking 
about the Abbottsford . . . the Abbottsford hospital and how the 
BC government had privatized the Abbottsford hospital and 
how the member from Wood River had said in his . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member, I’d just ask you to continue with 
your remarks without making any reference to the Speaker’s 
ruling or justifying what you were doing . . . or what the 
member was doing. But please continue with your remarks with 
respect to the private member’s motion moved by the member 
for Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
not, I’m certainly not out of material because the opposition 
over there gives lots of material for the government members to 
talk about — much, much material for them to talk about. 
 
So when we talk about the . . . We’ll take a closer look then at 
what the Sask Party would do. Because last fall the Leader of 
the Opposition said: 
 

A Sask Party government would undertake a core services 
review like that done by British Columbia’s new right-wing 
government. 

 
And this translates into a massive attack on Saskatchewan’s 
Crown and public services. 
 
And I’ve already explained about the 11,000 jobs that BC is 
going to be losing and about the 4,000 jobs that that would 
translate into. And again about the member from Lloydminster 

saying that if BC’s doing the right thing, that they would 
certainly do the same thing too. And we know in the past that 
the Leader of the Opposition has said that he would freeze 
health and education spending. And his core review would in 
fact cut services to the core. 
 
So what would that mean, I ask? Would that mean fewer 
nurses? There’s certainly a public sentiment that we have 
indeed — although the government is working very, very hard 
on it — we have a problem, I guess, in that some of our nurses 
have . . . are beginning to choose to retire and some of them are 
aging a little bit. And we are implementing more seats to train 
more nurses. 
 
But if the core services review would cut services to the core, 
according to the Sask Party, what would that mean for nurses? 
What would that mean, what would that mean for doctors? 
Would that mean fewer doctors? 
 
Well I would think it would mean fewer doctors. And it would 
also mean, I’m sure, as you’ve promised back in 1998 — as the 
member promised back in 1998 — that it would also mean 
private clinics. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Well I think that reduced public service in 
Saskatchewan would also mean fewer teachers, and we know 
that teachers provide extremely valuable service to children and 
parents and to the public in general in Saskatchewan because 
they are the ones who we entrust, for at least 10 months out of 
the year, with the future of our children. 
 
And those children and their education is the future of this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Children are the key to the 
province and its welfare and education system that is cut to the 
core as BC has done, indeed ripping up the teachers’ contracts, 
which I’m not too sure if that’s part of the opposition’s promise 
for less labour legislation is just to go ahead and rip up 
contracts. I think that’s probably what it means. 
 
I think that having fewer teachers and ripping up their contracts 
would not be a very popular nor a very wise and progressive 
thing to do in this province when we value our children, we 
value the students, we value the teachers, and we value their 
right to participate in determining what it is that their wages and 
salaries and benefits will be. 
 
I think that freezing health and education spending, I think that 
would likely also mean reduced health and safety inspection. 
And I think that it also could mean closing schools. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in this budget our government worked very 
hard to find a way to improve the capital spending for schools 
because there’s quite a pent-up need for infrastructure in our 
education system. 
 
And of course we always put health and safety concerns as our 
no. 1 priority, but there are neighbourhoods that are growing 
very quickly, and their children are growing up and are needing 
education facilities in their neighbourhood. And so we took 
some steps in our budget this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
address some of those concerns. And I think that that’s a very 
good job and I’m looking forward to seeing how the opposition 
members vote when it comes to that part of the budget. 
 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

Because we know last year that all the progressive moves, the 
spending that we did last year, the opposition party voted 
against all of those progressive measures that the government 
brought in. 
 
So we know that the opposition offers a hard-line right wing 
ideology and we know, and we know that it doesn’t work. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Better than socialist . . . 
 
Ms. Jones: — Yes, well the man says better than socialist. Well 
I would remind him, I would remind the member from Wood 
River, of the ideology that put this province $15 billion into 
debt — $15 billion into debt. And the people of Saskatchewan 
are paying for that debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And if we 
weren’t paying $700 million a year to pay for the interest on the 
debt of your Devine Tory friends we would have all kinds of 
money, all kinds of money, to spend on programs and to reduce 
taxes for your right-wing ideology . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Two 
reasons. One I would direct the member to . . . or ask the 
member, remind the member, to direct all her comments to the 
Chair and through the Chair and not engage members directly 
in debate. And secondly I am having difficulty hearing the 
speaker . . . the member speaking. So I would ask hon. members 
to keep the quantity of the noise down just a bit. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
left off by saying that the right-wing ideology does not work. 
And that the right-wing ideology that people suffered through 
from 1982 to 1991 left this province with a crippling debt. A 
debt that we are still paying for even though our ratio of GDP 
(gross domestic product) to debt is in much better position than 
it was when we took over this government. 
 
And I commend our current Finance minister, and all previous 
Finance ministers, and indeed all members of government who 
have worked so hard to bring this crippling debt under control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — And if the member from Wood River thinks that 
the right-wing ideology is what works I would invite — I would 
invite them, any member from the opposition — to come a little 
bit cleaner with what it is . . . It is though interesting, I mean I 
say I invite them to come clean, but it is interesting to find out 
what their economic strategy is. And I quoted earlier from the 
weather and the national economy. And so I want to . . . I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that their economic plan falls a little bit short 
on details — in fact, it falls a lot short on details. 
 
As usual the message was I’ll spend more money on massive 
tax cuts and more money on programs. Now mostly we hear 
that there will be zero monies increase spent on programs. But 
if he’s going to spend massive . . . money on massive tax cuts, it 
would be really, really interesting if he would just tell us where 
he’s going to . . . how he’s going to pay for it. Where is the 
money coming from? 
 
Now we just . . . It’s very interesting because even though they 
talk about as part of their core review . . . And we all know 
where they stand and we all know where the member from 

Swift Current stands. In fact, we get an opportunity to have his 
speeches to different organizations passed along to us and . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it makes, it makes, well, it 
makes better shredding material. Nevertheless . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Better shredded than read. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Yes, better shred than read, I say. 
 
But anyway they talk about massive tax cuts and spending 
money on programs, but they won’t tell you how they’re going 
to pay for it, and indeed they think that we should just trust 
them, Mr. Speaker, we should just trust them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you trust a guy that looks like 
Elwin? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Well, I’m not going to comment on anything like 
that. 
 
But it seems like they are negative; the opposition is negative, 
except — except — when they’re very gleeful about wanting to 
endorse the BC plan, then they seem to get cheery. That’s very 
cheery if they’re endorsing the BC plan. 
 
But if we talk about or introduce the fact that we have just . . . 
Saskatchewan has improved its job picture by 11,500 new jobs, 
they don’t want to talk about that. 
 
If we talk in the House about how our welfare rates have 
declined for the past 90 months, do we hear anything? Do we 
get any press releases? Do we get, do we get any members’ 
statements about how proud they are and how glad, how glad 
they are that the children of Saskatchewan . . . I mean I think it 
was 6,000 families, and I think that included over 12,000 . . . 
13,000 children who are no longer reliant upon welfare to make 
their way and to help them along and ensure that they come in 
and live in dignity . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, very, 
very difficult. 
 
Now another thing that I find interesting is all the debate that’s 
been going on in the last little while about, about our farm 
economy and our government. Our Premier, our Deputy 
Premier and Minister of Agriculture have been working very, 
very hard — very, very hard — to try and get a package for our 
farmers, for the rural community in Saskatchewan and a way to 
help get over the horrible situation that the US of A (United 
States of America) has imposed upon us by increasing the 
amount of subsidies that they pay to their farmer, as opposed to 
the promises that they made about reducing the amount of 
subsidy gradually over the number of years. 
 
And I note that back again in the World Spectator from 
Moosomin on Monday, March 23, 1998 the Leader of the 
Opposition says this on agriculture, he says: 
 

I don’t believe in making . . . special deals for farmers. 
 
Now I would think that we have been working very hard to 
create a special deal for farmers because farmers are hit by low 
commodity prices. Farmers are very devastated by the amount 
of subsidies that are provided by the United States and 
European Union, and we are trying to accomplish a trade injury 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

 

compensation package for rural Saskatchewan for our farm 
communities. 
 
And I have the Leader of the Opposition back in 1998 that says: 
 

I don’t believe in making . . . special deals for farmers. 
 
Now I must say, I must say that so far the agreement that we 
have and the support that we’ve enjoyed from the opposition on 
this issue seems to be holding, and I hope that it continues to 
hold. But on the other hand I don’t think we can ignore what 
has been said in the past. 
 
And what was said in the past by the Leader of the Opposition 
was that: 
 

I don’t believe in making . . . special deals for farmers. 
 
So I’m comparing a lot of these things to what happens in BC. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about, about something that I saw 
in the newspaper, from the News-Optimist from April 11 of 
2001. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know that 
we’ve had . . . a great deal of effort has been put into realigning 
the health districts in Saskatchewan. We had the Fyke report in 
which the opposition participated in the special committee 
meetings and the government implemented a new action plan 
for Saskatchewan health care, and they’re going to be working 
on that. And we have legislation pending that’s going to put all 
of that in place and so I’m . . . I think that working it out into 
regional hospitals of varying abilities to provide service to the 
people of the province is a very good idea. 
 
Now I see here that the Leader of the Opposition says in his 
speech to . . . well it’s not . . . I have a quote here, but it’s an 
article in the News-Optimist from April 11, 2001, where it says 
that the Sask Party would make sure that there’s access to 
health care. 
 
Now he says, the Leader of the Opposition said, and I find this 
very, very interesting because I think that delivery of health 
care is a big challenge; it’s a huge challenge to face. And what 
he says is that a Sask Party government . . . and I have to say 
again dream on, dream on because . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, we’ve gone from Fantasyworld to Disneyland. A Sask 
Party government would, and I appear to be quoting here, says: 
 

Would not be hung up on the mechanics of delivering 
health care. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have spent, we have spent a 
good deal of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking and planning 
the mechanics of delivering health care because I think that is 
one of the ways that you ensure an equal access to health care. 
It’s one of the ways that you ensure that remote corners of the 
province are not any more remote than they would necessarily 
be. I think that the mechanics of health care are important and I 
think to dismiss them in that way is not a very good way to gain 
public appeal. 

So I want to go on quoting from this article. And it says: 
 

If the Sask Party is elected to govern the province (dream 
on) it would set up a medical system in which local 
hospitals like Battlefords Union would look after relatively 
minor ailments like eye, ear, nose, or throat problems, 
while hospitals in Saskatoon would look after major 
problems like cancer or heart disease, Hermanson (well I’m 
quoting) Hermanson said. 

 
So . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You heard that? 
 
Ms. Jones: — It was a quote. So I compare that and, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, under the organization that we have in place, 
the Battlefords Union Hospital is a regional hospital. And when 
I look at what goes on at regional hospitals — and I believe it’s 
designated as a regional hospital, level 2 — it says all six 
regional hospitals will provide the minimum range of services 
found in district hospitals, which of course district hospitals 
provide a greater range of services, but the regionals will 
provide at least the minimum of that. 
 
And when you go on to say what that is, it includes, now keep 
in mind that the Leader of the Opposition said that hospitals like 
Battlefords would look after relatively minor ailments like eye, 
ear, nose, or throat problems. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think that the people of 
Battlefords and region are . . . would be extremely happy with 
the Leader of the Opposition for saying that. Because what they 
would do, what they would do under our reorganization is they 
would provide the minimum range of services found in district 
hospitals. They would also provide reliable basic specialty 
services. These include internal medicine, general surgery, 
obstetrics, and gynecology. These hospitals will also offer 
intensive care services. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I invite people to say . . . to compare 
what the Leader of the Opposition’s vision for the Battlefords 
Union Hospital, and following the BC model, it would most 
certainly be closed. But at a minimum, we want . . . he wants 
them to look after minor ailments like eye, ear, nose, or throat. 
 
And we say, in an area that has a burgeoning Aboriginal 
population, he wouldn’t even provide gynecology. And I think 
that obstetrics and gynecology — delivery of a future 
generation of our province — is an important thing to consider. 
 
Anyway the new image in BC of course, under Gordon 
Campbell’s new era, and again we go back to Abbotsford, a city 
just outside of Vancouver, puts the government’s health care 
agenda into stark relief. Before the rest of the province knew 
what was going to hit them, the community of Abbotsford got a 
bitter taste of the Liberals’ medicine when secret plans to build 
a new private hospital were exposed. 
 
And we know that the opposition is very, very enamoured with 
the BC core services review. They’ve said they would 
implement it. I don’t have any reason to believe them but 
indeed that’s what they said. 
 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

So the government’s plan, which is the Government of BC of 
course, exposed in October 2001 by CUPE’s (Canadian Union 
of Public Employees) Hospital Employees’ Union, which of 
course we all recall that the Leader of the Opposition wants to 
make these labour laws here much, much weaker for people in 
Saskatchewan. And they were developed . . . the government 
. . . 
 
There’s the member from Wood River cheering, for the record, 
about removing rights from workers. And I think it’s very 
important. He wants to make the labour laws weaker. I said that 
and the member from Wood River, in case Hansard couldn’t 
record it, said “Hear, hear.” And so that’s what he wants. He 
just did it again and I think that’s going to make a very nice 
little press release probably later this day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So they were developed without any community consultation 
despite the sweeping policy shift that they represent. And that is 
the government’s plans that they’re talking about. Now the 
previous NDP government had approved the hospital’s 
replacement as a public project and plans were progressing 
early into 2001. And the health employees’ union sources 
indicate that the project went private in June of 2001, around 
the time the Liberals implemented huge tax cuts and reduced 
government revenue. The hospital scheme is one of many 
Liberal broken promises on health care. Well certainly the BC 
government is about broken promises. Now the Sask Party isn’t 
exactly in a position to break any promises because they’re not 
government and they’re not going to be government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — So it’s pretty hard, pretty hard for them, pretty 
hard for them to break promises when you’re not government 
and you’re not going to be. That’s the way I see it. 
 
So we have a little bit under Britain’s private financing model, 
and I think it’s important. If they believe in the endorsement of 
BC, they need to be willing to look at other jurisdictions that 
have implemented the same type of thing as BC has, which of 
course they are endorsing. 
 
And that is that under Britain’s private financing model, 
hospital construction and ownership is privatized. The local 
health authority leases back the hospital from the consortium 
through the payment of an annual fee over the life of the 
contract, which is usually 25 to 35 years. The annual payment is 
expected to cover both the lease or the rental charges: private 
sector debt payment, shareholder returns, and building 
maintenance, as well as a service fee —a service fee — 
covering health and facilities support services such as cleaning, 
lighting, and laundry. 
 
So really what we’re talking about here is a return to the 
shareholders in a for-profit situation. 
 
Now once unleashed it will be hard to keep a handle on any 
private hospital. Because once it’s in here it cannot go back . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, no kidding. 
 
Now independent research has shown that public . . . private for 
. . . hospitals have ended up costing far more than public 
hospitals while bringing deep cuts in the number of beds and 

staff. It’s quite interesting to see, quite interesting to see, how 
the promises of the opposition would all mesh in with the 
broken promises of the BC government because the BC 
government didn’t have the guts to ever say what they were 
going to do, but the opposition across here does. 
 
Now I want to compare what BC, I want to compare what BC, I 
want to see what BC has to compare, how BC and Great Britain 
compare to the NDP, the NDP approach to, the public approach 
to strengthening communities. And I think that’s what we’re all 
about — strengthening communities. 
 
Canada’s prospects for the future rest on the strength and the 
vitality of its cities. Now we, to realize our potential, we need a 
full range of quality public services, securely and properly 
funded, with the federal and provincial governments paying 
their fair share. 
 
And we want . . . and we say that here in Saskatchewan we not 
only rely upon the strength of our cities but, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we rely on the strength of our rural communities as 
well. And we are going to, we are going to be putting a lot of 
effort and we are going to be holding the federal government 
accountable to ensure that we are able to deliver proper, proper 
finance help, financial assistance to our farming community. 
 
But nevertheless, whether you live in the city or whether you 
live in the country or whether you live in the North, the South, 
the East, the West, public services are really important to the 
public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — It’s very important that tax dollars are invested 
into public service and that all members of the community can 
participate actively in open and transparent decision making. 
And in communities it’s important that we have local 
governments there. But in their governing, it’s important that 
the public interest has to be respected. And it has to be 
respected without constraints imposed by international trade 
deals. 
 
And I think that’s one of the problems that we’re facing here is 
the international problem that we’re facing with some of the 
other nations with whom our farmers have to compete. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need communities that are healthy and 
sustainable. We need green communities that foster the 
development of green jobs and harbour our natural resources. 
We also need to develop our natural resources, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And we need communities that offer secure employment, 
communities that pay fair wages, and where the contribution of 
workers is respected and encouraged. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we do not have any encouragement from the members 
opposite that the dignity and the value and the worth of workers 
would be respected. None whatsoever. 
 
We would be very concerned at how a BC-style health 
privatization which the opposition is . . . want to endorse. They 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

 

say it’s a good thing. They say that they would certainly want to 
look at that and they would certainly endorse a core services 
review. 
 
And if, while they’re participating in the core services review 
and endorsing the actions of the BC government . . . I want to 
say a little bit about how BC health privatization has hit women 
hard. It has been quite devastating to the women. And I’m 
quoting from a little article here called, “A Cross-Country Sell 
Off.” And it says: 
 

The government plans . . . 
 
And they’re talking about the BC government here. 
 

The government plans to carry out the most extreme health 
care privatization scheme in Canadian history at the 
expense of working women, their families, and their 
communities. 

 
And that’s what they have to say about Premier Gordon 
Campbell’s relentless drive to dismantle and privatize public 
health care targets. 
 
And we have the member from Wood River on record saying, 
hear, hear, when I quoted him and said, very enthusiastic about 
creating private clinics. He was very enthusiastic in his support 
about that. 
 
So I say again here, Premier Gordon Campbell’s relentless 
drive to dismantle and privatize public health care targets the 
jobs of tens of thousands — tens of thousands of BC women. 
 
Now when you target, when you target something like health 
care, and we all know the very significant percentage of 
workers are women in the health care sector. So when you 
target an industry such as health care, you are targeting women, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the Liberal government’s privatization scheme attacks 
women in their homes and in their communities because it takes 
away their security. It takes away their ability to earn a living, 
to raise their children, to be a productive part of their 
community. 
 
And as health care workers piece together the outline of 
Campbell’s cuts, concealed in secret documents leaked to the 
public, I find that so interesting that BC finds this great need to 
have this great shroud of secrecy around their plans. And here 
we have leadership hopefuls back in 1998 who publicly said 
what it is that they would do. 
 
And what they would do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is very much 
what the Campbell government has done and were afraid to say. 
I find that very interesting that the Campbell government is 
afraid to say out loud what it was that they were going to do, 
when the opposition has absolutely no trouble whatsoever. 
 
And so it will be a very interesting experiment as we watch how 
things unfold in BC and the devastation that hits that province, 
and the deficit that continues to grow, just exactly how that 
compares to their plan across the way. 
 

So it goes on to say, concealed in secret documents leaked to 
the public, the extent of the devastation becomes clear. The 
Campbell Liberals plan to axe nearly 28,000 health care jobs. 
Now these aren’t, these aren’t the 11,500 public sector jobs, 
these aren’t the civil service jobs, these are on top of — so now 
we’re talking like 40,000 jobs at a minimum. And who knows 
how many jobs were lost in the closure of schools and 
kindergartens, and in the ripping up of collective agreements? I 
just have no way at the moment of keeping a tab on that. But 
I’m very sure and I feel quite confident in saying that it’s a 
minimum of 40,000 jobs and it will be a lot more when you 
tally in all the other casualties. 
 
And we have record, we have record housing starts in 
Saskatchewan, and people have jobs. We have 11,500 new jobs 
in Saskatchewan and a lot of that, a good part of those 11,500 
jobs are created as a result of the burgeoning housing starts that 
we have in this province. 
 
And so you have to tie those things together. If you’re going to 
slash 40,000 jobs out of the public sector and the health care 
sector, you can’t expect the people are going to go out and buy 
and build a new house. So they just work together, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You just . . . 
 
I mean it’s foolhardy to think that you could slash public sector 
jobs and still have people paying taxes, building houses, buying 
goods and services, able to participate in the entertainment 
industry or the food service industry, or any of the other things, 
or participate in sports and be able to volunteer in their 
community. It simply doesn’t happen. When you don’t have a 
job, you don’t have the ability to make the rest of the economy 
work. 
 
And so that’s the part that I find so very, very strange about 
when you link this seeming desire they have to make the world 
go around in terms of cutting taxes. I mean you can’t make the 
world go around by cutting taxes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You can’t shrink your way into the future says the member 
from Moose Jaw North. And I think that we have a lot of 
shrunken things but you can’t shrink your way into the future. 
 
So while they say . . . Again I go back and he says the Liberals 
planned action. Nearly 28,000 health care jobs, which is more 
than 85 per cent of them, are held by women and then increase 
the surgery wait lists and shift 500 million in health care costs 
onto the shoulders of BC families, forcing the sick and elderly 
to pay for the government tax cuts. 
 
Now when they say that they’re going to stimulate the economy 
by massive tax cuts, and what they do is it results in a big 
deficit when you shrink the amount of taxes that come in, but it 
also does not stimulate the economy because it ends up costing 
more. You end up with people without jobs, people on welfare, 
and I want to say how it is that it costs more. 
 
How it costs more is that the Ontario and BC government, who 
were planning to import a British scheme that has been a dismal 
failure — we all know that that was started under Margaret 
Thatcher — and perhaps stopped to some extent but not to the 
extent that we would like. But once you get started down that 
privatization road it, I mean, it’s just like a snowball. 
 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s a race to the bottom. 
 
Ms. Jones: — It’s a race to the bottom for sure. 
 
So the BC . . . and the Ontario and BC government planning to 
import a British scheme that has been a dismal failure, and why 
would they? Why would you take something that has proved to 
be a dismal failure and want to implement it into your 
government? Well if it’s simply to cut costs then that is most 
certainly a false economy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sask Party logic. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Well it must be. 
 
Now this British scheme was introduced in the early 1990s and 
the private finance initiative privatizes hospital financing, 
ownership and operation. The local health authority, National 
Health Services Trust, leaves . . . leases the hospital back from 
the consortium paying the annual fee over a 25- to 35-year 
contract. A decade after Britain introduced P3 hospitals, there’s 
been a massive reduction in the quality of and the “access to 
health care services, including a 30 per cent reduction in the 
number of hospital beds and a 25 per cent reduction in clinical 
staffing budgets.” The privatized hospitals are costing taxpayers 
far more than publicly financed facilities. 
 
Now I mean that’s what happens. You have a . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It is no mystery and indeed you cannot expect a 
private investor to invest his money and not expect to make 
money. 
 
So automatically you have to add a profit margin for the 
investor. And the profit margin for the investor is going to be 
paid by the taxpayer of the province — there is nobody else to 
pay that bill but the taxpayer of the province. So when you 
introduce false economies like that and then you wonder . . . 
and then you wonder why. 
 
It’s no secret the UK (United Kingdom) private hospitals have 
been a financial nightmare. They provide substandard care 
while rewarding shareholders with massive profits. Independent 
analysis of the model published in the British Medical Journal 
found the private finance initiative led to higher costs, lower 
level of service in staffing, inferior construction, and 
administrative efficiencies. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Other than that it was a good idea. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Yes, other than that, it was a great idea. 
 
But I think the idea that I would like is, I would like to know if 
indeed that is what the opposition considers to be a good idea. 
Because I think that’s here what we’re talking about, what 
we’re here to talk about is, is the fact that the BC government 
promised not to do certain things. Then when they got elected, 
they did those certain things. 
 
And what we know is that we have an opposition government 
who says good on you; we want to do the same thing because 
we say you’re on the right track. So I just want to make a 
review of what it is that they did. 
 

First they cut . . . they made cuts to welfare and income support 
for people in BC. Now we, as opposed to making cuts, as 
opposed to making cuts to welfare, we’re most certainly 
reducing the number of people on welfare, but we’re not doing 
it by making cuts to the amount of money that we spend. We’re 
doing it by finding people, retraining them, providing supports 
to them, and putting them into jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — The way that people have an opportunity to 
participate in a bright future in our province is not to cut the 
amount of welfare, but to hide welfare people in jobs. And 
that’s where they are — and we’re proud of our record — and 
they will be the future, the future productive people of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — But in contrast to that, in contrast to that, here’s 
what the BC approach is that the opposition tends to agree with. 
In fact, they have stated categorically that they would do the 
same sort of review. 
 
And so what they have done is cuts of up to $370 million, or 26 
per cent of income support for single parent families, most of 
which are headed by women. So in comparison to the 
Saskatchewan advantage, then that is for sure . . . 
 
Now here’s something else, here’s something else that the 
opposition party agrees with. They agreed that . . . cutting funds 
to BC’s entire network of women’s centres. So the BC 
government cut funding for centres that in communities across 
BC assist women with issues of poverty, justice, and family 
violence, providing hot lunch programs, legal advice, and 
counselling to abused women. With only transition houses left 
standing, there will be few resources for women between the 
threat of abuse and the reality of abuse. 
 
(16:15) 
 
It does put a whole new spin on that old saying, women first, 
because that’s what they’ve done — hit the women first. 
 
And in another category, they lowered the minimum wage. 
They said they wouldn’t do that. They said they wouldn’t do it. 
And so they maybe didn’t take the established wage, but what 
they did do is they put in a new wage. 
 
And the majority of BC’s minimum wage earners are women 
over 19, not youth. We’ve heard it argued that the majority of 
minimum wage earners are youth. But we know in this province 
that a lot of minimum wage earners are women, and university 
students, and people that are trying to get ahead in this world 
and trying to get an education and trying to lay claim to the 
types of service jobs that are important in this province. 
 
And what did they do in BC? Well no, they said we think that 
the new $6 wage with its mind-boggling paperwork it requires 
to prove a worker’s experience — and this is going to especially 
hit immigrant women. Now in Saskatchewan I think we would 
be quite happy if we had more immigrant women. We would be 
very happy if we had more new residents coming to 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
What we would not be happy is to discriminate by giving them 
a lower minimum wage than everybody else. And the 
Saskatchewan government would not be happy to do that. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we would be very happy to 
welcome them into our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Now we have an opposition across the way that 
is very, very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well sad is one way 
to describe them, yes. Very, very . . . Portray themselves as law 
and order, big law and order. Up on law and order. 
 
And one of the things that we noted in BC, that they certainly 
adore . . . endorse is that, is that they endorsed the fact that the 
BC province cut legal aid services. They did. They cut legal aid 
services and of course you know who that particularly affects, 
people who are mostly required to . . . require the service of 
legal aid lawyers, the most vulnerable in society of course. Of 
course. 
 
And they cut a good number, as I understand it, closed a good 
number of court houses in BC which of course is going to slow 
up the whole court process, is going to delay justice. It’s going 
to delay justice for the victim but it will also delay justice for 
the accused because sometimes they’re not guilty and yet they 
have this huge problem hanging over their head for a long 
period of time because court houses will be closed. There will 
be increased costs of housing them in holding facilities, in 
remand, or increased problems that come as a result of not 
being able to have your court case heard in a timely fashion. 
There’s the whole bonding issue. 
 
And yet, they promised . . . the opposition has decided that, 
indeed, they’re going to endorse the BC government’s program. 
So that is very shameful. 
 
And it’s . . . they . . . Among the measures that Gordon 
Campbell took to meet the Crown counsels’ 77.9 million budget 
in 2001 included slashing the Crown ad hoc work usually 
farmed out to private defence lawyers, reducing the number of 
prosecutors on big cases from two to one, and laying off the 
auxiliary victim services workers. Now we all know that victim 
service workers are very important. 
 
Now here’s another way that they seem to have, seem to have 
decided to particularly pick on women. And the way that they 
particularly pick on women out there in BC is that they 
eliminated the employment equity and put pay equity under 
review. 
 
And again I say that the opposition has endorsed this particular 
program and said that they too would carry out a core services 
review. So they’ve already have moved to eliminate 
employment equity from within the public service. 
 
And we’re still struggling very hard in this province to advance 
employment equity in the public service. And we are doing a 
good job; we have made very good progress on employment 
equity and we are making progress indeed on pay equity — 

very good progress on pay equity, although always more needs 
to be done but we’re working at it. 
 
But what did BC do? What did they do? Well they eliminated 
employment equity and then they’ve put pay equity under 
review. So they did. They did. So they’ve already moved to 
eliminate employment equity from within the public service to 
the extent of removing from government correspondence the 
declaration . . . 
 
Here’s how they went about it. They went about it by, they 
removed from the government correspondence the declaration: 
the government of British Columbia is an employment equity 
employer. So now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Deadwood, 
skunks and deadwood it was; skunks and deadwood, yes. And 
the man with . . . Wood River . . . 
 
Anyway the Campbell government already moved to eliminate 
by removing it’s an employment equity employer. 
 
Now here in Saskatchewan . . . And our government is proud of 
the work and we’re proud of the partnership that we have with 
many of our industry partners, many of them in the public 
sector, some of them in the private sector. And what are we 
doing? We’re working toward employment equity. 
 
We have a wonderful advantage in this province, in that where 
many other provinces are going to be suffering a shortage of 
skilled workers, our province is experiencing a growth. 
 
A growth in young people. And that growth is — thank you, 
thank you — to our Aboriginal community. And our Aboriginal 
community are going to be very, very active in our workforce. 
And we are working with industry in the public sector and in 
the private sector and in the government to expand employment 
equity and to bring along our Aboriginal sisters and brothers 
through their leadership and in partnership with their leadership. 
And we are working in economic development areas with our 
partners in the Aboriginal community. 
 
And what’s BC do? Cut employment equity. 
 
Now the . . . What would the Sask Party do? I think that that’s a 
very important question. Because if it means that they endorse 
what the Campbell government does, then it means they 
endorse what the Campbell government does. And what the 
Campbell government did was to cut employment equity in 
very stark contrast to what the industry in Saskatchewan is 
doing, the public sector, our private sector participants, and the 
government, and we are working to include employment equity 
into our program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — The Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
has also . . . we’ve worked . . . I think the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld talked about expansion in the . . . in 
schools, expansion in our early learning program, expansion in 
the number of people . . . number of community schools that are 
covered by additional funding. We have added child care spaces 
in our most recent provincial budget, and as I say very often, 
that the children are the future, that their early learning and their 
education is what is going to make this province the place to be 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

today and in the years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — And I want . . . So I want to compare that and 
our efforts in Saskatchewan to provide services to children with 
what they’ve done in BC. 
 
And what do you suppose that they’ve done in BC? They have 
gutted child care programs more. Here they’ve gone . . . cuts to 
subsidies for low-income parents will put child care out of their 
reach for thousands of BC families. The subsidy cuts amount to 
$26 million on $126 million budget. Now that is one shwack of 
a percentage. 
 
And in Saskatchewan we added child care spaces. We didn’t 
gut child care programs. 
 
In BC taking that $26 million out of their $126 million budget 
is being accomplished by lowering the income thresholds for 
the program so fewer people will qualify. And those who do 
qualify are going to get less money. 
 
The minister responsible there was quoted as saying . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You ask how they could do 
something like that? Well Lynn Stephens, the minister 
responsible, was quoted as saying that the changes were 
necessary to make the system more affordable for taxpayers. 
Even though . . . And you know what they said? She 
acknowledged that it would result in needy parents paying 
more. So I don’t know. 
 
They also cancelled universal child care, Mr. Speaker. In the 
2001 economic update, the Campbell government put a 
complete halt to their government’s move towards a universal, 
affordable child care program for all BC parents, scrapping 15.6 
million in the 2001 budget that was earmarked for child care 
funding. 
 
Now they scrapped $15.6 million. I wish that I had the numbers 
at the end of my fingertips or at the end of my tongue, but I 
don’t. But we increased money and put more money into our 
child care services. 
 
And if the opposition endorses what they did in BC, then I can 
only assume that that is indeed what the opposition would do. 
However, I’m feeling a little bit more comfortable about that 
because if you’re not in government, you don’t need to worry 
about it. 
 
Now they also eliminated programs for high-risk children and 
we talk here about high-risk children. We’ve talked about the 
Role of the School. We’ve talked about very, very many things 
and there’s high-risk children. Some children are at higher risk 
than others. We have dozens of programs in Saskatchewan 
aimed at preventing high-risk youth from getting into more 
trouble. 
 
I think that we’ve done a very good job in our government 
about identifying and about trying to protect some of the 
children who are at risk. And those that are, those that are most 
vulnerable in the province of Saskatchewan, we’ve recently 
introduced some legislation and certainly there’s a high level of 

support for what the government is doing. 
 
And I would be remiss if I didn’t thank all members of the 
committee that participated in the Special Committee to Prevent 
the Abuse and Exploitation of Children. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But when it comes to that, and here we have a BC government 
that is eliminating programs for high-risk children, and they 
want to be just like them, then you know even though they 
participated and I think some good work was done by the 
committee, I worry about the position that they would take 
when they want to be just like the BC government and eliminate 
programs for high-risk children. 
 
So they say that in BC dozens of programs aimed at preventing 
high-risk youth from getting into more trouble are facing the 
axe from the BC Liberals. Children and Family Development 
minister Gordon Hogg has stated: 
 

The cuts to the Children’s Ministry mean all such programs 
are under review. Some have already been told their 
funding will stop. Others expect to learn their fate by 
mid-April. 

 
And so we certainly endorse what has been done here, we were 
part of it and proud to be part of it, and I say that we do not 
need any government that would cut programs to high-risk 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Now we in Saskatchewan last year, we have . . . 
We started a program about increasing the number of jobs that 
were available to university students and summer students — 
the centennial summer employment program, which provided a 
lot of meaningful jobs. And a lot of the jobs that the people 
were placed in were very important in the city of Saskatoon and 
in the city of Regina where we had centennial employment 
program students working on Meewasin Valley, planting trees, 
doing parks, designing future research at the university — very, 
very, very important program and we’re proud of it. 
 
So what do you think happened in BC . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I’m going to tell you. I’m sorry, I have to 
tell you because it’s important to know what they did in BC and 
it’s important to know that the opposition party endorses it. 
 
So here’s what they did. They eliminated, they eliminated the 
summer, the student summer works program, the youth 
community action program, and the Job Start program, effective 
April 1, 2002. 
 
So our approach is provide more jobs, more employment for 
young people, give them an opportunity to make some money 
and go back to university, get an education. Give them an 
opportunity to participate in the community. Give them hope, 
give them optimism. 
 
In the JobStart program, give people who are on assistance hope 
and optimism and tools to participate in the future of this 
province. 



June 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — And compare our approach to the BC approach 
was to eliminate student summer works program, youth 
community action program, and the Job Start program. And the 
opposition says that they would conduct a similar core services 
review and, if it works, they would do the same thing. 
 
And I mean, it is a shame. I think it’s an absolute shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Well BC people are saying about their 
government . . . I have relatives, in-laws in BC, and I had the 
privilege of being able to introduce them in the House this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, I really, really appreciate the 
support but with all this interruption I don’t know if I’m going 
to be able to get to the main part of my speech. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, I have relatives in BC. I 
have one brother-in-law who’s a teacher, who’s been a teacher 
for a very long time, and who’s very, very concerned, not only 
for his own future and security but for that of his students, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have a mom and dad, well in-laws, out there who are phoning 
— they phone. We call each other at least every week and they 
continually tell me that it’s just . . . well some of the words I 
likely can’t tell you what they tell me, but in very plain words it 
is not a nice place to be, that the BC Liberals are just ruining the 
province and that’s in the word of my mother-in-law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my husband’s brother moved out here last fall 
from BC. He’s lived there all his life, born and raised here. He 
made the move to come to Saskatchewan because he could see 
what was coming from the . . . He could see what was coming 
— dark days for working people in BC. 
 
And when we talk to his mom, my mother-in-law, she says, I’m 
so happy. Although they did not want to lose their baby son 
from BC, and they miss him very much, she said, I’m so glad 
he was able to get out when he could because the BC Liberals 
are ruining this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can only ask what kind of an opposition 
could endorse the policies of a government that is ruining the 
province? Only the Sask Party . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — So I thought because I gave you, Mr. Speaker, 
some personal anecdotes and personal quotes from family there, 
I want to read just a few quotes from BC about what they think 
about the government in BC. May 11 to 16 the quote of the 
week . . . the quote of the week is: 
 

I would much rather have not had the tax cuts and seen that 
money go towards balancing the budget or not leading to 
such a huge cut in services. 

 

And that came from Steven Broscoe, a self-employed computer 
programmer, and was in the Vancouver Sun on May 16. 
 
Runners-up to the quote of the week on cutting programs for 
sick kids, Mr. Speaker, the quote is: 
 

If the government thinks they’re going to be saving money 
by getting rid of this service, they’re wrong. 

 
And this was from Denyse Fowler, the Victoria Times Colonist 
May 15. And Ms. Fowler helps severely disabled children 
attending live-in rehab and respite programs. And the centre is 
no longer booking past September and its programs are now 
under review. And what she says is if you think you’re going to 
save money by doing this, then you’re wrong and you cannot 
save money by putting sick kids at risk. 
 
Another quote on cutting child care subsidies, the quote is: 
 

We’ve got some families who are going to be getting 120, 
140, $170 a month less. We’ve had some calls from parents 
that are really concerned. They’re not sure what they’re 
going to do. 

 
Now one of the things that you need, Mr. Speaker, if you’re a 
young family and you got child care responsibilities, is you 
need to be able to afford the daycare in order to be able to go to 
work. And if you cut the subsidies to low-income working 
families, then you are dooming them to welfare. If they cannot 
have their children in a place that they can afford the proper 
care, then they are not going to be. 
 
This one’s really good. Gordon Campbell’s housekeeper says 
this: 
 

Gordon Campbell is taking us somewhere. He has a plan 
for BC, I think. I mean, he must, right? 

 
And this is said by Christiana Helsall, Gordon Campbell’s 
housecleaner and ultimate insider on . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I mean, he must. Right? 
 
Anyway, anybody that supports a government that’s doing what 
this government is doing, I think deserves very close scrutiny 
from the people of this province. 
 
I want to carry on a little bit more with the quotes because it’s 
important on . . . it’s important to hit all the highlights of what 
they are doing, and they are closing schools. And it says on 
closing schools, the quote is: 
 

This will just about kill us. It pulls the rug out from under 
us. How are we going to attract people to the community if 
we don’t have a school for the children. 

 
And that is from Dave Hendrickson, mayor of Wells, 
Vancouver Province on May 12. 
 
And I said earlier, Mr. Deputy . . . or Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, 
Mr. Speaker, that we in Saskatchewan in our most recent 
budget recognized the need for capital spending in both our K 
to 12 and in our post-secondary educations. And as a result, as a 
result of having to dedicate so much of our budget every year, 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard June 25, 2002 

 

year after year, since 1991 to payment on the debt — in fact 
only interest payment on the debt — it has taken and created a 
rather pent-up demand for some very needed infrastructure in 
this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker, I have outlined a lot of 
the issues that the people of BC have with their province. I have 
outlined many of the contrasts of how our government treats the 
extreme approach of the BC government — endorsed by the 
opposition, endorsed by the Sask Party — and the balanced 
careful approach that our government takes, and our 
government takes it to education, to our children, to advancing 
the opportunities for our Aboriginal people, for advancing 
investment and progress. 
 
We are looking at health. We are spending more on education. 
We are spending less . . . well I don’t know that we’re spending 
less, but we certainly have a lesser caseload in our welfare 
people because they are hiding in jobs. We are spending and 
promoting the people of this province. We are not gutting the 
core services. We are not selling the Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Jones: — We have 11,000 new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Saskatchewan is on its way up. We are 
prospering. We are doing well. And the people of the province 
will not be fooled by an opposition that endorses a government 
that is driving the province into the ground. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
adjourn debate . . . the House. Adjourn the House. I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 16:46 until 16:54. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Kasperski Goulet Van Mulligen 
Prebble Belanger Crofford 
Axworthy Nilson Junor 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 21 
 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Krawetz Draude Gantefoer 

Bjornerud Stewart Elhard 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Wall Brkich Wiberg 
Weekes Harpauer Hart 
Allchurch Peters Huyghebaert 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 


