















































Hansard: December 17, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3017 
 December 17, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
many petitions on behalf of residents of Hudson Bay and 
surrounding communities who are concerned about the shortage 
of long-term care beds in Hudson Bay. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary changes that would allow for an expansion of 
at least five long-term care beds in the community of 
Hudson Bay to meet the needs of the citizens of Hudson 
Bay and the surrounding area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are all signed by citizens of Hudson Bay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today with a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan opposed to 
the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 2002 grasshopper spray 
penalty. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reassess 
the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers in 2002; 
and further, that the government review the definition of 
viable farming practices as outlined in present 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance policy. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Hanley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
dangerous condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 

This petition is signed by individuals all from the community of 
Shamrock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of people in my 
constituency concerned about the Sask Crop Insurance 2002 

grasshopper spray penalty. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Sask Crop Insurance reassess 
the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers in 2002; 
and further, that the government review the definition of 
viable farming practices as outlined in the present 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance policy. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by my constituents, namely from Estevan, 
Lampman, and Benson. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the state of the hospital in the 
city of Swift Current and the prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of the funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all, and there’s 
many pages, but they’re all from the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens from rural 
Saskatchewan that are very concerned with the lack of cellular 
telephone coverage in the rural areas and the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone services to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



3018 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Aneroid, Kincaid, and 
Meyronne. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition opposed to 
possible reductions of services in Davidson and Craik health 
centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
doctorial services available, as well as lab services, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson, Unity, and Simpson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the impact of 
. . . the Kyoto accord will have on the Saskatchewan economy. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Cando, Landis, and Biggar and 
district. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition to present on behalf of constituents. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
Regional Health Authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea, Strasbourg, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

Petition concerning long-term care beds in Hudson Bay; 
 
Petition concerning the removal of government funding for 
abortions; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 18, 169, 174, 437, and no. 438. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
remarks I will move the following motion: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
As the Chair of your committee I would present the eighth 
report as follows: 
 
Your committee held a public hearing on private Bill No. 304 
— The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Amendment Act, 2002. The 
committee received petitions and submissions from 10 
individuals during consideration of this Bill. Your committee 
has agreed to report Bill No. 304 without amendment. 
 
So, moved by myself, seconded by the member from Arm 
River: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move 
pursuant to the seventh and eighth reports of the committee: 
 

That private Bill No. 304 — An Act to amend the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995 be considered in 
Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I 
would like to introduce Jim Hillyer, seated in your gallery. 
 
Jim is the Sask Party candidate for the Regina Victoria 
constituency, soon to be Regina Douglas Park. And this 
constituency is my buddy constituency and I’m so proud of the 
work Jim and the executive does there. And it will be nice to 
have this bright, young man as a member of our government 
caucus. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Jim. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3019 

 

Speaker, seated in the east gallery are a number of individuals 
from all across Saskatchewan who represent the concerned 
citizens for a safe healthy environment. These individuals have 
been outspoken in their concerns around water quality and air 
quality as they are impacted by mega hog barns. 
 
I’d like to introduce the following people from my 
constituency: Ms. Isabel Muzichuk, who has been here a 
number of times; Jack Maluga; Henry Norlin; Henry Neufeld; 
Joyce Neufeld; Steve Suderman; Jan Norris; Amanda Davies; 
Marilyn Gillis; Catherine Verrali; Kathy Kivol; and Cathy 
Holtslander. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome these people to the Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to members someone seated in your gallery who 
served my office well, and who has served the people of 
Saskatchewan very well also. He worked as a ministerial 
assistant in my office and he’s here to observe the proceedings 
today. And I’d like everyone to welcome Kirk Brown. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take pleasure in 
introducing to you in your gallery, John MacGowan. I’d ask 
him to stand. 
 
John is president of the Regina Sherwood Liberal Association 
and he was meeting with me today because of his interest in the 
Diefenbaker Homestead, the boyhood home of John 
Diefenbaker that was so callously closed by the government 
earlier this year. 
 
I’d ask all members to join in. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly two people sitting in the gallery, 
Brad and Deanna Amonetti, who are from Salem, Oregon, and 
they’re with their niece, my chief of staff Jamie McCormick. 
And I’d ask you all to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to also add my words of welcome to the 
Deputy Leader from the Official Opposition to members from 
the environmental movement who are in the gallery this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. And I particularly want to welcome 
three people who I know very well: Isabel Muzichuk, and Jan 
Norris, and Cathy Holtslander who lives in Saskatoon 
Greystone constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to thank these members for the work that they are 
doing, all the members from this group, in terms of increasing 
public awareness about some of the hazards that can be 
associated with the hog barn industry in the province. So I hope 

all members will join me in giving them a very warm welcome 
on behalf of members on this side of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to introduce at this time also to 
members a person who ordinarily you don’t see in the gallery 
because he’s usually back in the dark room in the back part of 
the legislature keeping an eye on the computer system that we 
have here, and that is Jeremy Phillips who is here with us today. 
 
And I notice . . . I want to extend a welcome to Jeremy and to 
his father who’s accompanying him here today. Would you 
welcome him please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Moose Jaw Centennial 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
special centennial is quickly approaching. The kickoff of this 
year-long celebration will take place on Wednesday, January 1, 
2003 at the Sheward Trade Centre on the Moose Jaw Exhibition 
Grounds. 
 
The afternoon will be . . . this will kick off a year-long 
celebration and it will begin on the first day of the new year. 
There will be entertainment, food, drinks, sleigh rides, 
festivities for children, and events for seniors that will run for 
the afternoon. The day will come to a dazzling end with a 
spectacular fireworks display. 
 
Over 2,000 people are expected to attend. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s the kickoff of Moose Jaw’s 100th birthday. 
 
(13:45) 
 
In addition, Mr. Minister, it was recently announced that Prince 
Edward and the Countess of Wessex will make a stop in Moose 
Jaw in June of that year as part of their Saskatchewan visit. This 
will coincide with the centennial celebrations and will add 
greatly to the excitement and another feather . . . and will be 
another feather in the cap of the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
From our meagre beginnings as a prairie settlement, through 
some very colourful years along with the usual ups and downs 
of every prairie community, thanks to its citizens Moose Jaw 
has come through this all with a . . . a community with a wide 
open future. 
 
I’d invite everyone from across our province to come to Moose 
Jaw in 2003 to participate and help to celebrate our 100th 
birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Remembering Bill Hunter 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Western Hockey League, the Edmonton Oilers, and the city of 
Saskatoon owe much to a man we remember today. One of 



3020 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

Saskatchewan’s greatest sports celebrities, Wild Bill Hunter, 
passed away yesterday in Edmonton at the age of 82. It would 
be difficult to recap Bill’s sports legacy in the 90 seconds 
allowed, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll do what I can. 
 
Born in Saskatoon, he organized his first sports team in high 
school. In fact the Saskatoon Hilltops can trace their roots back 
to Wild Bill himself. Furthering his education at the Notre 
Dame College in Wilcox, where Bill credits the school’s 
founder, Père Athol Murray, as being one of the most important 
influences on his life. 
 
After returning from the Second World War and over the next 
60 years, Bill owned, managed, and coached a number of 
hockey teams throughout Saskatchewan and Western Canada. 
He was instrumental in the foundation of the Western Hockey 
League and the WHA (World Hockey Association), Mr. 
Speaker, the WHA, which saw three . . . four teams — the 
Edmonton Oilers and three other teams — be accepted into the 
NHL (National Hockey League). 
 
If Regina has the Riders, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t Saskatoon 
have the Blues, was Bill’s call. Bill went to work hard trying to 
bring the St. Louis Blues to Saskatoon. In fact he even went so 
far as selling more season tickets to a rink than it actually had 
seats. The NHL unfortunately was not convinced, though. 
 
Wild Bill Hunter was a Member of the Order of Canada and the 
Canada . . . Canadian Sports Hall of Fame. He taught 
Saskatchewan people how to dream, the potential that this 
province . . . great province has. And he also believed in the city 
of Saskatoon — that it was big enough to do anything, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We all give our sympathy to the Hunter family. And have a 
great, merry Christmas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grey Cup Celebrations Planned 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, mark this date on your calendar 
— November 16, 2003 — the day, Mr. Speaker, when I predict 
the Roughriders will trounce its opponent in the most successful 
Grey Cup in the history of this great national event. The most 
successful cup till then of course was in 1995, when more than 
40,000 people crammed themselves into Taylor Field. 
 
We’ll be doing the same . . . we’ll be at the same place and 
doing the same thing next year, Mr. Speaker, because 
everybody knows that Regina will once again host the cup and 
all its week-long activities. We had a great time in ’95 and 
we’re going to have even a better one next year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, planning for an event of this importance 
doesn’t just start the week before. And I’m happy to recognize 
the excellent planning underway by the Regina Grey Cup 
Committee under the presidency of Marty Klyne. 
 
And I am very proud to recognize the partnership announced 
this month between SaskEnergy and the committee. 
SaskEnergy will be hosting the offices of the Regina Grey Cup 
Committee, providing them a home at SaskEnergy Place on 

Victoria Avenue. Later as we approach the game, the lobby of 
SaskEnergy Place will become a public venue for a number of 
Grey Cup activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy and TransGas have a very proud 
history of supporting the Riders and the Canadian Football 
League, and this is just one more proud chapter in that 
association. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Regional Hospital for Southwest Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The residents of 
southwest Saskatchewan have not given up their fight for a new 
regional hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last spring the government was asked by the Southwest to 
change its funding formula to make it easier to raise the local 
share of funding for a new facility. The government said no, 
Mr. Speaker. So the people of the Southwest and the partners 
involved went back to the drawing board and what they did do 
is come back with a plan to put in place the local commitment 
that was needed to build a new hospital. All that was needed 
was the government to commit its share, its 65 per cent share of 
the funding. 
 
There’s also a very active health care foundation ready to raise 
money. The Dr. Noble Irwin Healthcare Foundation has a 
superb fundraising track record. Local municipalities such as 
the RM (rural municipality) of Swift Current have also thrown 
their support behind a new hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the government maintains the cupboard is bare. They have 
money to invest in Australia, in Chile, in Mexico, in Georgia, in 
Tennessee, but they have nothing for a new hospital in Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, the provincial government 
since 1998 has taken nearly $100 million in oil and gas land 
sales out of the Southwest. Now the Southwest asks that they 
reinvest some of that money back and put some money back 
into southwest Saskatchewan and a great start would be a new 
regional hospital. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism in Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
wherever I go around Saskatchewan and beyond, people tell me 
that Moose Jaw is a happening place and they’re right. 
 
There are lots of reasons why the future is wide open in Moose 
Jaw but a growing tourism industry is right up there at the top 
of the list. Everyone knows about our recently expanded 
world-class spa, downtown murals, and mysterious tunnels. 
Historical River Street has been restored and Casino Moose Jaw 
is doing very well with the staff in 1920s garb. 
 
What many don’t know is that the early century Capital Theatre 
is being restored to the new cultural centre on heritage Main 
Street, and that a new tourism centre is opening near the 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3021 

 

Trans-Canada this spring. Mr. Speaker, the ’80s were tough on 
Moose Jaw but the ’90s brought a big time attitude shift and a 
spirit of partnership between the private sector and all levels of 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of my city and I’m looking forward to 
Tourism Moose Jaw’s news conference on Thursday. Stay 
tuned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dallas Bessey in Rodeo Finals 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to talk about a young man from my hometown of 
Bladworth. Dallas Bessey won the Canadian Cowboys’ 
Association rodeo finals held on October 24 to October 22 at 
Sask Place. Dallas had the best total score in the bareback, with 
a total score of 83. A very, very good score on the circuit and 
on the weekend. 
 
To qualify for these final competitions the riders are chosen 
from those who make the most money during the rodeo season. 
Dallas qualified in the top 10 in second place for a good 
position going into the final. 
 
Dallas had started riding bareback at the age of 17. He’s always 
been involved in cattle and with horses, which is something he 
wanted to do ever since he was a little kid. 
 
Over the past several years Dallas has been steadily improving 
his skills in the rodeo circuit. He said most of the rodeos he 
took part in this year have been Saskatchewan, but he’s also 
rode in Manitoba and Alberta. He rode bareback in the national 
finals held in Gillette, Wyoming during his high school days 
and also in the Canadian finals rodeo in 2000, and the Calgary 
Stampede 2001. And I fully expect to see him in the national 
finals someday in Vegas. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in congratulating Dallas 
on his remarkable achievements on the rodeo circuit in 2002, 
and the best of luck in the upcoming years. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Campbell Team in National Improv Competition 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very happy to rise today to tell the Assembly about the 
accomplishment of some students in my riding. I’m of course 
very happy to have Campbell Collegiate in my constituency of 
Regina South and I’m pleased to announce that another 
Campbell team has yet again distinguished itself. 
 
The senior Campbell improvisational team recently won the 
Saskatchewan section of the Canadian Improv Games. And they 
will be going to Ottawa in April to represent the province at the 
nationals. Campbell won out over 21 other teams. 
 
I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that last year we were very 
fortunate that another Regina high school, LeBoldus collegiate, 
won at Ottawa, and this year we hope to repeat again for 
Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, improv is a theatre sports 
competition in which teams of eight players take suggestions 
from the audience and use those suggestions to improvise skits 
during which they demonstrate their wit, intelligence, and 
teamwork. 
 
The Campbell team is comprised of Tara Jacobson, Tom Hill, 
Nena Rodenbush, Dan McCrae, Nicole Olszewski, David Poon, 
Hillary Sametz, and Justin Van Mulligen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might note that it is now clear to us all that the 
member for Regina Victoria clearly inherits his wit from his 
son. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the coaches, Ted 
Stewart and Karen Miliokas. 
 
And I just want to say once again, on behalf of myself and all 
members of the legislature, congratulations to the team from 
Campbell. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Relationship Between Sask Water and Microgro 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) shall be visited by three ghosts: 
the ghost of investments past, the ghost of investments present, 
and the ghost of investments yet to come — each spectre, Mr. 
Speaker, each spectre more frightening than the last. Let us 
begin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I read from a Sask Water Board of 
Directors’ information item, dated October 5, that outlined a 
strategy that was approved directly by the then minister of Sask 
Water and the current minister for CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation). And here’s what the strategy said about a 
company, Microgro, with whom Sask Water had a long-term 
commitment. I’m quoting from the item now: 
 

Create some financial expediency for Microgro through 
impacting . . . (the) cash flow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this appears to say that Sask Water had a 
deliberate strategy, approved by the minister, to sabotage a 
company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, he approved this strategy. Could 
he tell us exactly what that strategy meant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well it’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, while we’re doing wonderful 
things — government is, across this province, revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan — there’s a bunch of Scrooges on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



3022 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I stood on my feet many 
times, Mr. Speaker, and said I can’t comment specifically about 
the court case. But, Mr. Speaker, I am going to quote — 
because I can — from a news article, the Leader-Post, June 9, 
1999, in response to the member’s question. And here’s what it 
says, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

The official receiver (referring to the Microgro, the official 
receiver) confirmed Tuesday that there had been a dispute 
between Microgro and Spudco. 
 
But Bob Meldrum, a vice-president with the accounting 
firm PriceWaterhouseCoopers, also said its information 
since taking over supports the potato Crown’s claim that it 
paid, it paid its full share. 

 
“We’ve looked at it and I have to respectfully disagree with 
(Microgro),” he said. 
 
Neither the amount owed by Spudco — if any — nor a 
crop-sharing agreement for 1999 would have saved 
Microgro, he said. 
 
“Whether or not that contract was in place, I don’t think it 
would have mattered a hill of beans whether or not that 
company was going to go down.” 

 
I can say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, people are going to look back . . . 
people will look back on this session and say, it was the worst 
of ministers, it was the worst of ministers, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
answers like that, Mr. Speaker, that are going to result in this 
government getting the dickens beat out of it at the next election 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the coincidence in all of this is that . . . just shortly 
after that minute, Mr. Speaker, the coincidence is that that’s 
when apparently Sask Water slowed its schedule of payments to 
this company. So the minister has read from an article. Fair 
enough. Here’s the quote from the strategy that he approved: 
 

. . . create some financial expediency for Microgro through 
impacting their cash flow. 
 

Will the minister just simply stand in the House and say, if that 
doesn’t mean that they were setting out to sabotage this 
company, what does it mean, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I will read it more . . . 
perhaps more slowly this time then, Mr. Speaker. It says, Mr. 
Speaker, the receiver says, Mr. Speaker, he says: 
 

“We’ve looked at and I have to respectfully disagree with 
(Microgro),” he said. 
 
Neither the amount owed by Spudco — if any — nor a 
crop-sharing agreement for 1999 would have saved 
Microgro, he said. 

“Whether or not that contract was in place, I don’t think it 
would have mattered a hill of beans whether or not that 
company was going to go down.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, for that member to stand up here and make all 
kinds of allegations, as he does on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, is 
inappropriate. He should look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these aren’t our allegations. They’re 
from that minister’s memo. They’re from an information item 
and a strategy that that minister approved, Mr. Speaker. And 
they’re from a government who we know, Mr. Speaker, from 
the last week, has done anything but tell the truth on the whole 
spudgate issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re his words. We’re going to give him one more chance. 
If that strategy doesn’t mean . . . if it doesn’t mean that the 
government set out to sabotage that company, tell the House 
what it means. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve read it twice so I hope 
that’s enough. I hope they understand. Mr. Speaker, I am going 
to say though on a daily basis that member trots in here with 
information that he suggests are not . . . often suggests that they 
are not documents that are part of a court action. And 
surprisingly, Mr. Speaker — and I say to the House and to the 
people of Saskatchewan — when we go outside of the 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, we discover in every case so far they 
have been documents that have been part of the court action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he misinforms the House, Mr. Speaker, about the 
facts, Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the principals of Microgro are not a 
claimant in any court case with Sask Water or this government. 
If they are, if this government is being sued now by the 
principals of Microgro, they ought to come clean with that 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Investment in FarmGro Organic Foods 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
minister. Mr. Speaker, CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) has invested about 5.4 million taxpayer dollars 
in a company called FarmGro Organic Foods — about one and 
three-quarters million in equity as we understand it, Mr. 
Speaker, and 3.7 million in loans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the current status of that company and 
CIC’s investment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to just have a conversation briefly 
about FarmGro and investments in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
because again the member from Swift Current stands on his feet 
and today he says we’re going to have three ghosts from the 
past. 
 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3023 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, today we have only from Swift 
Current, Mr. Speaker, we have only from Swift Current the 
skeleton from the past, Mr. Speaker, the skeleton from the past. 
Because this member is back again. He was in this legislature 
working for the previous government, Mr. Speaker, in the ’80s. 
And so the skeleton’s back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s this man, Mr. Speaker, who talks about and should talk 
about what the Crowns in Saskatchewan are doing. We know 
what the Saskatchewan Party would do with the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. They’d take every one of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, 
and they’d put them on the chopping block and they’d sell 
every one of those Crowns, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this 
exercise is about and that’s what this debate is about. It’s about 
discrediting the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan in 
preparation for if they, God help us, would ever be government, 
would sell every Crown in the province that we have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we shouldn’t be surprised that the 
Deputy Premier just stood up and talked about the three ghosts 
of Christmas past. It shouldn’t be a surprise. They haven’t read 
A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens, Mr. Speaker, and of 
course they haven’t read the other great works of fiction over 
there, which are the cabinet documents that come out of that 
government, Mr. Speaker. They ought to read one or the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we asked the specific question to the minister 
responsible for Crown Investments Corporation about an 
investment they made in FarmGro, an organic flour mill. This is 
a multi-million-dollar investment of taxpayers’ dollars in this 
business. We’re simply asking for an update. What is the 
current status of the taxpayers’ investment in FarmGro 
Organics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
under attack over the last couple of days have been all of the 
investments that the Crown Corporations have been making in 
this province, Mr. Speaker — all of the investments that the 
Crowns have been making, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And FarmGro was an investment, Mr. Speaker, by this 
government because we saw an opportunity with private 
partners, Mr. Speaker, to grow the organic flour industry in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And so that’s why we invested 
initially with FarmGro, Mr. Speaker, because there was a need 
to develop a flour . . . organic flour industry in Saskatchewan. 
And we chose, Mr. Speaker, to be involved. 
 
What I say, Mr. Speaker, why is it today that the member 
opposite aren’t attacking, Mr. Speaker . . . They attack the hog 
barns, Mr. Speaker, that we’re growing in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re attacking ethanol that we’re growing, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatchewan. Today they’re attacking the forestry, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’re growing in Saskatchewan, because this 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is not satisfied until they 
dispose of the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan fully, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Broe Participation in Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Industry and Resources. Over the last several 
days we’ve learned all about how the NDP government 
presented the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) deal as a public-private partnership 
when it wasn’t. We learned that the NDP gambled and lost 28 
million taxpayers’ dollars on this potato fiasco. 
 
Well there’s another deal that the NDP are promoting as a 
significant public-private partnership these days, and that’s the 
deal with American-owned Broe industries to build ethanol 
plants in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP government be forthright with the 
taxpayers this time? Will the minister table the full terms of 
their financial deal with Broe industries? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
clear, it’s very clear where members of the Saskatchewan Party 
come from. You know, I can remember in 2001 when we had 
some difficult job numbers, the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party trotted out every day talking about what an economic 
development plan failure we had going on here in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, and you know what? He believed it then. So I’m going to 
ask the same Leader of the Saskatchewan Party whether he’ll 
stand in his place, given the job growth in this province in the 
last seven months, and if he will endorse the economic 
development plan of this province, Mr. Speaker, which plan is 
working. 
 
Now his members can stand up and attack every company. 
They can attack every business deal that goes on in this place, 
Mr. Speaker, because they believe it serves their own political 
needs. 
 
But I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to work with 
investors. We’re going to work with the business community. 
We’re going to build a stronger economy in this province in 
spite of those guys over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP are saying that Broe 
industries will have a 60 per cent equity in the Belle Plaine 
plant and CIC will have 40 per cent. But as we learned with 
SPUDCO, Con-Force was given a majority equity position in 
the potato sheds for a whopping investment of $153. 
 
Now the Minister of Industry says the total investment for the 
new Belle Plaine plant is $55 million and that Broe was going 
to have a 60 per cent equity. Clearly, taxpayers are questioning 
whether or not we can believe anything this government says 
any more. 
 
It’s time for details, Mr. Speaker, so the people of 
Saskatchewan can be assured we aren’t going to see a repeat of 
the NDP’s SPUDCO failure with ethanol, only on a bigger 



3024 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

scale. The taxpayers have a right to know and I ask the minister, 
exactly how much cash — actual cash — is Broe contributing 
to receive the 60 per cent equity position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say to 
that member, in spite of his opposition to ethanol development, 
in spite of the fact that Broe group of companies is going to be 
creating jobs in his own riding, in spite of the fact that it’s going 
to be offering some jobs and some opportunities in intensive 
livestock, Mr. Speaker, that member stands up and attacks a 
good business deal for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re opposed to anything that creates positive 
opportunities and a positive investment climate, Mr. Speaker. 
And what do they offer in alternative? In alternative, they’ve 
got a slogan instead of an economic development plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they attack this government on ethanol. They 
attack when we put in the most competitive mining incentive 
package in the history of this province, the most competitive in 
this country. They attack when we put in place the most 
progressive royalties as it relates to oil and gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what. We’re going to continue in spite 
of them because it’s what’s right for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — The Saskatchewan Party is in full support of 
an ethanol industry in this province. What I’m trying to do by 
asking the minister these questions is to protect the people of 
Thunder Creek from a fiasco like the SPUDCO. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, there is good reason why people 
should be very skeptical about this deal with Broe industries, 
given the NDP’s track record. We’ve learned over the last week 
that deception runs deep over there. 
 
The minister told members of the media that Broe would be 
contributing $8.2 million in equity investment and 26.7 million 
in debt financing for a total of $35 million investment in the 
Belle Plaine plant. The NDP government is contributing the 
other 20 million. But what taxpayers deserve to know, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the NDP government is not helping Broe 
industries finance any of their $35 million investment in this 
plant as they did with the potato sheds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand in this Assembly and 
guarantee today that the NDP government, through any 
department or Crown agency, is not helping Broe finance any of 
their debt or equity financing in the ethanol plant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, that member talks 
about protecting the people in his riding. And I tell you what, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this government is doing and 
that’s exactly what people on this side of the House are doing. 
We’re going to protect the people of his riding from himself, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know the day Broe came, announced he’s putting equity 
into an ethanol plant in Belle Plaine, in that member’s own 
riding, he’s out whining and he’s complaining because it just 
isn’t what he wants to see, Mr. Speaker, because it’s positive. 
People feel positive about ethanol development in this province. 
They know it’s going to value-add agriculture. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? It doesn’t fit into the political 
agenda of the Saskatchewan Party because jobs don’t fit into 
their agenda, Mr. Speaker. The only thing that they’ve got 
going for them is the most negative role, the most negative 
attitude of any group of men and women in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan see through them and I 
would say to you, they’ll have none of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Information Technology Arrangements 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Lucky Lake and Outlook that went bankrupt with 
SPUDCO can’t afford any more of the government’s protection. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister responsible for information technology. 
 
Two weeks ago, the Auditor General of Canada uncovered one 
of the largest cost overruns in the history of Canada. In 1994, 
the federal government estimated the net cost of its new 
firearms registry at $2 million. Now the Auditor General is 
saying the gun registry will cost taxpayers between 800 million 
and $1 billion. The federal government has already spent $227 
million on a computer system that is being scrapped because it 
doesn’t work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the company hired to develop much of the gun 
registry system was Electronic Data Systems — EDS. That’s 
why . . . that’s the same company hired, Mr. Speaker, the same 
company the NDP in Saskatchewan has chosen to privatize the 
government IT (information technology) services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps is the NDP government taking to 
ensure its plan to privatize 325 IT jobs in Saskatchewan through 
an exclusive, untendered deal with Saskatchewan doesn’t result 
in a massive cost overrun as was in the case in EDS’s 
involvement in the federal gun registry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Normally I 
don’t have to start way, way, way, way, way back in the 
question list, but let me start by assuring the member opposite 
that we do not run a gun registry, we are not planning on 
running a gun registry, and we will not run a gun registry. If he 
wants, he can direct his questions to the Alliance in Ottawa and 
perhaps they can ask the question. 
 
Second of all, I’ve already clarified that there’s not going to be 
privatization of jobs. I gave that assurance a week ago Monday. 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3025 

 

I have said that. I’ve repeated it outside the House. That is a 
core component of what we are taking a look at. 
 
Third of all, Mr. Speaker, let me assure the members opposite 
that we have not yet made a decision on the EDS proposal. We 
are not going to get pushed into making the decision. We are 
going to take our time. We are going to make sure that we 
understand the impact and that we have the protections in place 
to make sure that price guarantees are there. That is an 
assurance I’ve given the public; that is an assurance I’m giving 
this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
after the government’s record with Microgro and other 
companies like SPUDCO, it’s comforting to know the 
government’s not going to be involved in a gun registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, federal Justice minister, Anne McLellan, said the 
technology chosen for the federal gun registry was inadequate. 
Ms. McLellan said, and I quote: 
 

I think it’s fair to say that the technology that was in place 
could not deliver all aspects of that system as originally 
designed. 

 
On December 5, the NDP Justice minister in Saskatchewan told 
the media that the big problem with the federal gun registration 
system was, and I quote: 
 

It’s using a computer system which apparently simply 
doesn’t work. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the company that was contracted to lead the 
development of the federal gun registry was EDS and that’s the 
same company the Justice minister hired to build the computer 
system for the NDP’s Information Services Corporation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like the member to put 
the question. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, so would the member. 
 
ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) has 
blown more than $80 million on its computerized land title 
system. Is the NDP at all concerned about entering into an 
untendered contract to privatize government IT services with a 
company with a track record of losses in both Saskatchewan 
and Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a few questions for the critic of government efficiency 
across the way, the member who supposedly is interested in 
looking for a more efficient way to do government. 
 
Is the opposition telling us today that they do not support this 
government when we look for ways to reduce the cost? Is the 
opposition telling us that we should not be pursuing economic 

development approaches that will attract potentially $63 million 
a year in new economic GDP (gross domestic product) growth, 
that will attract millions of dollars in new economic direct 
investment, that will create 1,000 new direct jobs and create 
600 indirect jobs? Is that what this opposition is saying? 
 
Is EDS on their blacklist just like the Broe Companies, and are 
they going to make that list public so Saskatchewan people 
know who need not apply? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on the list are the current cabinet ministers that have created this 
debacle in Saskatchewan’s economic development. They need 
not apply, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, EDS may be fully capable 
of handling the privatization of the 325 jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
But the facts are that both the land titles project and the gun 
registry system are significantly over budget. And the Justice 
minister has concluded that the failure of the computer system 
was in large part the problem with the federal gun registry. The 
Justice minister also acknowledges that there has been 
significant problems in the development of the computerized 
land titles system in Saskatchewan. In both cases, EDS was the 
provider of that technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister contacted the federal government 
to ascertain whether the massive cost overruns with respect to 
the gun registry were in any way related to the services 
provided by EDS; and what steps is the government in 
Saskatchewan taking to ensure the cost of any untendered 
contracts with EDS do not balloon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to assure all people in this province I will, under no 
circumstances, be seeking the advice of the federal Liberals on 
how to handle anything in the computer systems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Absolutely not. 
 
But let me ask the member opposite this: the first two questions 
that the member asked accused EDS of being responsible for 
the gun registry. Now the third question the member asks is, oh 
no, they don’t think EDS had anything to do with it. Let me say 
that he has finally got it right. EDS is not responsible for the 
problems that they are having in Ottawa’s gun registry. They 
are not responsible. 
 
And I need only refer to them the interview yesterday that was 
done on the John Gormley show. They needn’t take my advice. 
They need only listen to the former Tory MP (Member of 
Parliament) who’s on CKOM radio everyday. Listen to what 
John Gormley had to say about it. He recognizes that EDS is a 
competent provider, the second biggest provider of IT services, 
after IBM (International Business Machines Corporation), in 
the world. 



3026 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

This is a company that has come to us with a proposal that 
looks like it’ll reduce the cost to government, that’ll create jobs, 
it’ll provide us with a better platform, and it is fundamentally 
different than anything else we’ve looked at because it is not 
about developing a new system. It’s about implementing what 
they already know how to do very, very well. The member 
opposite should welcome this proposal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. A private members’ Bill is before 
this legislature, and it will allow the board members of the Sask 
Wheat Pool to potentially change the ownership structure of 
their company. 
 
The legislature’s Standing Committee on Private Members’ 
Bills has been meeting and discussing this legislation over the 
past few days. And although this question was asked in 
committee, it did not receive an answer. 
 
We have just reviewed this NDP government’s long and dismal 
record of using taxpayers’ dollars to become involved in private 
business. Will the Premier assure the people of Saskatchewan 
that his NDP government will not use taxpayers’ dollars to 
purchase shares, or take any debt or equity position in the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen over the last 
couple of days in the legislature is a demonstration by the 
Saskatchewan Party about how it is that you invest and grow 
Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, from the onset in this 
legislature this fall, Mr. Speaker . . . or this spring, we had the 
ACRE Committee (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) 
that were here. And they made a presentation, Mr. Speaker, to 
the members of the Legislative Assembly. And what did they 
say, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They said to us, Mr. Speaker, that in order to grow 
Saskatchewan what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is that we need 
to invest in rural Saskatchewan in order to grow it. And, Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the House, we have the litany of 
examples of investments that we’ve made in Saskatchewan 
today to make a difference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We made a difference on the ethanol piece which we talked 
about today, which the members opposite are saying we 
shouldn’t. We make loan guarantees, Mr. Speaker, today, and 
we assisted in the growing of the ethanol industry at Lanigan, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ve helped in the past, Mr. Speaker, with 
the building of the grains and transportation sector in 
Saskatchewan because this government and this Premier are 
about growing Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not taking it apart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cannington on his 

feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, over the last two days the 
member from Swift Current has repeatedly asked the minister 
for CIC to explain the meaning of a Sask Water Board of 
Directors decision item dealing with the company called 
Microgro, today with FarmGro. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture has responded to these questions 
but his responses have had absolutely nothing to do with the 
questions asked. Mr. Speaker, section 417 of Beauchesne's says, 
and I quote: 
 

Answers to questions should be as brief as possible, deal 
with the matter raised and should not provoke debate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the practice of this Assembly has 
been to give ministers a great deal of latitude when answering 
questions. And I think that’s a good practice, one the 
Saskatchewan Party will continue when our ministers are 
answering questions in a few months. However, according to 
Beauchesne’s, the answer given must have something to do 
with the question asked. 
 
Over the past two days the member from Swift Current has 
repeatedly asked about Microgro and Sask Water’s strategy 
dealing with Microgro. The Minister of Agriculture has never 
so much as mentioned agro grow in any of his answers. Mr. 
Speaker, according to Beauchesne's the government is perfectly 
within its rights to have the Minister of Agriculture answer 
these questions. The minister is also within his rights not to 
answer the question. However, what he is not allowed to do is 
have a long-winded response that has absolutely nothing to do 
with the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, section 417 of Beauchesne's has been cited on 
numerous occasions by the Speaker of the Manitoba legislature, 
and here are some examples. I will also provide these to the 
Speaker for his review. On August 8, 2002 an opposition 
member asked about a contract with Manitoba gaming 
commission. The minister responded by asking the opposition 
to withdraw a previous accusation from another contract. A 
point of order was raised by the opposition and the Speaker 
ruled, citing Beauchesne's 417 that, quote: 
 

The minister should deal with the question that is raised. 
 
On December 3, 2002, the opposition asked a question about 
counselling for children. The minister responded by talking 
about the government’s healthy child initiative. The Speaker 
ruled, citing Beauchesne's 417 that, quote: 
 

Answers are expected to be responsive to the question, . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I invite 
the member from Cannington to continue. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
over the past two days the Minister of Agriculture have not 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3027 

 

dealt with the questions raised and have not been responsive to 
the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would note that by agreement 
tomorrow is expected to be the final day of this fall session. 
That means we only have one more question period to try to get 
answers out of this government. I would therefore ask the 
Speaker to rule on this matter, either before the Assembly 
adjourns today or prior to question period tomorrow. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to respond to the 
point of order raised by the Opposition House Leader. 
 
I find it kind of interesting that the Opposition House Leader 
objects to, he says, answers which are not brief. He says 
answers should be brief and should not be long-winded. Mr. 
Speaker, earlier in this question period we had the marathon of 
questions from the hon. member opposite, and if there’s 
anybody who’s the champion of long-windedness we’ve just 
heard from him in raising the point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is frivolous and irrelevant and the hon. 
member knows it. The traditions of parliamentary use of 
question period also understand that, Mr. Speaker. The rules of 
question period are very clear. The opposition has the right to 
ask the questions that they consider to be appropriate. Those 
questions are directed to the Executive Council of the 
government of the day. It is the jurisdiction of the government 
of the day to determine which minister is most appropriate to 
address the question and to address the question in the way that 
the minister considers to be most appropriate. 
 
There is no obligation in the House, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
obligation in the House for the ministers when responding to 
questions to have to satisfy the opposition. Mr. Speaker, if we 
were having to satisfy the opposition, we would be here forever 
because they are incapable of being satisfied. That’s the bottom 
line on the matter and it can be — as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, it is frequently — a technique used in debate of the 
issues of the day when members of the Executive Council 
respond, to also challenge the positions of the members of the 
opposition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the hon. members 
would object to that. It is also, Mr. Speaker, it is also a 
responsibility, it is a responsibility of members of the Executive 
Council when accepting questions to respect and honour the 
parliamentary traditions of sub judice. I know that that is a 
tradition which is honoured and respected on this side of the 
House but is a very, very mild respect, at best, on that side of 
the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you to make the rulings and to make them 
consistent with the traditions of question period, not only in this 
House, but in the Houses in the nation, in the House of 
Commons. Mr. Speaker, I think upon review and reflection you 
will find that the objection raised by the House Leader is 
nothing more, nothing less than frivolous and grandstanding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I would thank both members for the 
comments regarding the point of order. I will strive to review 
and bring back some guidelines for the members at an 
appropriate time. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government today and respond to 
written questions no. 459 through 481 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 459 to 481 inclusive 
have been tabled. 
 
(14:30) 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee of the Whole. The first item 
before the committee is consideration of Bill No. 304 — An 
Act to amend The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, 1995. And I 
see there are no officials so we’ll proceed directly to the Bill. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to thank 
the member for bringing this Bill forward for discussion. 
 
I feel that I would be remiss if I didn’t forward some concerns 
that have come from constituents and from other Pool members 
throughout the province. 
 
The Wheat Pool has a significant presence in rural 
Saskatchewan and has for a number of years. The elevators 
have been somewhat of an icon of rural Saskatchewan and 
there’s a lot of even sentimental feelings towards the Wheat 
Pool and what it’s meant to our history. 
 
The elevator closures, the concerns that have come before me 
— I would say not even just recently, but over a number of 
years now — is the speed at which the closures take place. 
There are communities that have producer groups who would 
be interested in purchasing the elevators but before they could 
get their financing or business plan in place, the Wheat Pool has 
the elevator taken down and the opportunity is gone at that 
point. 
 
The other concerns are, many of the elevators, before the sale is 
made, the Wheat Pool puts stipulations on rail cars not being 
able to be loaded from that elevator and therefore the elevator is 
of no use other than a large storage bin. 
 
When we look at growing Saskatchewan and revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan, I think abandoned elevators do have a lot of 



3028 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

opportunity in a lot of communities if there are producer groups 
who are willing to grab that opportunity. 
 
And we need look no farther than St. Gregor, which is very 
close to my home, where a fellow by the name of Bruce 
Bornhorst runs a very successful business of cleaning seed, pea 
seed, in an elevator and he employs five or six or more — I’m 
not even too sure where he’s at for employees — and he is an 
important contributor to the St. Gregor community. 
 
So that’s an issue that’s brought forward from a number of 
producers in Saskatchewan and they feel that if the Wheat Pool 
goes to a more corporate-type structure that these closures will 
be given even less consideration — that they will be, you know, 
happening more quickly. The elevators will come down more 
quickly. So that is a huge concern. 
 
The other concern — and I’m a little concerned about this one 
as well — has come from members who feel that there has been 
a real lack of consultation from the delegates to the members. 
And I brought this concern up to Mr. Wiens while we were at 
committee and he assured me that the delegates did consult 
their members, but he also said that that was up to each 
individual delegate’s discretion as to how they wanted to go 
about that process. 
 
It was lacking in some of the districts. Some were great and 
they did let their membership know that this was potentially 
going to happen and therefore those members were well 
informed, they had the information in advance, they could give 
an opinion, and it worked very well. But there were delegates, a 
number, who did not do that. And those members are quite 
upset and taken by surprise actually. 
 
But the problem then lies with the Bill, of course. What is my 
responsibility as a legislator? And one of the members on the 
committee proposed that the role as legislators is to be a 
facilitator and a regulator but not anything beyond that. Mr. 
Wiens explained in committee that the Bill before us: 
 

. . . is not asking the Legislative Assembly to change our 
corporate governance or share structure (of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool). It is seeking (the) Assembly 
support to move final authority for selected provisions 
pertaining to governance and share ownership from the . . . 
SWP Act into our company’s bylaws, thereby giving . . . 
(the) delegates final authority to make future changes as 
desired or . . . (requested). The intent (of the Bill, or the 
changes to the Bill) is to maintain or indeed enhance the 
responsibilities of (the) Wheat Pool delegates and 
streamline the decision-making process in these particular 
areas. 

 
I do recognize that the Wheat Pool has faced a number of 
challenges and quite possibly may need more flexibility in order 
to stay financially viable. 
 
And so with that, the question that I would . . . You know, 
another further concern that I have and a question that I would 
like to pose to the member who’s brought this Bill forward . . . I 
observed that after question period that the member was 
consulting with the Premier quite considerably. And so, during 
question period, I asked a very, very pointed question. I would 

like to re-ask that question now that she’s had an opportunity to 
discuss the Bill with the Premier. 
 
Will she, on behalf of the NDP government, assure the people 
of Saskatchewan that this NDP government will not use 
taxpayers’ dollars to purchase shares or take any debt or equity 
position in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 
 
The Chair: — Before the member . . . Order. I listened very 
carefully with the preamble and with the questions and just to 
remind hon. members that this is a private Bill that is sponsored 
by a private member and there is no . . . irrespective of whether 
that member is a member of the government side or of the 
opposition and so . . . and it just as easily could be being 
sponsored by a member of the opposition. 
 
And just as it would be not fair for a member of the opposition 
to be answering government policy within . . . as a sponsor . . . 
Order. It would not be appropriate for a opposition member to 
be answering government policy nor would it be appropriate for 
a government member answering government policy questions 
as a sponsor of a private Bill. So I rule that question out of 
order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I apologize, Mr. Chair, and I’ll rephrase the 
question. Does the member know if the NDP government has 
any intentions of purchasing shares or taking any debt or equity 
position in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, which is outside of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool’s policy? 
 
The Chair: — Again the item before the committee is Bill No. 
304, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act, and 
that questions and comments and debate should be specifically 
related to the Bill that’s before us on a clause-by-clause basis 
and limited to the specific Bill and not directly regarding 
government policy. 
 
So again I would rule that that question is out of order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Generally from the public and from Wheat 
Pool members in large, the assumption is that the Wheat Pool is 
asking for changes to allow changes to their structure because 
they intend on doing so. So that is why these questions become 
important because if they intend on making those structure 
changes within the company, that means there could be a 
potential buyer. The concern, of course: is that potential buyer 
going to be the Saskatchewan government? 
 
The Chair: — I want to be very clear that the Chair makes no 
determination or conclusion as to whether these are important 
questions or valid questions or worthwhile questions. I’m only 
ruling as to whether they’re relevant to the Bill and to the 
committee and to the process that’s before us. 
 
So I just want to reassure the member that there’s no judgment 
as to the quality of the questions, the importance or whether or 
not these are relative or whether they’re important. I’m just 
ruling whether they’re relevant to the item before the 
committee. So I hope that reassures the hon. member and that if 
she would direct the question specifically to the Bill at hand and 
then we can proceed with the committee. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, with leave to introduce guests. 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3029 

 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To you and through 
you, to the rest of the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce two people sitting in the east gallery there, Meghan 
Wankel and Myoyng Sung Lee, who are here from Toronto. 
They attend university in Toronto. 
 
Meghan is from Saskatchewan and is here, back for Christmas. 
She is taking law at the U of T (University of Toronto). And 
Myoyng is from Seoul, Korea. It’s her first trip to Western 
Canada. She might have a real opportunity to see some snow 
come down tonight as they’re forecasting a big snowfall. She’s 
attending the U of T and taking some English classes. So I’d 
like all members to welcome Meghan back home for a while 
and to give Myoyng a hearty Western Canada welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 304 – The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for North Battleford on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I was going to enter into the debate, so I’ll 
yield to the member from Watrous. She was continuing her 
questioning. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Would the member 
please explain to the Assembly how the proposed amendments 
to this Bill will allow the Wheat Pool to change their share 
structure? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the member 
opposite. My understanding of the process of the Bill is that the 
Bill will enable the Pool delegates to increase the current limit 
on share ownership to a higher level at some time in the future 
if it is deemed necessary and if it’s deemed advisable or 
required. The Act does not directly change anything. It allows 
for the Pool to enter in a process to allow that to happen without 
them coming back to the legislature for further approval. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Would this allow a change in 
the status of non-voting shares to become voting shares? And 
further to that, would it allow non-shareholders to become part 
of the board? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Perhaps the most advisable course of action — 
although I think that these questions were answered in 
committee — but perhaps the most advisable course of action 
would be if I take note of their questions, forward them to the 
Pool, and ensure that the member receives the appropriate 
response. 

(14:45) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, if I may first say, just as 
preamble to my questions, it seems to me a rather strange 
procedure that the sponsor of the Bill suggests that we pass it 
first and find out what it’s about afterwards. That seems to me a 
odd procedure for responsible legislators. 
 
I think that for anyone who was raised in this province, we 
obviously remember the days when the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool was the largest corporation in Saskatchewan, one of the 
most successful co-operatives in the entire world, when there 
were 1,100 delivery points across this province. And that 
number now, I believe, is down to 47. 
 
We remember the days when the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
handled something like two-thirds, I believe, of the 
Saskatchewan crop and today I understand it’s something like a 
third, or that number or lower. 
 
My question for the sponsor of the Bill is that if we approve 
these amendments, if we approve these amendments, does the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool remain, in any sense of the term, a 
co-operative? 
 
Ms. Jones: — My understanding, Mr. Chairman, is that the 
amendments proposed do not change anything except those 
outlined — and the member is free to read those — and that the 
clause that says that the Wheat Pool will continue to abide by 
co-operative principles remains intact. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — In that case I wish to ask, Mr. Chairman, if the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool remains a co-operative, in what 
sense is it a co-operative? If another corporation is free to own 
controlling or all the shares of the company and to name the 
board of directors, in what sense would that be a co-operative 
then? 
 
If it is her contention that the Wheat Pool will still be a 
co-operative after we pass this — I’ve read over the 
amendments; I can’t see how that is — but if it’s her contention 
that it’s still a co-operative, I wonder if she would be good 
enough to explain to the Assembly in what sense it is still a 
co-operative. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, I’m making no contention. The 
hon. member’s questions are on the record. I’ll make sure that 
they’re forwarded to the Wheat Pool for their reply. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think any member of 
this Assembly wishes to stand in the way of the Wheat Pool 
raising more capital for whatever . . . from whatever source in 
an attempt to stay in business. However, I think there is a 
feeling in this Assembly that we would hope that that additional 
new capital wouldn’t come from the taxpayers of this province. 
 
I note that when the share value of the Wheat Pool was at $20 a 
share, that gave a capitalization of the company of 740 million. 
Today I understand the shares are trading at approximately $1, 
which gives the capitalization for the company of only 37.4 
million. 
 
Now that is a small amount for any international grain 



3030 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

companies, like say ADM (Archer Daniels Midland). And 
indeed, in view of the money that CIC has invested in Australia 
and other places around the world, that’s small change for them 
as well. So I think hon. members are right in asking. 
 
But before I get to my next question I would like to ask the hon. 
sponsoring member, is she seriously saying to this Assembly 
that the correct course for this Assembly is to pass the 
legislation today and get answers for our questions at some 
future date? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The process for a private member’s . . . a private Bill sponsored 
by a private member is . . . And we’ve gone through those right 
up and including the public hearings that we had yesterday, 
which is . . . The major difference between government Bills 
and private Bills is that there is a hearing where members are 
free to advocate both for and against the proposed Bill, and to 
ask any questions of the individuals, of the entity bringing the 
Bill forward. And that process took place and the questions 
were answered. 
 
The answers are on the record. Any further questions that were 
not posed or answered, I commit to forwarding the transcript of 
these proceedings to the Pool for their response. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, could the sponsoring member 
be good enough to tell us whether, in her opinion, if we make 
these amendments today, there would be anything preventing, 
first of all a private corporation such as ADM to buy the total 
assets of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. member’s 
question, I refer him to item no. 6 of the explanatory notes and 
it has to . . . I will read it into the record, or at least part. It says: 
 

The amendments to the Act have been approved by the 
requisite majority of the delegates of the Corporation and 
also by The Toronto Stock Exchange. Clause 12(5)(e) of 
the Act requires that the change to the share ownership cap 
be approved by the Class B shareholders. As a result, the 
assent to the amendments to clause 12(5)(e) and section 15 
of the Act would be subject to filing a certificate with the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly confirming that such 
amendments have been approved by the requisite majority 
of the Class B shareholders. 
 

And so the Bill, after receiving . . . after being passed in the 
House and receiving Royal Assent still must go back to the 
shareholders for their two-thirds majority approval before it can 
. . . before those sections of the Act can be proclaimed. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, may I then ask the hon. 
sponsoring member, if we pass these amendments, will there be 
anything preventing CIC or some other arm of the provincial 
government from making a direct equity investment or 
purchasing all of the assets of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, the member had an opportunity to 
be briefed as well as to ask questions. Investment policies are 
not the specialist of a private member. He knows the process. 
And again I will offer to forward any transcripted questions to 

the Wheat Pool, and I’m sure they’ll make available . . . make 
themselves available to him to answer any questions that he has. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I think I’m 
going to ask for a ruling. I take enormous offence at any 
suggestion from the hon. member that I’m doing anything other 
than my duty as a member of this Assembly. 
 
For the record, I was not invited nor even informed of the 
meetings of the Private Members’ Committee. I was not . . . I’m 
not a member of that committee. I was not invited to attend the 
meetings of that committee, nor was I informed. And so I take 
. . . I take enormous offence at any suggestion from the member 
that I or anybody else in this Assembly is doing anything more 
than the duty to which he or she was elected. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I didn’t quite catch what the member said 
at the tail end . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, so it’s not a 
point of order? Could the member clarify what he said? I didn’t 
quite catch what you said. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is a point 
of order that the hon. member is suggesting that I am not doing 
my duty and I am acting improperly to ask questions about the 
import of this Bill and the significance of what it says and what 
we are actually being asked to pass this afternoon. 
 
And by asking what this Bill says, what it does, what it will do 
to the largest corporation in Saskatchewan — a part of 
Saskatchewan’s history — that in asking those questions she is 
suggesting I’m not doing my duty as a member of this 
Assembly. And I think that’s offensive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the hon. member has put a 
point of order to the Chair and on that point of order, Mr. Chair, 
if I may simply remind the committee of the process and of the 
opportunity that the hon. member has had. 
 
The hon. member shouts from his seat that he hasn’t had any 
opportunity. Well, Mr. Chair, I remind the hon. member, I 
remind the committee that there is a standard process for private 
Bills. 
 
Private Bills need a sponsor in this House and the scrutiny on 
private Bills takes place in the committee where hon. members 
have the opportunity to receive information, to put their points 
of view, and to get responses to their questions if they have 
them. 
 
I also point out, Mr. Chair, that in addition to that process — 
which has already occurred — that the member who has 
sponsored this Bill has said, more than one occasion, that 
additional questions that are put here on the record this 
afternoon will be forwarded. She will ensure that they are 
forwarded to the Pool for a response. 
 
I do point out as well finally, Mr. Chair, and perhaps most 
importantly, to the hon. member who shouts from his place that 
he didn’t have any opportunity, that there was a posting of the 
committee meeting on the bulletin board outside the door 
entering into the Legislative Assembly chambers. The same 
place, Mr. Chair, that is standard in this House for the posting 
of information about committee meetings — available to all 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3031 

 

hon. members. 
 
Mr. Chair, there is some strict requirements that are put in place 
regarding the advertising of the committee meetings. They have 
been followed. If the member didn’t read the notice, that’s his 
problem but it’s certainly not . . . it is not the responsibility of 
this committee now to make up for his failure to have used the 
notice that he was appropriately given and could have followed. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — On the point of order, Mr. Chairman, the hon. 
member knows perfectly good and well I’m not a member of 
that committee and have no right to ask questions in that 
committee. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the member for the point of order and 
also the member for speaking to it. From this Chair’s opinion 
that the questions that the member has put are in order and that 
the answers are in order, and I would refer to the member to 
rule 75 which said: 
 

No committee on any Private Bill shall begin consideration 
of the same until after notice of the sitting of such 
committee has been affixed for two days in the lobby, and 
appended in the Votes and Proceedings. 

 
And I notice that they have been in the Votes and Proceedings 
since Wednesday, December 11 and the notice of meeting was 
posted. So the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Is there anything in this legislation that once 
passed would prevent CIC from buying up the whole of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll ensure that the member’s 
question is forwarded to the Pool and they will answer. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Is the purpose of this legislation before us 
today — coming before us by unanimous leave rather than the 
normal course at our spring session — is the purpose of this 
legislation today to allow sale of the Pool to the Government of 
Saskatchewan or to some other private corporation? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, it’s not in my purview to answer 
that. I’ll ensure that the question is forwarded to the Pool and 
they will I’m sure respond. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, does the hon. member, does the 
hon. member believe it is acting responsibly for us to pass these 
amendments prior to receiving answers to these questions? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, we . . . this Bill is following a 
normal process for private Bills sponsored by a private member. 
Ample notice was given. This was dealt with in part in 
committee yesterday and forms part of the record. And any 
other questions that were not answered to the member’s 
complete satisfaction can be forwarded to the Pool through our 
transcript and responded to by them. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member for her 

assurances that the Wheat Pool will be forwarded these 
questions from the hon. member from Watrous and from 
myself. I thank her for those assurances. 
But would even she herself feel comfortable in passing 
something and then finding out what it’s all about afterwards? 
Or would she think it prudent to find out what a Bill is and what 
the full ramifications are and what we are actually approving in 
. . . especially in an institution which has been so much a part of 
the fabric of our province and had such a signal role in the 
building of this province that if we are, if we are going to put it 
on the block, should we not be perfectly clear as to what we are 
doing prior to passing it? Or does she think that it would be 
acting responsibly to pass it first and figure out later what we 
are doing? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry that the hon. member 
didn’t attend the meeting and take the opportunity that was 
afforded to him and to all hon. members to ask these questions 
of the Pool directly at that committee hearing. That is the reason 
that private member Bills have committee hearings, is so that 
questions and answers can be put to the person who is 
requesting the Bill. And I’m sorry the hon. member didn’t take 
advantage. 
 
Perhaps the best course of action would be for him to ask all of 
the questions, put them into the record, and then they will be 
forwarded to the Pool for their response. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I understand the Hon. Deputy 
Premier has said that there are ongoing negotiations with the 
Pool. Now does the sponsoring member think it might be 
important for us to know what is the tenor of these discussions 
and whether or not these discussions are about taking an equity 
position before we pass these amendments? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, I believe I’ve already answered 
that question. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly feel myself and I 
believe other members of the opposition feel that if the 
government wants to delude itself into thinking this is still a 
co-operative, if they still want to dwell under that illusion, I 
guess that’s their business and that doesn’t do us any harm — 
although it is clearly an illusion, I think, to anyone who reads 
the Bill, that the company is in no sense a co-operative after the 
passing of this motion. But I say if you wish to believe it’s still 
a co-operative, then so be it — go ahead and believe it. So we 
have no reason to stand in the way of it. 
 
If the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool wishes to explore new 
opportunities to raise capital, it is not for me or I think any other 
member of this Assembly to try and prevent that. If that 
amounts to some or all of the Pool being sold to a third party 
interest, then again I don’t think that is something that I should 
be standing in the way of. 
 
If however the Government of Saskatchewan is going to take 
advantage of these new provisions so that it can take an equity 
position in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, then I think that is 
something that hon. members will want to be firmly aware of 
prior to approving this legislation. But I think we all in this 
Assembly are of the view that it’s really not for us to decide to 
whom the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool might wish to sell some of 



3032 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

its shares, and I wish to put that on the record. 
 
But in view of the fact we can’t get answers as to whether that 
potential buyer may be the Government of Saskatchewan, I 
think that many hon. members will be very uncomfortable in 
passing amendments to lead to that sort of equity investment. 
And I do wish that we could be given some assurance on that 
before proceeding. 
 
The Chair: — I would indicate to the member that I think the 
assurance that he’s requesting is an appropriate question, but 
it’s not relevant to this forum and specifically to the Bill. I 
believe what the member was saying is he wants assurance of 
what the government policy will be. And that’s perfectly 
appropriate, but not in this forum. So I just wanted to make that 
comment to the member. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I accept Mr. Chairman’s ruling. I think it is 
correct. But may I then ask the sponsoring member, does she 
believe that this Assembly is acting responsibly to proceed with 
these amendments until we have received an indication of 
government policy? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, the appropriate process for the 
introduction and passing of a private Bill sponsored by a private 
member has been followed. It is now in the hands of the House 
and the House will decide. And if the member . . . the member 
will make his own decision. It’s not up to me to judge. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I attended the 
committee meeting yesterday with great interest. My family has 
had a position in the Pool for a long time. Both . . . all four of 
my great-grandfathers were founding members of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Both my grandfathers delivered the 
vast majority of their grain there and my father is currently a 
delegate. 
 
I feel that there were a lot of serious issues raised before the 
committee, and first and foremost of those was what is going to 
happen, what potentially can happen, if the amendments are 
approved. In lieu of what we’ve just heard from the Minister of 
Agriculture outside, I think it does bring serious questions to 
this Assembly which were not made apparent yesterday. 
 
Yesterday, as Hansard would show, when asked by the member 
from Arm River if the Crown Investments Corporation was 
considering a investment in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, his 
question was ruled out of order. 
 
The real concern I have focuses twofold. Firstly, it is with the 
financial viability of the Pool. The president of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Mr. Marvin Wiens, spoke at length 
at the need in a global environment to be able to position itself, 
be that by raising equity from markets or whatnot. 
 
But the second point that I’m concerned about is the social 
implications for rural Saskatchewan with regards to the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and specifically with regards to the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and its demise. 
 
We heard a little earlier the member from Watrous speak about 
the concerns around rural elevator closures. The father of the 
member from Nutana yesterday spoke up and pointed out some 

statistics of thousands of kilometres of branch lines which have 
been closed since the change in 1995 to The Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool Act, of the hundreds of elevators which have also 
closed and the problems that this has caused for those 
communities. And I can assure you the people in the Kindersley 
riding have felt that and it has been very serious indeed. 
 
It seems to me that there has been a direct correlation between 
the changes in 1995 and the subsequent project horizon that the 
Wheat Pool ventured into and the diminishing of the value of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool shares on the Toronto Stock 
Exchange. And I would postulate that the demise of that share 
price occurred by and large because customers of the Wheat 
Pool, when local elevators were closed, did not appreciate the 
way that they were being treated. 
 
I would also bring up to the members opposite the share price I 
think is a very good indicator of the financial viability of a 
company and its in direct correlation to their response to 
customers’ concerns. 
 
And the members opposite, since their tenure in government, 
have closed rural hospitals. We continue to see the possibility of 
rural school closures. And I think that that’s proven out in the 
number of seats that they’re holding in rural Saskatchewan, that 
again the customers or the constituents are not pleased with this 
situation. We continue in rural Saskatchewan to struggle forth. 
We don’t want to see the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool diminished 
any further. 
 
And I’d like to speak with regards to The Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool Act in 1995, and how in essence I will claim that it didn’t 
go far enough. In 1990 in Berlin, the wall came down and two 
different global economies went to battle. And one has clearly 
won and one has clearly lost. The winner of that battle has been 
the free enterprise system, not the centralized economy. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And members opposite somehow have not grasped this. And it 
is to the detriment of the persons of Saskatchewan, and to all 
taxpayers, to recognize that centrally planned economies with 
monies from governments being invested in the market do not 
return profits. 
 
It didn’t work anywhere else in the world and it’s not working 
here in Saskatchewan. We’ve seen that it hasn’t worked in 
SPUDCO. It hasn’t worked in their failed computer system with 
regards to the land titles. It’s not working. It didn’t work at 
Channel Lake. 
 
And with the comments which we’ve just heard outside the 
Chamber, where the Minister of Agriculture says that we’re 
possibly . . . the Government of Saskatchewan is in negotiations 
with the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, I fear that this could be the 
final nail in the coffin for a company that has suffered a great 
deal in the last number of years due to some of their own 
restructuring and whatnot. 
 
So the first question that I would have is, the changes that 
would be brought about, could the member comment on 
whether the delegates will have a say or not — if these 
amendments are passed — on who invests in the Saskatchewan 



December 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3033 

 

Wheat Pool company? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the 
member for the question. I refer him to item no. 5 in the 
explanatory notes that accompanied the Bill and what it 
explains in there is that: 
 

The reason for the amendments to clause 15(1)(c) of the 
Act is to allow the delegates of the Corporation, through 
bylaw amendment and without the need for further 
legislative amendment, to (alter) . . . the share ownership 
cap on the Class B shares to a percentage higher than 10 %. 

 
The addition of . . . 15(1)(d) clarifies that Class B 
shareholder approval would be required to decrease the 
share ownership cap following an increase in the share 
ownership cap above 10 %. 

 
So as I read the explanatory notes, the amendment deals with 
the cap and any policy of the Pool is not addressed in these 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — I’d like to thank the member opposite for 
her answer to that question. I appreciate that. 
 
I would like to say in summation, I believe that the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool should take control of its own 
destiny. The final powers should be left in the hands of its board 
of directors, its delegates, and, at end, its members who make 
the company financially viable and the important part of 
Saskatchewan which we all know that it has been and hopefully 
will continue to be. 
 
I would say that with regards to direct equity investment by the 
Government of Saskatchewan into the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, that will be going against the wishes of any delegates. 
Delegates spoke to me just on Sunday evening, and expressed 
this concern directly. 
 
The final question that I would have to ask has to do with the 
returning of The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act to this 
Assembly at any time in the future. I feel that the Pool, as the 
largest company in Saskatchewan, is very much capable of 
setting its own destiny and needn’t come to the taxpayers or 
elected members of this Assembly, at great cost, to have its 
business decided for them or parts of its business decided for 
them. 
 
So my final question, sir, is: can the member opposite tell me, 
upon passing these amendments, would this in her mind be the 
cessation of having The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Act brought 
before this Assembly and will it allow the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool to conduct its business without having to ask leave of this 
Assembly? Thank you. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Chairman, I’m certainly not aware of any 
future requests that the Pool may have to bring any amendments 
before this House. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. Soon to be government, Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the Pool initially came to this 
Assembly to make changes to its structure back in 1995 which 
allowed it to actually go out to the marketplace and seek 

financing. Now this . . . the financing that the Pool was seeking 
at that time did not allow those investors, though, to take an 
equity . . . a direct equity position in the main course. 
 
What it did do, though, was allowed the Pool to transfer what 
was classified as debt or liability — which were the dividends 
built up by the membership at that time, which were a 
considerable amount of money, Mr. Chairman — transfer that 
from a liability over to an asset which allowed the Pool then to 
borrow against that asset and to expand their business. 
 
And this was a move at the time, Mr. Chairman, to try and 
allow the Pool to grow as well as to preserve it, because the 
Pool was in some financial difficulty at the time and not being 
able to grow to meet the competition from the other grain 
companies. That was a partial step, Mr. Chairman. The Pool 
was never a fully fledged co-operative in the sense that one 
would normally view co-ops. It was a quasi co-op, Mr. Speaker 
. . . Mr. Chairman, not a full-fledged co-op. 
 
This change as proposed by the Wheat Pool now and as 
approved by the delegates, asking for a change in the bylaws to 
allow the Pool to gain more control of their own operation, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chairman, moves them even further away from 
the concept of a true co-op. It becomes more of a new 
generation co-op, if someone would like to use that term. 
 
But now, Mr. Chairman, if you allow them to change the 
percentage of ownership of the voting shares — which is not a 
bad thing — if that allows to change, you move it further away 
from that co-op concept. 
 
If you allow the change then from the class B non-voting shares 
to be restructured and become voting shares, you allow those 
investors that have provided, have bought the class B shares, to 
become voting shares, you now completely move away from 
the concept of a co-op with one member, one vote regardless of 
the number of shares. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, that allows the Pool to become basically a 
corporation in the sense of the word that we utilize it in Canada 
and moves it away from the Pool . . . from a co-operative. And, 
Mr. Chairman, that also is a good thing. 
 
The Pool needs to have the ability to grow its business and its 
corporation after some very difficult years for it. It’s had to 
divest itself of a number of its enterprises to try and salvage its 
main core business which is the purchase and transport of grain. 
And it is, I think, close to turning the corner on that. This, 
hopefully, will be a step that allows it to be successful. 
 
The Pool needs to be able to go into the marketplace to gain 
equity from the market to salvage its business. The difficulty 
though that we have on this side of the House is not with that. 
The difficulty is with the Government of Saskatchewan turning 
around and then buying into the Pool which is a separate issue, 
Mr. Chairman, than this Bill. It’s a different issue. 
 
We asked the minister that question — he didn’t answer it in 
here — what the Pool policy was. Outside of this Assembly this 
afternoon though, Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Agriculture 
has said that they are indeed in negotiations with the Wheat 
Pool. About what? Not exactly sure. About whether or not the 



3034 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 2002 

 

government is going to take an equity position? We don’t know. 
About whether or not the government is going to provide loans? 
We don’t know. Whether the government is going to provide 
loan guarantees? We don’t know. 
 
The government’s track record in these kind of investments, 
Mr. Speaker, I think should scare the Pool away from talking to 
the government because their success record is notable in its 
failure, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we have these concerns, the place for 
their discussion is not in this committee. This committee is to 
decide whether or not to pass the Pool Bill. And that’s what 
needs to be allowed to happen in this case, Mr. Chairman. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just very, very 
quickly. The member is suggesting that should anyone have 
concerns she will forward them on to the Pool for response, and 
I would ask her to provide that response to the town of Hudson 
Bay. And, Mr. Chair, I will just read a letter that I received from 
that community, read it into the record, and then I will leave it 
to the member to forward that on to the Wheat Pool for their 
response to both myself and to the community of Hudson Bay. 
 
The letter reads as follows, and I am quoting: 
 

I am sure that by now, you have heard that Hudson Bay 
will soon be losing its elevators. This is an added hardship 
imposed on our farming community and a direct impact on 
our economy. Our farmers will now have to travel an extra 
150 kilometres one way to ship their grain. 
 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool . . . keeps closing elevators in 
the Province, destroying the livelihood of the farmers and 
their families. Our elected politicians seem to have . . . 
(and) taken the ostrich position and have buried their heads 
in the sand ignoring the erosion of Rural Saskatchewan. It 
is time that someone reminds . . . (the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool), that they are as strong as their membership and 
without members to support them they will soon find 
themselves out of work. 
 
Farming is the number ONE industry in Saskatchewan and 
I don’t see any elected member in the government, . . . 
(taking) a stand to save the industry. Saskatchewan’s 
population is dwindling . . . and soon we won’t be able to 
feed the people that are left behind and our politicians are 
left sitting there looking “impotent.” 
 
It is time for you, as our elected representative, (to) stand 
up and be counted and demand the . . . (Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool) cease immediately its pilferage of rural 
Saskatchewan and become accountable for its actions. 

 
This letter is signed by the economic community development 
officer for the community of Hudson Bay, Mr. Roger 
Lacoursiere, and I would ask the member to forward that to the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool on my behalf and on behalf of the 
community of Hudson Bay, for their response. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, I assure the hon. member that I will 

forward the entire transcript of proceedings, once they become 
available, to the Pool for their appropriate response. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 304 – The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 304, The 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Amendment Act, 2002, be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 15:34. 
 


	Investment in FarmGro Organic Foods
	Investment in FarmGro Organic Foods

