















































Hansard: March 25, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 249 
 March 25, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — I won’t start from the beginning, but I 
would like to just a mention a couple of things that I did say in 
detail. I talked about the Crowns and what the Crowns do for 
the people of Saskatchewan — rural and urban Saskatchewan 
— and how many people work in rural Saskatchewan for our 
Crown corporations and how much service they provide, how 
much industry they create by what they buy and what they 
build. 
 
So what I do want to talk about . . . and I will go back briefly to 
start again with health premiums and the system in Alberta. The 
premiums are a payroll tax that in most cases must be 
administered by businesses, and it can be difficult and 
expensive to administer. For example, working couples in 
Alberta have to decide which one of them will pay for the 
premium and have it deducted from their pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am told that last year the Alberta government 
had to write off millions of dollars of uncollectable accounts — 
I was told over $30 million — from people who couldn’t or 
didn’t pay their premiums. I’m also told, Mr. Speaker, that it 
costs more to administer the premium program with costs of 
about 15 million than it costs to administer the payroll of health 
providers for 10 million. 
 
With our tax cuts, our low housing costs, our reasonable 
electricity and auto insurance rates and no health premiums, 
Saskatchewan cities remain cheaper to live in than Vancouver, 
than Calgary, than Winnipeg, than Toronto, than Montreal, than 
Charlottetown and even Halifax. 
 
All of these advantages don’t seem to be of interest to the 
members opposite, and we never hear them talk about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have already mentioned, health premiums in 
Alberta are about to increase. And they will be $44 per month 
for a single person or $528 per year. For a family, it will now 
cost $88 a month for a total of $1,056 a year. That is compared 
to a family of four in Saskatchewan which I mentioned 
previously will pay 794 in sales tax. So health premiums in 
Alberta will be more than our sales tax in Saskatchewan. This is 
. . . they’re raising the premiums in Alberta despite a 1996 
promise in Alberta to the contrary, and 90,000 seniors will now 
have to pay the increased premiums. 
 
British Columbia is the only other province to charge health 
premiums, and it has increased their premiums as well. An 
average BC (British Columbia) family will now be paying 
$1,296 per year in health premiums. All that and houses that 
cost a quarter of a million dollars too, Mr. Speaker. 

The Edmonton Journal reported that inflation in the price of 
energy last year in that city was 133 per cent. That’s pretty 
scary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a former unionized worker, I worry about the members 
opposite and their attitude towards working people who are 
unionized. And I want to remind all members that the benefits 
that union members have fought hard for have benefited other 
workers generally in society. Things like labour standards, 
which the members opposite may not like and in fact refer to as 
impediments or unnecessary regulations. Things like 
occupational health and safety standards, things like minimum 
wage. 
 
And about the minimum wage issue, Mr. Speaker, people who 
live on the minimum wage will earn approximately $12,700 a 
year if they work full time. After October, they’ll earn 13,300. 
A rise in the minimum wage helps them to pay for their basic 
needs as well as allows them some spending with discretionary 
income, and that is good for local businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the workers of Saskatchewan need to fear this 
group of people opposite. These folks have referred to 
unionized workers as job killers. What does that mean? Should 
every worker in Saskatchewan fear for their job under a 
government formed by this opposition? They’re often quoted as 
saying that the labour legislation in this province is too onerous. 
What legislation would they repeal? What standards would they 
relax? Will there be fewer occupational health and safety 
standards? Will there be lower labour standards? Will hours of 
work be changed? Will overtime and stat holiday pay be 
eliminated? What will happen to The Trade Union Act? 
 
One of the members opposite would make it much more 
difficult for women to collect maternity benefits. I read in 
Hansard from June 13 of last year that he preferred to have 
women work more weeks to qualify for maternity benefits. He 
was copying the Alberta legislation, another example where the 
opposition would make it more difficult for workers. I advise 
workers of this province to pay attention to the discussions of 
this legislation that takes place in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is the right choice for everyone. It’s 
well known that education and economics go well hand in hand. 
Education remains one of our top priorities. Education is the 
most important, long-term, effective action we can take to 
improve the lives of our citizens. An Asian proverb says: 
 

If you want to plan for one year, sow seeds. If you want to 
plan for ten years, plant trees. If you want to plan for a 
hundred years, educate, educate, educate. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Education is important for all our citizens, 
but it’s also very important for women, especially those who 
must support their families. And now that I’m on that topic, let 
me speak for a moment about this government’s record on 
women. 
 
I won’t read all of my three pages of initiatives, but I will read 
some highlights. Our government has, under employment, 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

increased maternity and parental leave provisions from 30 
weeks to 50 weeks; implemented the building independence 
strategy; increased the minimum wage in 1999 and 2002. We 
continue to implement pay equity within government. This 
initiative affects approximately 60,000 people working for 
government departments, Crown corporations and agencies, 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) regional colleges, and the health sector. We’ve 
established a balancing work and family unit to help workplaces 
address work-life balance issues. We’ve increased support to 
child care initiatives in the last nine budget years. We’ve 
changed the tax system which will result in approximately 
55,000 single parents, low-income seniors, minimum wage 
earners, and working families, and they will no longer pay 
provincial income tax. We’ve added a child tax credit to help 
Saskatchewan families with the cost of raising children. 
 
We’ve enhanced maintenance enforcement through legislative 
amendments and the pilot of a dispute resolution process. 
We’ve developed and enhanced funding of screening programs 
for breast cancer, cervical cancer and bone mineral density 
throughout the province to ensure early detection and treatment. 
We’ve passed The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, the first 
legislation of its kind in North America. It enables police to 
remove the abuser and allows the victim to remain in the home. 
 
We continue to provide funding to Saskatchewan Towards 
Offering Partnerships to Solutions or STOP to Violence, a 
province-wide partnership of community-based organizations, 
individuals, and government working together to eliminate 
violence. And in our new legislation proposed for this session, 
dealing with the exploitation of children by prostitution, we will 
again help women. 
 
Finally, I’m going to talk about health care, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sure no one would accuse me of not wanting to get into this 
topic. Listening to the opposition always makes me want to say, 
and the rest of the story is? They use the tactic that if you say 
something is bad for long enough, everyone will believe it. It is 
also called programming the parrot. I see that evidence 
constantly by the empty rhetoric and inflammatory half stories 
that continually come out of the members opposite. 
 
Perhaps the benefit of over three decades’ involvement in health 
care causes me to view the world differently. I am concerned 
about calls for premiums in health care, for medical savings 
accounts, for privatization, because they take away from what 
should be the central debate in health care. That is, how do we 
improve the care that people receive and make things better for 
them? Health care should be centred around the patient. Patients 
must be the heart of health care, and everything must revolve 
around their care and safety. 
 
People are scared in Saskatchewan about the opposition coming 
to power. With the massive tax cuts the opposition is proposing, 
people are wondering how their health care will be paid for. It’s 
certainly not clear to anyone. 
 
The member from Melfort-Tisdale talked last month about how 
inviting pharmaceutical companies to take advantage of the 
synchrotron will be his plan to anchor health as a contributor to 
the economy. Inviting research is important, but I fear that he 
really wants to invite private health corporations to 

Saskatchewan to only take profits from the provision of health 
care. 
 
He also complained about the length of time it takes to approve 
new drugs to our drug Formulary. This is another thing I’m 
worried about, Mr. Speaker. Is his comment a precursor to a 
Sask Party policy of less regulation on drugs? This would fit 
with their deregulation ideology. We must be careful when we 
introduce new drugs as some come on the market quickly and 
are later found to be ineffective or just plain dangerous. It 
shows that the member doesn’t understand the ideas of efficacy 
and effectiveness in the use of drugs. 
 
In the Gull Lake Advance of Tuesday, March 12, the headline 
says, “Sask Party fails to outline position on health care.” Mr. 
Speaker, they made no effort to appear before the Romanow 
Commission because they really do have no plan for health 
care. If there is a plan, it’s a very well-kept secret. 
 
People across Saskatchewan have told us that they’re also afraid 
of drastic changes like premiums and medical savings accounts. 
I’ve talked about premiums. They cost a lot of money to 
administer. Sometimes people don’t pay. What do you do with 
those who don’t pay? People hear from us that we aren’t 
planning to go there, but the members across might be going 
there. And if we follow the lead of their friends in Alberta and 
BC, well, that’s what they would probably do. 
 
Let’s talk about medical savings accounts or MSAs for a 
moment, and I want to do this because people have asked me 
about them. They also worry because the Sask Party says next 
to nothing, but they look at some of the suggestions made by 
the Mazankowski report, knowing how much the Sask Party 
likes anything from Alberta, and Saskatchewan people worry 
about what they might do and if they’ll implement medical 
savings accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people want to help contain costs, and they want 
to keep their health care. So it’s interesting that one of the 
solutions being proposed is to give people control over an 
account and say, you manage your own health care using this 
account. Proponents of this solution say it will encourage 
people to be more aware of the costs of health care, but the 
worry is that people won’t seek health care in order to save 
money. 
 
And there seems to be a problem with how to pay for these 
medical savings accounts. Are they a taxable benefit? Would 
employers contribute? What happens to the money if it’s not all 
used? What happens if you have a pre-existing condition? 
Would you still qualify? 
 
Medical savings accounts, Mr. Speaker, tend to benefit younger 
and healthier people at the expense of the older or sicker person. 
There is a debate in the United States as to whether patients 
would manage their medical savings accounts or whether they 
would be managed closely by insurance companies. There is a 
debate about whether they would help contain costs. 
 
One of the conclusions of the paper I read on MSAs was that 
the relatively unhealthy will likely end up paying more for 
health insurance for out-of-pocket than they do now. They also 
concluded that higher-income, healthier persons are the most 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

 

likely to be attracted to the MSA approach. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while some solutions may be interesting to 
some, they must be examined carefully. And with regard to the 
private, for-profit, health system in the United States, I want to 
take this opportunity to read some highlights from testimony of 
February 21, 2002 before the Standing Senate Committee on 
Social Affairs, Science and Technology. This testimony was 
given by Dr. Arnold S. Relman, professor emeritus of Medicine 
and Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School and emeritus 
editor-in-chief of The New England Journal of Medicine. He is 
someone who has studied our system and the US (United 
States) system for many years. 
 
He makes the following points: 
 

Most of the current problems of the US system result from 
the growing encroachment of private, for-profit ownership 
and competitive markets on a sector of our economy that 
properly belongs in the public domain. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

No health system is as expensive, inefficient and 
inequitable or as unpopular as the US system. The only 
parts of US society happy with the current market-driven 
health care system are the owners and investors in the 
for-profit industries now living off the system. 
 
There is not much evidence that private businesses 
delivering health care for profit. 

 
This is still him talking. 
 

. . . have greatly increased the total cost of health care and 
damaged, not helped, their public and private non-profit 
competitors. They can’t exist together. So goodbye public 
system. 
 
The Medicare system has administrative costs of less than 3 
per cent with the remainder of expenditures, (97%) going to 
physicians, hospitals, and other providers. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

The private insurers have corporate and administrative 
costs of 15 to 30 per cent (and) in addition, out source, 
(which means) contract out many services they use to 
control costs. 
 
As a result, only 50 to 60 per cent of the premium dollar 
ends up with the providers. 
 
Private insurers at first held down premium prices by 
drastically cutting utilization. 
 
(But) recently premium prices of private for-profit insurers 
in the US have begun to increase at double-digit rates, more 
rapidly than the cost of Medicare and Medicaid. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

Several years ago senior citizens covered by Medicare were 

encouraged to obtain their care from private, for-profit 
HMOs that would be paid for by the government. It soon 
became obvious that the costs of care under the private 
system were much greater and the senior citizens were 
dissatisfied with the care they received. A wholesale exit of 
senior citizens from the private system ensued. 
 
In short, the US experience has shown that (the) private 
markets and commercial competition have made things 
worse, not better, for the US health care system. 

 
Here is a very important point he makes, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Many south of the border believe that you Canadians have 
the right idea in deciding that the financing of health care is 
primarily a public responsibility. We still think you are 
right and that we ought to emulate you, rather than vice 
versa. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Junor: — Dr. Relman goes on to say: 
 

We must look at ways to optimize our use of resources and 
improve the quality of our health system. 

 
That is what Ken Fyke did here in Saskatchewan. Dr. Relman 
makes the point that: 
 

Splintering the delivery system into many different, highly 
specialized facilities is not in general a sound option for 
improving quality and effectiveness. A better approach 
would be to re-organize how physicians work together. 

 
Now there is a novel thought. 
 

We should both begin to encourage physicians and other 
health care professionals to organize themselves into 
self-governing, multi-speciality and multi-disciplinary 
teams to deliver comprehensive care. 

 
He is reconfirming the models that we have in Beechy, Kyle, 
Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, Hafford, and countless other 
places in Saskatchewan. He is reconfirming our primary care 
model. When great distinguished scholars agree with the work 
we do in Saskatchewan and say, that’s the way we do it. We 
should pay attention. 
 
Here’s another confirmation, Mr. Speaker, that Dr. Relman 
says: 
 

Physicians provide the best care when they work in teams 
not as competitors. 

 
(19:15) 
 
And another one: 
 

To discourage over service, they should be paid primarily 
for their time and not on a piecework basis. That would 
reduce both fraud and the resources wasted on the 
processing of claims. 

 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

I want to emphasize the following important point that Dr. 
Relman makes: 
 

It is a fundamental misconception to imagine that sick 
patients can or should behave like ordinary consumers in 
commercial transactions, selecting the services and prices 
they want. 

 
Most of us can’t shop for medical services when we are sick, 
Mr. Speaker. Health care is totally different from most goods 
and services, and that’s why we have medical insurance in 
Canada and why sick people need the professional and 
altruistic services of physicians and other providers. 
 
Finally this distinguished American doctor says: 
 

I suspect that most Canadians understand why health care 
is special and why it needs to be insured by a public system 
like the one you now have. 

 
I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, this doctor is the former dean 
of Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School and the former 
editor of The New England Journal of Medicine, one of the two 
most respected medical journals in the world. 
 
I want to briefly mention waiting lists since I hear that chirping 
going on across there often. We often hear about the length of 
waiting lists. Waiting lists are not consistent throughout the 
province; one is not the same as another. One doctor may have 
a long list, another a short list. There are few criteria to go on 
the list and are few definitions of who should be on the list. I 
know that recently when a waiting list was phoned through, 
many people had already had their operations. Other people 
didn’t know they were on the list. Many people remain on the 
list longer than others as they have reasons not to have their 
operation on a given day that’s offered to them. 
 
Our government has a plan to make the waiting list transparent 
and to give everyone the opportunity to have their surgery as 
quickly as possible. Innovation continues in health care in 
Saskatchewan. Improvements will follow. We will be training 
more emergency medical technicians, and we’ll introduce the 
paramedics Act. That will improve patient care. We will create 
12 new regional health authorities. We will work to improve the 
efficiency of our health system, and we’ll work towards having 
proper funding for the health system from the federal 
government reinstated. And our improvements will be for 
patients. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to wrap up, our Throne Speech has given us 
an outline. The budget tomorrow will give details — 
Wednesday, I guess — will give details, and later we will 
introduce legislation to bring our plans to fruition. I have 
outlined good news that is occurring all over the province. I’ve 
highlighted the happenings in the economy and the housing 
construction industry in an effort to fight the doom and gloom 
from across the way. 
 
I talked about how agriculture is diversifying. There are things 
happening that will help develop new industries in the province 
such as organic produce. You never hear those members 
opposite talking about great things going on in agriculture and 
the many people in rural towns and on farms being innovative 

and responding to the changing world around them. I 
recommend that they read Al Scholz’s book, Don’t Turn Out 
the Lights. At least they should scan the contents and read the 
dedication. Al Scholz says he was surprised to learn about all 
the success in Saskatchewan in the food processing and textile 
industries. I encourage everyone to read about it. 
 
I talked about the Crown corporations and how they provide 
jobs across the province, mostly in rural communities. I talked 
about the services they provide at a very competitive rate, about 
the goods and services they purchase from small businesses in 
the province, and about the good works their employees do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about health premiums and how much 
they’ve gone up in Alberta. I talked about how expensive they 
are to administer and how many people can’t or don’t pay them. 
I talked about how we can’t blindly follow Alberta’s actions. 
 
I’ve highlighted a few things of the many problems for the 
for-profit health system. I talked about how health care 
premiums . . . how health care is to remain patient centred and 
how everything we do in health care has to answer the question, 
how does this improve patient care? I talked about the fears that 
I have for workers and people generally in this province if the 
members opposite ever take power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion so eloquently moved by 
my colleague from Saskatoon Greystone and seconded, in his 
maiden speech, by my new colleague the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
a real privilege to stand and join into the debate today on the 
Speech from the Throne. I think like a lot of other members, 
Mr. Speaker, that have spoke before me, I think I’m going to go 
along the same vein, as far as the start of my speech, and thank 
a lot of people that are significant in my life that have helped 
me through the two and a half years of elected life. 
 
I think it’s a bit of a function of time how . . . I mean I never 
mentioned a word I don’t think after the . . . when I spoke the 
first time and perhaps not even the last time. But I think as we 
are longer in this life we realize the support system that needs to 
be there and certainly I am probably no different than anyone 
else. 
 
I would like to thank especially my wife Cindy and my two 
boys Craig and Mark who at times don’t have Dad around 
maybe quite as much as they did prior to elected life. I don’t 
make every hockey game, baseball game, lacrosse game, 
football game, soccer game. There’s a lot of sports going on in 
the family. So unfortunately I’m not there all the time. 
 
Also I would like to thank my wife who has to not only look 
after the household and making sure the boys are at the right 
spot at the right time, but also holds down a job at the Regina 
Health District in the operating room and in the cardio cath lab. 
So I’d like to thank her. 
 
I’d also like to thank some extended family I guess. My mother 
and father who live in Fort Qu’Appelle who . . . It’s always 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

 

interesting, after I get up and speak in the House, I quite often 
get a phone call from my father who tends to watch this channel 
religiously. And I would have to agree with him; normally 
whenever he watches, after . . . when he phones me up he says, 
you know you guys make perfect sense but I don’t know what 
those people on the other side of the floor are talking about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So perhaps I come by it honestly because 
honestly I question too. I also would like to thank very much 
my mother- and father-in-law who tend to help out a lot. My 
mother-in-law, Anne, who looks after the kids quite often when 
I’m working late or if Cindy’s working late. And also my 
father-in-law who has been just an invaluable help on my farm. 
 
I still continue to farm, have farmed, and still continue to farm, 
and plan on farming well into the future. But it’s not easy and 
with his help it’s made it much more easy, or certainly a lot 
easier. 
 
The other person I would like to thank would be my 
constituency assistant, Vonni Widdis, who holds down the 
office in Sedley, Saskatchewan — in the mall at Sedley, 
Saskatchewan — and does just a great job dealing with 
constituency concerns. Unfortunately I can’t make all the phone 
calls, return all the calls, but she does a great job handling the 
casework and things like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the main part of my speech, what 
I really want to talk about as far as the Speech from the Throne, 
I’d really like to welcome back the member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife, for being back in the House and giving . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . what I think was just an excellent 
speech. The member and I go back many, many years, long 
before political life. We worked together a little bit through the 
Saskatchewan Safety Council when the member was on the 
board with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and doing the work through SARM, and mainly 
on the transportation committee. And we used to attend a lot of 
meetings together and have always appreciated his input, and 
it’s just great to see him back here again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The last person I’d like to welcome into the House is the 
member from Saskatoon, the newly elected member from 
Saskatoon. This last eight days it must be really quite 
interesting to sit over there and have as many people welcome 
you as what have welcomed you. 
 
I would say the second or third week of your MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) life, especially in this House, may 
not be quite as rosy, especially from this side, but welcome and 
I hope you have a significant career in politics. It may not be 
long. It may not be long but at least put your heart and soul into 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that it’s been, you know, 
a number of months since we’ve been back. Unfortunately we 
went through a whole fall season of September, October, 
November that this House didn’t sit. I know members on this 

side of the House called for a fall session because we felt there 
were some issues that were of significance, some issues that 
really needed to be addressed at that time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we go into this spring session, I would 
have to agree with our call for the session in the fall, to have 
been able to discuss some of the issues that were of significance 
such as the job losses. We have lost a pile of jobs, 16,000 jobs 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, and . . . the province of 
Saskatchewan has lost 16,000 jobs and we really felt it was time 
to get back into the House and do some of the work prior to this 
spring session. 
 
You know, it’s interesting as the session was called back in for 
the Speech from the Throne in March, and I was talking to a 
number of constituents and they say, well you’re finally going 
back to work. And I don’t know if they don’t realize maybe 
what you do in between session, intersessionally, but there 
certainly is enough to do there. I find it often the same way 
when I’m farming and people say to me, so do you work? No, I 
say, I just farm. I don’t really work; I just farm. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we could have answered a lot of 
those questions had we had a fall session, had we been back in 
this House doing the work of the people that we called for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t only the loss of jobs; it was the declining 
economy. We’ve seen oil prices drop and the significant impact 
that it’s had on this government with now going into a deficit 
position. 
 
We had the health care plan. We talked in length through the 
summer with the Fyke hearings that went on and we felt it was 
just a really great time to get back into this House and debate 
what the government’s plans were for the future of health care 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know I would say that in health care many people go 
through the system and have no problem at all. And 
unfortunately, maybe I guess in the job that we have, we tend to 
get all the phone calls of people that have been through the 
health system and it hasn’t worked out very well. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I wish I could say that in my constituency office, the 
number of phone calls I get on health care and health care gone 
bad, I guess you could say, is not declining; it’s increasing, Mr. 
Speaker. So you can take from that, that it’s a very serious 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that needed to be discussed last fall, 
really was the whole ag file, and what this government was 
planning on doing in the future for agriculture. Unfortunately 
we start this House with the Speech from the Throne on March 
14, we hear the latest ideas coming out of crop insurance — 
coming out of crop insurance — when our crop insurance are 
supposed to be filled out by the end of March. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, had we had the opportunity to debate some 
of this, to bring some of this to the forefront back in a fall 
session, we wouldn’t then be in such a tight time frame as we 
are right now. 
 
Now I realize on seeded crops such as wheat and durum, there’s 
been an extension to the middle of April. But, Mr. Speaker, 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

what that doesn’t take into consideration is the planning that 
most farmers put into planning a crop, what they’re going to 
grow, on which land, and everything else. We haven’t even got 
the what-if statements from crop insurance to determine what 
we should or shouldn’t be . . . what we should or shouldn’t be 
seeding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s going to be . . . I know in a situation like mine which is 
. . . I don’t farm a lot of land; it’s not too difficult. But I can 
imagine somebody that’s farming 80 quarters of land, that 
didn’t have a clue of what this crop insurance program was 
going to look like until a week or two ago. Mr. Speaker, that is 
just unrealistic. 
 
Now I guess if the Minister of Agriculture or the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government felt that all you need is a week 
or two or three to make your seeding plans on 80 quarters of 
land, they’re sorely mistaken, Mr. Speaker. So I really felt that 
it was time to come into this House and debate those issues 
back in the fall, where we had certainly a lot more time to 
research it and make better decisions than the decisions that 
have been made by this government just recently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Moving forward to the Speech from the Throne, and I’ve 
listened to some of the speakers on the government side talk 
about the Speech from the Throne, and I listened to the member 
from Moose Jaw that was talking about the four pillars and 
what a strong foundation this Speech from the Throne was built 
on, Mr. Speaker. But I tell you, I didn’t hear that part of the 
speech I guess. I don’t think any of the members on this side of 
the House heard that part of the speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because certainly there’s a lot of questions to be answered after 
that Speech from the Throne. And I realize it’s supposed to be 
just a bit of a direction of which way the government is going, 
but really there was no vision, no long-term future plan that was 
announced in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
They did make mention of a couple of things. They talked about 
the Saskatchewan status of the arts Act that they would be 
introducing. They talked about a safe driver reward program 
which I would be very interested to see and how that is going to 
work. They talked about the national sex offender registry, Mr. 
Speaker. All of which are probably very good Acts and very 
good things to be talking about. But as far as how does that 
grow the province, how does that increase the population, how 
does it increase the tax base of this province, Mr. Speaker, I 
didn’t hear one word mentioned of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The one thing that I would hang my hat on though, if I was the 
government, and I think they should hang their hat on this; it’s 
the only rung on the coat rack left that they could hang their hat 
on, Mr. Speaker, is their ethanol plan. They talked about an 
ethanol plan in the Speech from the Throne and then shortly 
after the Minister of Energy and Mines talked and introduced 
the plan that the government has for ethanol. And I would 
applaud that, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s a great plan. And you 
didn’t hear one thing come out from this side of the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . this side of the House to go against it, 
Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — And, Mr. Speaker, there was a real applaud 
coming out of the government side and they should applaud 
themselves, because it is a great plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me quote from a September 19, September 19, 
2001 news release. And the letterhead happens to be 
Saskatchewan Party caucus news release: Sask Party announces 
a plan for ethanol expansion in this province, Mr. Speaker. And 
we go down and we see that: 
 

Saskatchewan has the opportunity to lead the way in the 
production and consumption of environmentally friendly 
ethanol. 

 
Okay. Quote, Mr. Hermanson says: 
 

Ethanol production has the potential to create new jobs, 
diversify the struggling agriculture industry and contribute 
to a cleaner environment . . . 
 

If we act now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document is dated September 19, 2001, was 
put out by the Sask Party caucus. It goes on to talk about a 
number of things about ethanol that were exactly the same 
blueprint or greenprint or whatever colour you want to call it 
from that side, that talked about ethanol expansion, such as the 
elimination of the fuel tax on the ethanol portion. 
 
It talked about keeping it out of government hands, Mr. 
Speaker. This document talks about keeping it out of 
government hands. 
 
And I will applaud the government on that side for taking a plan 
like this and putting it into action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, and I think more significantly, 
Mr. Speaker, that this could have been done if it would have 
been a Saskatchewan Party government back in September 19, 
2001. Right now we hear the government say it’s going to be 
about a 16-month, 18-month wait before ethanol production is 
up and running in this province. Well we’ve already wasted six 
months from when we announced it to when this government 
decided that maybe everybody had forgot about our plan and 
they could reintroduce it, Mr. Speaker, and hang their hat on it. 
 
So as I said, great idea, Mr. Speaker, great idea. I would ask, I 
would invite the government opposite to take a look at the Sask 
Party Web site because there are a whole host of ideas just 
every bit as good as this ethanol production expansion news 
release, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I think maybe what we should 
do is reissue all our news releases over the last year because as 
a government that seems to be completely null and void of new 
ideas of their own, we could certainly give them a few, Mr. 
Speaker. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Speech 
from the Throne and I hear the members opposite, they talk 
about this or that in the Speech from the Throne and what a 
great idea it is, and perhaps that might be. I mentioned a couple 
of them that I picked out here whether it’s a safe driver award 
program or the national sex offenders registry which no doubt 
the member from Humboldt had spent a lot of time on and 
pushing this government to act on. But, Mr. Speaker, when you 
look at the whole document and you look at the direction of 
where this government is going, Mr. Speaker, I cannot call it a 
success. I cannot call it positive forward thinking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would use the example of on my farm that if I’ve 
got a quarter section of land that produces very, very well but at 
the end of the year my expenses are higher than my income, it’s 
not a successful year. Yes, I can look at that quarter and I can 
brag about that quarter and say what a great quarter that was. It 
produced a great crop and my dollars per acre are way up, but 
when I look at the bottom line, when I look at the whole year of 
what my farm produced, and my expenses are more than my 
revenue, it’s not a successful year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I look at the ideas that are coming from that side of 
the floor, Mr. Speaker — from the government side of the floor, 
Mr. Speaker — when I look at the NDP’s ideas, Mr. Speaker, 
yes they come out with the odd good one, but when you look at 
the balanced scorecard of hearing some of those people on that 
side, it’s not very balanced, Mr. Speaker, because we have more 
certainly negatives than positives. 
 
One of which would be the deficit, Mr. Speaker. We went from 
a . . . Talk about a long-term vision. Let’s talk a little bit about a 
long-term vision. We heard the Premier last year talk about, and 
the Minister of Finance, talk about quite a bit of extra money in 
. . . a surplus of money in the budget. And so what did they 
decide to do? They decided to hire 570 more employees which 
would be a good idea I guess if you can extend that and can 
continue to have those people employed. Now this year, Mr. 
Speaker, less than probably 12 months after that announcement, 
we’re looking at — in the newspaper — firing or releasing 340, 
400 employees, Mr. Speaker. What type of a long-term vision is 
that for the province, Mr. Speaker? It is absolutely no vision at 
all. 
 
And there are some complaints from the government side when 
we start talking about a deficit position that the government will 
be in and definitely they will be in a deficit position. They are 
in a deficit position. I’d like to quote from an article by Randy 
Burton in The StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, dated March 19, 2002. 
And it says, “Straight Talk” and “Clarification”, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Finance Minister, Eric Cline says I am wrong in stating the 
government miscalculated its budget forecast by some $450 
million last year. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance, he says, is right. 
He’s right. The government only missed by 237.4 million, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what this minister has to correct him on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is . . . the fact remains, however, the 
government will spend 478.4 million more than it took in last 

year. Mr. Speaker, there is no way that that can be classed as a 
balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year they were able to make up the difference with the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. We’re going to talk about it this year, 
Mr. Speaker, but unfortunately that Fiscal Stabilization Fund is 
no longer there. It was a shell in the shell game that had nothing 
under it, Mr. Speaker. When they lifted the shell up there was 
nothing there; and that’s exactly what was left in that Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund come this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would like to talk about, move onto now is 
a little bit of my constituency. I’ll get back to some of the 
statements made by the government members in a bit. But what 
I wanted to talk a little bit about is the constituency of Indian 
Head-Milestone and the hard-working people in that 
constituency. 
 
Every year in January/February I go through and make stops in 
every community, rent space in every community, and did the 
same thing this year, Mr. Speaker. I stopped in about 18 
communities, spent three or four hours in each . . . two or three 
hours in each community — it was advertised well in advance 
— had some very good crowds come out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it was interesting because what you do more than anything 
else, Mr. Speaker, is you hear what is on the mind of the people 
of Indian Head-Milestone, Mr. Speaker. You sit around and you 
have a coffee and you hear what the people are thinking, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I will also go on, after I talk about the community tour that I 
did, I would be very glad to talk about the Grow Saskatchewan 
meetings we had around the province, Mr. Speaker, and I will 
deal with that. And I’ve heard members opposite, the 
government members talk about our Grow Saskatchewan 
meetings compared to their bus tour — their high-speed stops in 
different communities, Mr. Speaker. You can use that word 
high-speed stops. And we’ll compare those two. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I first want to talk about are the communities 
in my constituency that I had the opportunity of stopping in, 
whether it was the small community of Edgeley, whether it was 
the community of Milestone, Indian Head, Fort Qu’Appelle, 
Yellow Grass, Wilcox, Odessa, Vibank, Montmartre — just a 
number of communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I could say without a doubt that every community — 
Osage, Tyvan — Mr. Speaker, every community was concerned 
about the out-migration from this province, Mr. Speaker. Every 
person has a story about a neighbour, a son, a daughter, a 
grandchild that has left this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we look at StatsCanada numbers that have come out 
just recently, Mr. Speaker, the anecdotal evidence, over and 
over again, is spelling out true, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing our 
population in this province dip well below the million mark, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s down to 978,000 people or whatever. 
 
So the anecdotal evidence that we hear day in and day out, Mr. 
Speaker, is borne out in the StatsCanada . . . in the census done 
by the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

So one of the biggest issues that I heard was the declining 
population and what can a person do about it and what can a 
government do about it. And, Mr. Speaker, they said, you know 
we’ve been in this province for 10 . . . we’ve had an NDP 
government in this province for 11 years and we’re seeing more 
and more people leave. And unbelievably enough I didn’t hear 
. . . In every community that I went to, I didn’t hear one person 
say, well that’s good we have less people because there’s more 
for the rest of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I didn’t hear that anywhere in the 18 to 20 communities that I 
stopped at. There’s only been one place that I happen to hear an 
economic theory like that, and it was from the government 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — But there is a declining population and it’s 
affecting every community. It’s affecting every aspect of rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I think what we need to do is 
get some long-term vision on how can we regain population in 
this province. And that was certainly the direction that we went 
forward with, when we had our Grow Saskatchewan meetings 
around the province, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll get to that in a little 
bit. 
 
So declining population I would say was the most common 
topic that I heard when I was visiting community to community. 
And then I look at the Throne Speech and I say, is there 
anything in here that’s going to attract people to our province or 
keep the people that we already have in this province here, Mr. 
Speaker. And I didn’t hear a word of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also heard a lot about the highways in our 
province, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll probably be rising almost every 
day in this House reading a petition from the people of Indian 
Head-Milestone regarding the 35 Highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I drive up and down that highway, and I’ve 
gone from the American border all the way up to Nipawin on 
that highway, and there are portions of it that are in very, very 
good shape, Mr. Speaker, very good shape. But there are a 
number of areas that are absolutely undriveable, Mr. Speaker, 
undriveable. Where my farm is, and when I run up to Fort 
Qu’Appelle, up to the lake at Fort Qu’Appelle, I honestly take a 
grid road every time because it is twice the shape as our 
highways are in this province. 
 
It’s an absolute disgrace, Mr. Speaker. And the problem with 
that, leaving that as an absolute disgrace, and the Minister of 
Highways is making a joke of it and thinks it’s perfectly fine 
that it’s in that disgrace, that type of shape. You know I mean 
that’s just absolutely unbelievable that the Minister of 
Highways would think it’s perfectly fine that that highway is 
impassable, undriveable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That highway goes from Tobin Lake all the way down to the 
American border. And I will guarantee you that if you drive that 
highway in the summertime you will see quite a few vehicles 
going north — quite a few cars and campers going north up to 
Tobin Lake for the fishing — but you very, very seldom see one 
of them come back south on that highway. They’ve driven it 
once and that was enough for their vehicle. They’re pulling a 

$100,000 unit there and they cannot drive on the highways, Mr. 
Speaker, of this province. 
 
We’ve talked about population increase and we’ve talked about 
growing economy — and tourism is a huge part of it — and 
then you get the members of the government opposite making 
light of a highway that would be a major corridor up through 
the middle of this province, north-south corridor. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they aren’t doing a darn thing to fix it. So road rage 
was another issue that was raised often. 
 
Health care was raised often, Mr. Speaker. And again, 
unfortunately, we hear case after case where people have 
accessed the health care system and it wasn’t there for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just had a case and again — I mean, many, many 
different anecdotal cases — but it’s a case where a lady from 
Indian Head was down south in the States and she had fallen 
and broken her arm. She had fractured her arm, and they said 
you better get back to Saskatchewan right away because of the 
insurance issues and also you need to be close to your medicare, 
where you can get good, quality, health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that was the case. And they rushed home. They 
forewent the chance of going directly into the hospital in 
somewhere in Montana, I think it was Billings or wherever in 
Montana. They forewent that, going directly into the hospital 
and having it treated that day or the day later, Mr. Speaker, and 
they jumped in the car and they came back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the doctor here, and through his diagnosis, thought it 
should be in a sling; and they put it in a sling and it wasn’t 
healing. So then she went on the list to have this operation to set 
her arm, Mr. Speaker. And she was on the list and on the list 
and on the list, Mr. Speaker. The arm was unable to move, the 
atrophy was setting in. What they had to do is either completely 
lose the use of that arm or save the muscle that was there. And 
they went down to Minot and she had it operated on, because it 
was going to be something like a six-month wait here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They could have been in the hospital that day or the next day in 
Billings, but they came up to use our medicare system which, 
Mr. Speaker, we can argue back and forth on the system. But 
the problem was, it wasn’t there for her, Mr. Speaker. She 
ended up going back south across the line. 
 
And I bet you there is very few people on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, very few government members, that 
wouldn’t have a story about that — wouldn’t have a story about 
that, Mr. Speaker. So it’s just another story of health care that 
when you access the system at times it really lets you down. 
And that was just another issue. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Agriculture was always a topic because when you look at the 
constituency of Indian Head-Milestone you can’t go from one 
community to the other community without dealing agriculture 
. . . discussing agriculture issues. Perhaps the only area in the 
constituency of Indian Head-Milestone would be the 
community of Fort Qu’Appelle which isn’t as directly impacted 
with agriculture, but certainly does have some spinoff industry 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

 

in the Fort Qu’Appelle area; but agriculture is continually 
talked about. 
 
Now in our area we weren’t affected maybe quite as much a lot 
of areas with the drought but, Mr. Speaker, we also were 
affected greatly with the amount of hail, Mr. Speaker. Now the 
members opposite are joking back and forth and are saying, 
what about grasshoppers? 
 
You know, I mean, that’s what they care about. What are they 
hoping that we have a grasshopper infestation so that they’ve 
got another problem on their plate, Mr. Speaker? Right now 
they can’t control the problems that they do have on their plate 
without adding another one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the agriculture issue is a big 
one and we talked a little bit about it already today. We talked a 
little bit about it already with the agriculture. We had a number 
of questions from our ag critic talking about the issue of crop 
insurance. The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood went 
on about crop insurance premiums and the difference that’s 
going to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s significant. It’s a huge difference, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know the minister of Agriculture stood up in the 
House this afternoon and talked about well, you guys just don’t 
understand — you just don’t understand, Mr. Speaker. And he’s 
still reiterating that that we don’t understand about agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker. And I will tell you that I don’t know everything 
about agriculture — no one on this side or that one does. 
 
But it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, in the break between five 
and seven, a number of us went out for supper. There was 10 of 
us sitting around the table and you know what the topic was? 
What are you going to seed this year? What about John Deere 
equipment? What about Case IH equipment? We talk 
agriculture day in and day out and the minister opposite is 
saying we don’t understand agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely out of this world to think that he 
would be the only person in this House that has any idea of 
what’s going on in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
he’s saying that’s right. He’s the only one in this House that has 
any idea on agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite that minister to come out to a 
community in my constituency and we’ll invite a bunch of 
people in, a bunch of farmers in, and ask how many are sure 
glad that their premiums for crop insurance are going to be 
going up — as the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 
talked about — $8,000, Mr. Speaker. How many people do you 
think in that hall are going to say, thank you, Mr. Speaker, or 
Mr. Minister, you understand a lot more about agriculture than 
we do. I’m glad our premiums are going up $8,000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there hasn’t been one word 
mentioned from that side either when you deal with the 
Canadian Wheat Board. They talk about, well what’s your ag 

plan, what’s our ag plan? Mr. Speaker, I would invite them 
again; go to our Web site, and you’ll see our whole plan on 
agriculture, what would help turn this agriculture sector around, 
Mr. Speaker. And for some reason, whether they choose not to 
go to the web site or whatever, but there are a number of areas 
in agriculture that we talk about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is completely out of ideas when it 
comes to agriculture. Mr. Speaker, if I could give the Minister 
of Agriculture one word of advice, one word of advice — no 
more enhancements to the crop insurance program. Please, we 
can’t afford it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been listening over the last six or seven days 
regarding the government’s response to the Speech from the 
Throne, and I’ve also listened to a number of our people speak 
regarding the Speech from the Throne. And often I think almost 
without a member from that side, they always make some 
remark about Alberta, and they call us the Alberta envy party, 
and they make all these sorts of accusations and claims, Mr. 
Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, they make fun of Alberta. 
 
I know the member from Saskatoon — I’m not exactly sure 
which constituency — that was just finished speaking, and she 
was talking about the Alberta tax rates going up, Mr. Speaker. 
They talked about the tax rates going up. Yes, they went up. 
They’ve gone up to the lowest in Canada. Wouldn’t that be a 
shame. They’ve gone up to the lowest in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so when you hear them talk about Alberta and 
how things are so much worse in Alberta. How could you ever 
do that. You’ve got health care premiums. You’ve got this. 
You’ve got that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of 
things that they’ve failed to realize, Mr. Speaker, they’ve failed 
to realize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at Alberta and you look at 
Saskatchewan, I know that Saskatchewan is definitely a 
have-not province. We receive transfer payments. What would 
you like to call those transfer payments? You could call those 
transfer payments welfare virtually, couldn’t you? Mr. Speaker, 
this province wouldn’t be able to operate unless we had transfer 
payments from the federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Who do you think pays into the provincial . . . the federal 
coffers as a have-province, Mr. Speaker? Who would be one of 
those provinces? Well I would think it would be Alberta. See 
you’ve got a government slapping the hand, biting the hand 
that’s feeding them, Mr. Speaker. They are putting money into 
the federal coffers so we as a welfare province, a have-not 
province, under this NDP government have to collect. 
 
Wouldn’t it be just a shame if this province became a have 
province, if this province grew to become a have province so 
that we could put into the federal coffers instead of being a 
welfare province under the NDP and take out of the federal 
coffers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Regina Centre. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Centre went . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. The member for 
Indian Head-Milestone has the floor. 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll have it 
for quite a while yet, I hope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when I listened to some of the 
speeches from the members opposite, and I listened to the 
member from Regina Centre, Mr. Speaker, and she went on 
about Alberta and the debt that Alberta has. And she announced 
it a couple of times that Alberta has got a $6 billion debt, Mr. 
Speaker — $6 billion debt. 
 
But it was just a typical NDP salesmanship that they told half 
the story, Mr. Speaker, and they forgot the biggest half. The 
biggest half would be, yes, they do have a $6 billion debt, but 
they also have a $12.2 billion heritage fund that they take from, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Let me say that again. They have a $12.2 
billion heritage fund versus a $6 billion debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister from Regina Centre would like to make fun of 
that. But, Mr. Speaker, if I was given the chance to have a $12 
billion heritage fund compared to a $6 billion debt, I would take 
it, Mr. Speaker — I would take it. 
 
And the $12 billion heritage fund is not a shell game. It’s not 
like the fiscal stabilization program that this government likes 
to operate under, Mr. Speaker. It’s actual cash in the bank, Mr. 
Speaker — $12.2 billion cash in the bank with a $6 billion debt 
compared to the situation that we are in in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was also listening to the member from 
Athabasca. I was also listening to the member from Athabasca 
that was talking quite a bit about Alberta and he said, you 
know, those members opposite — meaning the Saskatchewan 
Party — they’ve got Alberta envy. And all you can do is talk 
about Alberta. And all you can do is talk about Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so the minister says, if you like Alberta so much, 
Mr. Speaker, if you like Alberta so much, why don’t you just 
move there? That’s what the Minister of Environment, SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), the 
member from Athabasca, said. Why don’t you just move there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if 20,000 people can’t get it through their heads — 
that have already moved to Alberta — what’s another 26 going 
to do, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Twenty thousand people have moved to 
Alberta out of this province and we lost 12,000 because of our 
death to . . . rate ratio; we have more births than we have 
deaths. But, Mr. Speaker, the anecdotal evidence over and over 
and over again are people talking with their feet. They’re voting 
with their feet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the last three years we’ve lost about 20,000 people. What 

does that mean? That means the town of . . . the city of Estevan, 
that means the city of Weyburn, are gone out of this province in 
the last three years. And they sit on that side of the House and 
say, oh, it doesn’t matter, it doesn’t matter. 
 
In fact, if I can quote the member from Regina-Qu’Appelle, in 
his Speech from the Throne, said, let’s not make too much of 
this census thing. No, no, no, let’s not make too much of this 
census thing. I mean we’ve only lost 20,000 or 30,000 or 
40,000 people out of this province, but let’s not make too much 
of that, Mr. Speaker, because you know what it might signify? 
It might signify a government that’s out of ideas and lost touch 
with the economic realities of the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you also hear the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education; the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education. And I heard her talking and she was very right when 
she said we have some excellent educational opportunities in 
this province with our two universities, and the SIAST 
campuses around the province, and the community colleges, 
and the extended education. There are some excellent 
opportunities for education in this province, Mr. Speaker. We 
educate some of the brightest kids coming out of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, that is the problem, Mr. Speaker. 
This government has no plan to retain the people that we’re 
losing. 
 
Now I remember campaigning in 1999 and going from 
community to community. And I remember, Mr. Speaker, at a 
all-candidates forum in the town of Fort Qu’Appelle where the 
member from Melville was sitting in opposition to the 
government, Mr. Speaker, and I was sitting in opposition to the 
government, Mr. Speaker, and we were both talking about the 
NDP’s plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only person, unfortunately for him, that was speaking for 
the government’s plan, out of the three constituencies, was the 
former SERM minister, Mr. Lorne Scott. And he was having to 
defend the government’s policies during the 1999 election. 
 
But it was sure interesting because the member from Melville 
and I could really go after the member — well, the former 
member from Indian Head-Milestone, Mr. Scott, regarding their 
education platform. I think . . . what was their education 
platform? They had talked about something like a free year’s 
education for the first year, Mr. Speaker — free tuition. 
 
And I remember the member from Melville saying, I mean, 
that’s ridiculous, that’s ludicrous. But now we hear this member 
also today speak in the House defending just about every 
program this NDP government has put in place over the last 
three years, not mentioning going back three or four years or 
ten years and supporting every one of those programs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when you look at this 
province, this province has got so much opportunity. And we 
hear the members on the opposite side talk about doom and 
gloomers. You want to talk about doom and gloomers? It’s the 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

 

members on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, doom and 
gloom because they’re satisfied with what we’ve got in this 
province. They’re satisfied with the status quo, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province should be . . . we were at a million 
people 50-60 years ago; we’re still at a million people . . . we’re 
below a million people. When we look at neighbouring 
provinces that have doubled and tripled — tripled — their 
population, and these people feel it’s perfectly fine the state that 
this province is in. 
 
Can you imagine what our tax base would look like if we could 
double or triple our population, Mr. Speaker. I do realize that 
the Minister of Economic Development wouldn’t be that happy 
because there wouldn’t be as much for him, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think everybody else that are paying taxes in this province 
would be quite welcome to two million people paying taxes, not 
a million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when you look at people 
wanting to invest in this province and when you look at 
growing this province, Mr. Speaker, of course what we need to 
grow this province are people. We need people in this province 
to grow, Mr. Speaker. But people need jobs. So what you also 
need in this province is to grow jobs. 
 
We’ve lost 16,000 in the last number of years, even though the 
NDP promised that they would create 30,000 new jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. My calculation says it’s a difference of 48,000 jobs 
from where we are now to where they said we would be, Mr. 
Speaker. That would be 48,000 more people working in this 
province, Mr. Speaker; 48,000 more people paying tax in this 
province, Mr. Speaker; 48,000 more people sharing the load of 
the social programs that we all truly believe in in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you need people, but for people you need jobs, for 
jobs you need business, Mr. Speaker. We need business moving 
into this province, Mr. Speaker. But for business, do you know 
what you need, Mr. Speaker? For business you need capital. 
You need people bringing their money and investing in this 
province, and unfortunately right now in Saskatchewan people 
do not feel comfortable investing in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Many, many times I talked in years past when I was dealing 
with driver education and the new ABS (anti-locking brakes 
system). We used to talk about ABS all the time. It was 
anti-lock brakes system, Mr. Speaker. But ABS no longer 
means anti-locked brakes in this province, Mr. Speaker. For 
capital investors it means anywhere but Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of reasons 
you know . . . And they make light of some of our members and 
our leader, a very successful leader’s dinner in Calgary the 
other day. But, Mr. Speaker, when you talk to some of those, 

when you talk to some of those business people of Alberta and 
they rate different areas, constituencies, not necessarily 
constituencies but jurisdictions. 
 
And they rated Saskatchewan compared to another number of 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, 300 different jurisdictions. We were 
about 250th to invest in, Mr. Speaker. A lot of these oil 
companies would rather invest in a banana republic in Central 
America than they would in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
there are reasons for that. That just doesn’t happen. That 
happens because of government policy. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members, I think the tradition of 
the Assembly certainly, in my opinion, is that a quip and a 
heckle is always welcome. However yelling and screaming just 
to drown out the person who’s got the floor is really not 
acceptable, and I ask members to note the difference. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
one way I do know I’ve got their attention when they’re trying 
to yell and drown out my voice, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I think it’s very important that this government looks at why 
investment capital is not coming to the province. 
 
Investment capital doesn’t come to a province when it’s afraid 
that the government is going to take over that business that they 
got into, Mr. Speaker. Investment capital is not going to come 
into a province when it’s coming into a province that has forced 
unionization, Mr. Speaker, that we experienced last year, Mr. 
Speaker. There are a number of reasons why investment capital 
will not come into this province. But most significantly, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it’s got a socialist government, and they’re not 
willing to invest their dollars in a province like that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been very interesting and I don’t remember as 
much the first year that we were elected in 1999. I certainly 
heard it a lot more last session, and I’m hearing it certainly a lot 
more this session, Mr. Speaker. When we bring up issue after 
issue after issue, when we challenge the government on their 
positions and their stances in . . . whether it’s Crown 
corporations, whether it’s economic development, whether it’s 
population decline, whether it’s crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
Every time this government will not stand on its own record. 
They’ll turn around and they’ll say, well it’s your fault, you 
would do this, you would do that — not what we’re doing as far 
as a government is concerned. They blame it on everybody else. 
 
How many times have we heard in the last two or three days 
that it’s Alberta’s fault, that it’s Manitoba’s fault, that it’s 
British Columbia’s fault, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, when will 
a government take responsibility for the programs that it’s 
implemented and the consequences those create, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government look at the falling 
population, Mr. Speaker? When will they look at the economic 
deficit they’ve put this province in, Mr. Speaker, and say you 
know maybe we are doing things a little bit wrong, Mr. 
Speaker? Maybe we should look at ethanol production in this 
province outside the Crown, Mr. Speaker. Maybe we should 
look at putting tax incentives in place to create and to attract 
capital investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

And I would just applaud them for that very thing, Mr. Speaker, 
because at least then they’re saying that just another Crown 
corporation can’t do it any better than the private business, Mr. 
Speaker — just another Crown corporation isn’t the way to go, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I mean there are so many more issues that a 
person could talk about. You could talk about SaskTel and their 
$24 million or 20 million plus 2.4 plus more into Georgia. You 
could talk about all the different investments that they’re 
making all over the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You could talk about them . . . And I read this article again, it’s 
March 16 from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix “futures bright is an 
optical illusion,” Mr. Speaker, because they keep saying that 
everything is fine, everything is fine. Things are going just the 
way we planned them. That’s a pretty scary thought: that things 
are going just the way they planned them; and we’ve lost 30 or 
40,000 people out of this province over the last decade; we’ve 
lost 16,000 jobs in the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker; and 
that’s just the way we planned it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re in a sorry state that a government can’t look 
at . . . take its responsibilities and look at the direction this 
province is going and say okay this is what we need to do in 
order to get to point B, in order to grow the province. When all 
they do is look at blaming everybody else, it’s everybody else’s 
fault, it’s never their fault, they’ve never done a thing wrong in 
this province in the last 11 years, because if they have we 
haven’t heard a word about it. 
 
We’ve heard lots of people in rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan say, man was that a crazy idea. But never from 
the government side. They’ve done everything just as planned 
and just as planned has made this province drop down to 
979,000 people with 48,000 less jobs than what they had 
planned on in 1999, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only prospect that people are clinging on to 
right now . . . and when you talk to people in Saskatchewan, 
especially rural Saskatchewan, they’re getting a little frustrated. 
They’re getting a little antsy, Mr. Speaker, because after the last 
election, Mr. Speaker, they thought that number one, there 
could be an election soon after because it was a minority 
government. They didn’t know how long that the cabinet 
ministers from the Liberal side would stay with them, Mr. 
Speaker. They were really excited with the anticipation that 
there may be an election within the next year or two, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone two and a half 
years, possibly another year and a half to two years, Mr. 
Speaker, and the problem with that is, what type of shape will 
this province be in in another two or three years of NDP 
government? If I could quote the Economic Development 
minister, he’ll sure have a lot for himself then because the 
population isn’t going to turn around and start increasing under 
their policies. It’s probably going to continue to decrease, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I would urge the government, from many, many people that 
I talk to in my constituency, call an election, Mr. Speaker. Call 
an election, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, and they say, where is your 
plan? Our plan is on the Web site and, Mr. Speaker, call an 
election and you’ll see a lot more of our plan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting when you 
hear members on that side talk about the 1999 election and 
they’re quite proud and they’ve got this strong mandate to carry 
on what their plan has been, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one political party in this province that 
garnered the most votes, Mr. Speaker, and it wasn’t a party on 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It was the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. More people in the last election voted for the 
Saskatchewan Party than any other party in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and I daren’t to say that in the next election you’ll see 
that number increase a whole lot more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Speech from the 
Throne because it lacks vision; it lacks direction, Mr. Speaker; 
and it lacks ideas to make this province grow to be the province 
that it needs to be to compete in the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s one thing about the Throne Speech debate that 
has not changed over the years and that is no small amount of 
inflated rhetoric and bravado that seems to come from the 
opposition benches, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset, I want to wish you well in the 
session. I know how difficult it can be. It’s not always apparent 
to those that have not been in the Chair, but yours is a difficult, 
demanding job, and I want to wish you well during the course 
of the coming session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome the new member for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld. I enjoyed his remarks. I’ve known the member longer 
than many people in this House, and I know him as a person of 
substance. I am confident that he will make a solid contribution 
to development of public policy in this Chamber and in 
government and that he will serve his constituents well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the mover, the member 
for Saskatoon Greystone. The member for Greystone is known 
as a hard-working member, a knowledgeable member, incisive, 
caring, passionate in his beliefs, and certainly he showed all of 
that in his excellent speech, Mr. Speaker, and we thank him for 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I should like to acknowledge the 
support of my constituency assistant for the excellent work that 
she has done, continues to do for me, and without her I would 
be half the member that I am now, Mr. Speaker. I think 
sometimes we do not recognize those who serve us on a daily 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

 

basis in our constituency, but I want to make a point of 
recognizing her. 
 
I also want to recognize my family for the support that they 
have given me over the years and that they continue to 
encourage me to do the thing that I love best — and that is 
being elected and being in public life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to recognize one other group in our society, and that 
is the excellent performance of Canada’s Olympic team during 
the recent Winter Olympics. These Olympians, including those 
who come from Saskatchewan, gave us all much to cheer about 
and they made us all proud to be Canadians. 
 
The Olympics were significant for me too in that a very strange 
thing happened during the course of the Olympics that I was so 
caught up in the Olympic coverage that for a moment, for a 
moment — and I know that members will know that this is 
impossible — but just for a moment I forgot that I was a 
politician, Mr. Speaker. This is not like where you go on 
holidays and you don’t think about politics, but this is where I 
was confronted by something and my first thoughts weren’t 
political; they were something else entirely. They related to the 
Olympics. 
 
I think it was the morning after a late-night curling game 
featuring Kevin Martin, and I believe he was playing the United 
States, where I watched that game or most of it and went to bed 
shortly after Kevin Martin winning the game. I woke up in the 
morning. I went out to get the newspapers, and there’s three of 
them. And as I stumbled my way back into the house, there 
were . . . the newspaper on top, I believe it was the National 
Post, the headline said, “Rock ‘crossed the line’: Martin.” And 
my first thought was, you know, I watched most of that game 
but I don’t remember that controversy. And then I thought, well 
you know, he won the game, why is he complaining? And then, 
furthermore, why would the National Post be writing about it? 
But then as I read on, of course it was about Allan Rock and 
Paul Martin and goings on in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I thank the Olympians for bringing me to that stage where 
just for a moment I forgot all about politics. My wife says that’s 
healthy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in previous speeches I’ve talked about my 
constituency, the people in my constituency. I’ve talked about 
the sense of community that people in my constituency in the 
various neighbourhoods have. I’ve also talked about the very 
active economic development that we’ve seen in Regina 
Victoria constituency because so much of the economic focus 
has shifted to retail development in east Regina that I represent. 
 
I want to tonight just mention one institution in my constituency 
where there has been a lot of activity and I speak of the 
University of Regina. Most people in Regina and those that go 
by Regina will know about the development that is taking place 
at the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College because it’s so 
evident, and what a beautiful building and what a beautiful 
addition that will be to architecture in Saskatchewan and in 
Regina once it’s completed. 
 
They’ll probably be less familiar with the Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre which I had an opportunity to tour 

a few months ago. It’s located at the University of Regina and 
it’s a partnership with the Saskatchewan Research Council, 
Saskatchewan Energy and Mines, and Natural Resources 
Canada, and it’s there to ensure that oil production in 
Saskatchewan continues on for many years to come. 
 
In addition to supporting research and development projects, the 
prairie technology research centre will ensure that the findings 
of the work it supports are applied by the petroleum industry. I 
was very impressed with the high level of activity and research 
activity that I saw at the centre. And it’s one of the reasons that 
it’s gaining international recognition for the work that it’s doing 
and it will serve the people of Saskatchewan and certainly the 
petroleum industry well for many years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for some of the content of my remarks, I will be 
relying on the research of my legislative intern, Wendy 
Moellenbeck. I appreciate Wendy’s good work and I would 
certainly recommend to all members that if they have the 
opportunity to obtain the services of a legislative intern, that in 
fact that they do ask for one. These are bright young people, 
Mr. Speaker, who have much to offer and can make an 
excellent contribution to helping members prepare for 
discussions and matters of public policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One area that my assistant, or my intern, has done a great deal 
of work is to examine the US health care system. Mr. Speaker, 
you will know, and as members and I think the public will 
know, that over time there is much discussion about health care 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
From time to time members of the opposition will let it slip that 
they admire or they would prefer to see us go to a more 
privatized system of health care, that there’s less opportunity or 
if there’s less emphasis on public administration, indeed even 
public funding of the health care system. And from time to time 
too I think they express admiration for the US system which 
epitomizes of course a privatized health care system. So I was 
interested in that and I wanted to take a closer look at that and I 
appreciate the work of my intern in being able to do that. 
 
Without getting into a great deal of detail, one of the interesting 
conclusions that we found when comparing the two systems, is 
that you know when it comes to health expenditure per capita, 
and you know people say that well if we had a private system, 
then you won’t need to spend as much from the public purse, 
and there will be more money available for other things. But at 
the end of the day, whether you pay private or you pay public, 
you are paying. 
 
And so therefore it’s instructive to look at what it is that people 
are paying. Whether it’s public, whether it’s private, or some 
combination of the two, it’s interesting to note that the health 
expenditure per capita — Canada versus the United States — in 
Canada this is $2,360; in the United States this is $4,165. So 
from the viewpoint of expenditure by an individual, you have to 
ask yourself where is it that people are spending more money 
— whether it’s private, whether it’s public, whether it’s some 
combination of the two —clearly shows that people south of the 
border are paying more. And also as a percentage of the gross 
domestic product of all the things that we manufacture, the 
whole wealth of the economy, it’s apparent that people in the 
States are paying more than here in Canada — 9.3 per cent of 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

our gross domestic product is used to . . . is used for health care 
expenditures while in the United States this is 12.9 per cent. 
 
Now you might think does this higher expenditure — and it’s a 
significantly higher expenditure by people in the United States 
— does that result in better health indices for people in the 
United States. Well the research that my legislative intern 
conducted shows that it’s not necessarily the case. When you 
look at things like life expectancy for females, the life 
expectancy in Canada is 81.4; the United States it’s 79.4. Male 
life expectancy, 75.8 in Canada; 73.9 in the United States. And 
here is an interesting one, infant deaths, infant deaths per 1,000 
live births in Canada there are 5.5, in the United States there are 
7.2. 
 
So on a very broad level one has to ask themselves, why would 
the opposition in Saskatchewan continue, sometimes overtly as 
the member for Weyburn has done, sometimes less so by 
attacking our system in a great doubt about the system we have, 
why would the members of the opposition want to continue to 
move us towards a system that costs more, but gets you less? 
And that’s a question that I certainly have after listening to the 
members of the opposition and looking at the work that my 
legislative intern has done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also asked my intern to look at another issue that 
interests me, I think that interests all the people of 
Saskatchewan, and is an issue that continues to be raised even 
during the course of the Throne Speech interventions that we’ve 
heard, even tonight in the speeches, and I think virtually in all 
of the speeches that have been offered by members opposite, 
and that is the question of population. And the question I ask is 
that, you know, we make all these comparisons between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta on the issue of population. What 
would happen if we made a comparison with other jurisdictions 
that are contained wholly or partly within the Great Plains 
region of North American and states such as North Dakota, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And it’s very interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the trends in 
Saskatchewan, trends in Saskatchewan are far more similar to 
US jurisdictions whose economy is primarily or to a very great 
extent based on agriculture, the same as Saskatchewan. Now, 
that tells . . . an agrarian economy. 
 
That tells me something about powerful trends that are affecting 
agriculture and which, in turn, are affecting jurisdictions not 
only here in Canada but also to the south of us in the United 
States, because when you look at those population figures, there 
is a great deal of common trends that we can see between those 
American jurisdictions and Canada. 
 
Of course, that’s not something they want to talk about. But I 
can tell you that from the viewpoint of public policy, it’s very 
important to understand that because if there are powerful 
trends, powerful trends that affect our economy because our 
economy is so agrarian, then you have to question are there 
things that you can do — or for that matter, even should do — 
to try and counteract those trends when you may not be able to 
do . . . well, from the viewpoint of public policy, next to 
nothing, if anything at all. 
 
And recognize that some of those trends — I think as the 

president of John Deere indicated at the Farm Progress Show — 
that some of those trends where we see increasing farm sizes, 
where we see increasing mechanization on the farm, increased 
use of fertilizers and other inputs, that those trends are likely to 
continue for some period of time. And you know what? There 
ain’t nothing, Mr. Speaker, that any government can really do 
about that. 
 
And it’s important to understand that when you’re talking about 
what kind of public policy is it that we should be pursuing in 
Saskatchewan, in Canada, in North Dakota, in the United 
States, for that matter. So it’s . . . I very much appreciate the 
very good work that she’s been able to do for me. 
 
Just on a related item, Mr. Speaker, I . . . and I don’t know if the 
public is aware of this, and they probably aren’t, but for many 
years now, Saskatchewan . . . the Legislative Assembly has 
been a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association. The Commonwealth Parliamentary Association 
brings together parliamentarians, people from legislatures such 
as ours, in meetings. We have Canadian meetings. We have 
regional meetings. There are international meetings, Mr. 
Speaker, where we talk about issues of common interest to 
parliamentarians or those people who work in a system that’s 
based on the British parliamentary system. 
 
And one of the things that I’ve noticed over the years is that the 
issues that we tend to discuss tend to be more related to the 
process of parliamentary democracy than they are related to 
specific or substantive issues, social economic issues. For 
example, in the CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association) during the course of the last number of regional 
meetings, the regional seminars and conferences, we’ve 
discussed electoral systems and democratic change, committee 
reform, which seems to come up just about every meeting, 
power shift from elected official to global organizations, 
reconciling party discipline, parliament in the media, does 
religion have a role in politics, the use of technology in 
legislature, public perceptions of office holders, enhancing the 
role of private members, balancing between the legislature and 
the executive, and I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we do not often have an opportunity as parliamentarians to 
discuss substantial economic trends because in a country as 
diverse as Canada we in fact have very little in common with 
the economy that’s operating in the Maritime provinces. We 
have very little in common with the economy that’s extant in 
the province of British Columbia. We have very little in 
common with the economies of Quebec or Ontario. But we do 
have a lot in common with the economies to the south of us in 
the Great Plains area in the Midwest area of the United States 
because those are agrarian economies to a large extent, or arose 
from agrarian economies, and we have a great deal in common 
with them. 
 
So one of the interesting things that’s happened, and that the 
public may not be aware of, is that over the course of the last 
number of years, Saskatchewan has joined an American 
organization. In short, we’ve joined the Council of State 
Government Midwestern Legislative Conference. Not as a full 
member, of course, but as an associate member. And the reason 
we do that is because we’ve come to the realization that we 
have a great deal in common with the people to the south of us, 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

 

the people in North Dakota, the people in South Dakota, the 
people in Nebraska, the people in Iowa, the people in Kansas, 
where they have great grain-producing areas, like we do in 
Saskatchewan, and that agriculture in those areas has an 
important influence and an important impact in the economies 
in those areas. So it’s important to learn from them and for them 
to learn from us about important social and economic trends. 
 
And just on that, Mr. Speaker, I was very interested to read a 
recent publication of The Council of State Governments, 
Midwestern Office. It’s called Signs of the Times. And it’s 
about Midwestern demographic trends and their implication for 
public policy. 
 
And just for your information, Mr. Speaker, and for the public 
who may be interested, this publication can be accessed at 
www.csgmidwest.org. 
 
Tonight, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to draw your attention 
to one introductory paragraph. Now you’ve got to remember, 
Mr. Speaker, this is about the Midwest’s, about states who were 
largely built on agrarian economies. And this introductory 
paragraph states: 
 

While every state in this region saw population increases 
(of varying degrees) between 1990 and 2000, none matched 
the national average . . . 

 
And of course Saskatchewan did also not match the national 
average; the national average in the US being 13.2 per cent. 
 
Now they say: 
 

The numbers would have been even more dramatic if it 
wasn’t for the influx of immigrants into the Midwest, 
where the foreign-born population grew at rates higher than 
the national average. International migration patterns help 
keep Midwestern populations growing, but many states in 
this region have experienced negative net losses in the area 
of domestic migration. 

 
Well does that ring any bells for people? Does that sort of call 
to mind any jurisdictions in Canada, Mr. Speaker? Of course, 
that’s not something the opposition ever wants to talk about, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They state that: 
 

This region is suffering from a “brain drain.” Many highly 
skilled, well-trained workers have left the Midwest for the 
South and the West. (Sounds like Saskatchewan to some 
extent, Mr. Speaker). Furthermore, national projections 
indicate that the labour and skills shortages seen in the 
1990s will only intensify in the future. 

 
And I found that very interesting reading, Mr. Speaker, in light 
of the fact that the members opposite never, never, never want 
to talk about the fact that the trends that are affecting 
Saskatchewan — which are powerful, powerful demographic 
trends based on changes, fundamental changes which are taking 
place in the economy — they somehow try to give the 
impression that this is something that only narrowly affects 
Saskatchewan, doesn’t affect any place else in the whole world, 

doesn’t affect any other region of Canada, not even rural 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, or rural Alberta, doesn’t affect any 
other jurisdiction, just Saskatchewan. 
 
(20:30) 
 
And the conclusion they somehow come to . . . so if we have 
this problem, it must be the fault of the Saskatchewan 
government. And we heard this again tonight from one of the 
members opposite. The member from Indian Head-Milestone 
— correct me if I’m wrong — said, you know in the last 10 
years the NDP government this and the NDP government that; 
now we have population loss, so therefore the one must be 
causing the other, Mr. Speaker. You hear the line from some of 
their supporters which is, you know, if we hadn’t elected 
Tommy Douglas in the 1940s, Saskatchewan would be like 
Alberta today. Well we all heard that. We all heard that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe that’s an 
explanation for Saskatchewan, but I don’t know what the 
explanation would be for South Dakota, North Dakota, and any 
number of jurisdictions to the south of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wanted to introduce that into the debate because 
it’s very important that we all understand what it is that is 
affecting the economy in Saskatchewan and what it is that we 
can do something about, but also what it is that we cannot do 
anything about, because if you try, try, or you make the 
decision to take substantial government resources or public 
resources to try to counteract trends that are irreversible, you’d 
be spending your money very, very foolishly. 
 
And I don’t get any deal of comfort, Mr. Speaker, when I listen 
to them and their lack of understanding of these trends as to 
what it is that they would do if they were ever elected, heaven 
forbid, to form government in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the things that I find encouraging 
about the Throne Speech because the Throne Speech is realistic. 
The Throne Speech is encouraging in that way. It doesn’t take 
an unrealistic point of view about what is taking place in 
Saskatchewan. It recognizes the importance of maintaining 
what has worked in Saskatchewan and there have been things 
that have worked. Over time we have seen a great increase in 
the number of jobs in manufacturing and processing in 
Saskatchewan, and we want to continue that because we’ve 
been successful in that. We’ve seen an increase in jobs and the 
people working in the resource sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and we want to continue that. 
 
The Throne Speech also recognizes new opportunities for new 
kinds of jobs in Saskatchewan that will be created by things 
such as the Canadian Light Source synchrotron in Saskatoon 
and the research jobs that that will create for Saskatchewan; by 
the film sound stage in Regina which will add to the 
development of a very healthy film industry that we’ve seen 
take place in Saskatchewan, and particularly, I might say, Mr. 
Speaker, in Regina. It recognizes that. 
 
It also recognizes new initiatives such as ACRE which is the 
Action Committee on the Rural Economy and their report 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

which will hopefully form the basis to diversify the rural 
economy and create jobs, because if agricultural trend suggests 
that you will keep losing jobs and keep losing population, then 
it becomes even more important to invest in diversification of 
that economy, Mr. Speaker. It also recognizes the greenprint for 
Ethanol and what a tremendous opportunity that can create for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It was interesting that even though the opposition say, oh we 
applaud that, it’s simply though a rehash of something they had 
to say in opposition, well I might say, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the 
way they want to go, it seemed to me that at least one of the 
candidates running for the NDP leadership well before that also 
enunciated a similar plan, Mr. Speaker. But no one ever accused 
them of originality, Mr. Speaker, either in ideas or in the way 
they approach the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to deal with a few more issues, and one 
is the discussion that they tried to engender about the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker. Now in Saskatchewan we have 
a Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and we set up the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund so as to ensure that in Saskatchewan, 
because Saskatchewan is very dependent on resource revenues 
like Alberta, Saskatchewan’s revenues can be very volatile 
because as people will know, oil prices can change in an instant 
and can have significant implications for the public purse. So 
we took the point of view that given the volatility of resource 
revenues, it would be wise in Saskatchewan, wise from a public 
policy point of view to create a fund so as to cushion the impact 
should there be any major downturn in resource revenues. And 
we said that money should be set aside. 
 
Now we’ve always set aside money in some way or another, 
usually through the liquor and gaming reserves over the years. 
We’ve set money aside and then drawn on that for much the 
same purpose. But the government took the point of view that 
we should be more transparent about that, that we should have 
an Act about that and suggest how those funds should be spent, 
Mr. Speaker, so that the public understands. 
 
But all of that, all of that seems to have been lost on the 
members opposite over the years, Mr. Speaker, because whether 
it was the liquor and gaming reserve or whether it was the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, any issue came up, they’d say, you’re 
sitting on money. You’ve got money, spend the money. Just get 
it from your liquor and gaming reserve. Get it from your Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. How come you let so much money build up 
there? What are you doing? What are you sitting on? Why don’t 
you spend it? We’ve got a problem in health; spend some 
money. We’ve got a problem in highways; spend some money. 
We’ve got a problem in education; spend some money. Don’t 
sit on the money. 
 
And then they said — when we weren’t spending the money — 
oh we know what you’re doing. It’s just an election slush fund. 
You’re just saving it for the election and when the election 
comes, you’ll haul out all those monies to try and buy votes. 
Well that’s what they said, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they said, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know what they’re saying today? You know what 
they’re saying today? Why are you spending money from the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund? As if there’s something wrong with 

that. 
 
Well all I can say, Mr. Speaker. We set this fund up to help 
cushion the impact of violent swings in resource revenues so 
that they would not have as major an impact on the people of 
Saskatchewan as we now see the case being in some other 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. Most notably Alberta, where the 
government didn’t have any such fund, has had to take drastic 
action, Mr. Speaker, to increase their revenues, increase their 
health care premiums by 30 per cent. 
 
We in Saskatchewan are fortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve had 
the benefit of effective, forward-looking public policy to put 
into place a fund such as that to help cushion the impact of the 
impact of the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they chatter from 
across the floor but I am just, I am just so delighted, Mr. 
Speaker, that over the years that we didn’t listen to them. And 
it’s like almost a daily occurrence with them in question period. 
Oh you’ve got the money. You’ve got the money. You’re 
sitting on it in the liquor and gaming reserve. You’re sitting on 
it in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Spend the money. And we 
said no; we have to save some of that money for when we really 
need it. We need to save some of that money for a rainy day. 
And now we are having a rainy day, and I’m glad we are able to 
save that money and that we didn’t listen to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now one other issue I just wanted to 
touch on, Mr. Speaker, is the question of Crown corporations. 
It’s no secret to the people of Saskatchewan that the opposition 
has over the course of the last number of years attacked the 
Crown corporations. Every opportunity they’ve had, they’ve 
called into question the functioning of the Crowns, and they’ve 
called into question the kind of activities of the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s no secret to the people of Saskatchewan that they, 
they — that is the opposition, Mr. Speaker — are flirting, 
flirting with the notion of selling off some or all of our Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker. And that, that I daresay is no secret to anyone in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that they are so, if I might say, so 
oriented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it’s ironic that they would do this because at the same time 
that they float these notions about the efficacy of the Crowns, 
the role of the Crowns and what it is that the Crowns should do 
as opposed to what the private sector should do, they stand up 
in this House and say but, but, forget about that; I have things 
that need doing in my own constituency that only the Crowns 
can do. I mean, they stand up here in the Chamber. They 
present petitions and say, I want cell phone service in such and 
such a town. Many members have done that, and I think that is 
the member for Estevan that in her Throne Speech intervention 
talked about extending cellular coverage to some of the 
communities in her constituency. Minton is one community that 
comes to mind, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s ironic that they would 
stand up in this House and say we need to invest more public 
resources to serving the people of Saskatchewan; at the same 
time say, or at least giving the notion, that we should sell off 
these Crown corporations. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

 

Now I have one question, one question, one question out of this: 
does anyone, anyone in their right mind in Saskatchewan think 
that a private corporation would provide the level of service that 
they are demanding in this Legislative Assembly for their 
constituents compared to any Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I don’t think there’s a 
chance of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s just not SaskTel. I understand the people of 
Lloydminster would like to see SaskEnergy extend its network 
to include the people of Lloydminster on the Alberta side as 
well. Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. There’s something 
strange here about, on the one hand saying we don’t want these 
Crown corporations, but their constituents are saying, we want 
the services of these Crown corporations. The one thing I 
conclude, Mr. Speaker — they haven’t been listening to their 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say one other thing about the Crown 
corporations and that is that their musings, their musings about 
selling off the Crowns doesn’t go over well with the 
Saskatchewan people. I think generally speaking, Saskatchewan 
people, generally speaking, Saskatchewan people, as evidenced 
by the petitions that they present in this House, appreciate the 
good services that Crowns can and potentially can provide for 
the people of Saskatchewan — good services at a reasonable 
price, Mr. Speaker — compared to what they know or 
understand or think they understand about comparable services 
in other jurisdictions. 
 
The other thing that I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is from 
the viewpoint of a raw political strategy. Now their strategy is 
that they in the last election . . . I know the member from Indian 
Head talked about they should have been the government. Well, 
they weren’t the largest group and our system works on 
whoever is the largest group gets to form the government. 
 
And the reason they aren’t the largest group is that they kind of 
ran out gas. They ran out of gas, Mr. Speaker. They ran out of 
gas at the boundaries of the cities in Saskatchewan. They ran 
out of gas at the boundaries of the cities of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And they ran out of gas because urban people are less 
than wildly enthused about their ideas and the programs and 
suggestions that they put forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can tell in you in Regina, if it’s your political strategy, if 
it’s your political strategy to embrace Reginans and it’s your 
political strategy to show that you’re urban-friendly and that 
you’re Regina-friendly, the dumbest thing you can do is talk 
about selling off the Crown corporations, my friends. It is just 
absolutely the dumbest thing that you can do. Here is the sector 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the member to continue 
making his remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
people in Regina are very sensitive about a sector that provides 
4,400 jobs in Regina, has an annual payroll of about $300 
million. They understand the significance and the importance of 
that sector to the local economy, yet here is a group, here is a 
group that always talks in destabilizing ways about that 
important sector in the Regina economy. 

Is it any wonder then, Mr. Speaker, that people have their 
suspicions about that group and what they might do? And no 
matter what they say, Mr. Speaker, no matter what they say 
about, oh, they’ll keep jobs here and all that malarkey, Mr. 
Speaker, people in Saskatchewan keep asking, you know, where 
did the head office jobs go from that old Saskoil? Where are 
they anyway? Well they’re not in Regina any more, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was a privatization case in point that worries 
the people of Regina. And I, for one, I just don’t understand 
their political strategy. 
 
And I might say, too, Mr. Speaker, that I find in one way that 
their talk about what they might do for Crowns is economically 
destabilizing — economically destabilizing. What kind of 
business man, what kind of business person, would want to 
invest significantly in the Regina economy when you have a 
significant political group in the province who says, but if we 
get in, we’re going to make decisions that are going to have 
massive impacts on that payroll; we’re going to have a massive 
impact on those kinds of jobs? Well anybody who’s thinking of 
making investment decisions has to bear in mind what it is that 
that group is saying, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t know if they fully 
appreciate what it is that they’re doing to the Regina economy 
and the Saskatchewan economy, for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 
but it’s no good. I can tell you that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the Throne Speech. It presents a solid 
plan for growth. It builds on the successes that we have seen. It 
offers improvements in vital services that the people of 
Saskatchewan want and need, Mr. Speaker. I guess my question 
is: I don’t have any problem with our Throne Speech, Mr. 
Speaker, but where is their plan? I mean, where is their plan? 
Where is their plan? 
 
Well they said they had something called Grow Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, but listening to the members, it’s clear that Grow 
Saskatchewan is not a plan; it’s only a goal. It’s only a goal. But 
you need more than a goal, Mr. Speaker, to have a plan. A plan 
sort of indicates a series of steps and strategy to achieve your 
goal but they don’t seem to have that. 
 
Now I understand that they’ve had a number of focus groups 
throughout Saskatchewan — well not quite focus groups, they 
hadn’t had enough people at these focus group sessions to really 
warrant calling it a focus group because in my understanding a 
focus group is that you need sort of at least a dozen people or so 
to get some legitimate input. And when you have two people or 
three people outside of the MLAs involved at these meetings it 
doesn’t exactly qualify as a focus group, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I understand too, Mr. Speaker, now that some of these 
meetings as opposed to being public meetings, they’ve decided 
to have them as private meetings, Mr. Speaker, which raises 
some questions as to whether or not public funds should be used 
then to pay for those meetings, Mr. Speaker. But that’s another 
question. I’m not going to raise that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say that they’re going to, notwithstanding 
these massive demographic trends, these sweeping changes that 
are affecting agriculture not just in Saskatchewan, not just in 
rural Manitoba, not just in North Dakota, but all of the great 
plains regions, they say that notwithstanding that — 
notwithstanding that, they’re going to grow the Saskatchewan 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

population by 100,000 people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, last night was the Academy Awards and of 
course they didn’t have the Academy Awards for this one 
because that was a year or so earlier but I’ve got to tell you that 
one of the favourite movies I watched this year is a movie 
called, O Brother, Where Art Thou? And the reason I like that 
movie so much, Mr. Speaker, is that the excellent soundtrack 
that it had, Mr. Speaker. And one of the songs that I liked so 
much . . . and you know what, Mr. Speaker, it begins to remind 
me of their Grow Saskatchewan. It’s a song called, “The Big 
Rock Candy Mountains.” 
 
And “The Big Rock Candy Mountains,” Mr. Speaker, is a 
wishful song by a hobo who talks about a better life, a heaven 
somewhere, a dream world that he’s inviting the other hobos to 
come along with him to see. And there the big rock candy 
mountains where you have lemonade springs and alcohol 
streams and the fruit grows on the trees and there’s hay in all 
the barns and the sun shines every day and the jails are made of 
tin so that you can get right in and walk right out again, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a dream world, Mr. Speaker. And that reminded 
me of their Grow Saskatchewan plan, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s not 
a plan; it’s a goal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a plan 
and I will support that plan and I will support the motion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be able to rise again in the 
Legislative Assembly and enter the debate over the Speech 
from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the outset of my remarks I’d like to once again acknowledge 
the great constituency of Swift Current, and the people of that 
constituency which is basically, Mr. Speaker, the city of Swift 
Current and a small rural area to the north and to the south. I 
want to thank them again for the unqualified honour that I have 
to represent them here in the Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m at it I’d also like to offer some 
words of welcome as well to the new member for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld to this Assembly, and certainly to our colleague, the 
member for Battleford-Cut Knife. It’s a joy to see him back 
here in the legislature. 
 
I want to acknowledge as well, Mr. Speaker, the support that I 
receive from my family at home, from my wife, Tami, and our 
children, Megan and Colter and Faith. We have quite a young 
family and so her support and their support is very, very 
important to me and allows me to be able to do this job. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I was looking for some quotes to use 
from somebody that would aptly describe the Throne Speech as 
I saw it, and as I’ve heard the various debates. It’s difficult to 
find just the right quote but I hope I was able to do that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I found a quote here in a book called With 
Malice Toward None, and it’s a quote by Abraham Lincoln who 

at the time of making this quote he was a little frustrated with a 
US Supreme Court decision called the Dred Scott Decision on 
the issue of slavery and the citizenship of the slaves at that time. 
 
And he was also a little frustrated with the argument that was 
put forward by his arch enemy throughout his political life, a 
fellow by the name of Stephen Douglas. He thought his 
arguments were a little thin and he said of Mr. Douglas’ 
arguments, he said he found them “as thin as the homeopathic 
soup that was made by boiling the shadow of a pigeon that had 
starved to death,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I read that quote 
and it jumped out of the page at me because that is exactly what 
the Throne Speech is that we’re debating here today. This 
Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is as thin as the soup 
made from boiling the shadow of a pigeon that starved to death. 
 
And if we needed a proof of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we 
needed any proof of that, we only had to listen to the comments 
by the previous speaker, the member for Regina Victoria. In his 
defence of this Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and he 
actually concluded his speech with it, he basically criticized the 
official opposition’s response to the Throne Speech, a response 
that has included specific criticisms but also the presentation of 
a plan — and yes, a detailed plan for the future of the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he criticized them basically by saying, in 
his last reference there, that people ought not to dream, that 
people in this province ought to settle for the way things are, 
that the way things are today in terms of the out-migration of 
the tax base and of our population is something that we have to 
put up with. We can’t do anything about it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why this Throne Speech is so much 
thin gruel. It has no hope for the people of the province who 
now more than ever need that hope. They want to hear from 
their leaders that it is okay to dream. They want to hear from 
their government that it’s not okay to settle for what we have to 
date, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Instead what they get is a Throne Speech that is devoid and 
bereft of any hope or any ideas as to how we can turn the 
situation around and, more to the point, it’s supported, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, by members, former cabinet ministers no less, 
that stand up and basically shrug their shoulders and give up, 
Mr. Speaker — give up on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recall reading the clippings as we were 
getting ready to come back to session, and the Premier indicated 
that he believed this session could be characterized thusly. He 
said it’ll be really a showcasing of competing plans, of 
competing visions for the province’s future. That’s what he 
said. And to some extent he’s right. I think many of us on this 
side of the House would wonder where the other plan is. We’ve 
certainly presented ours; we haven’t seen theirs yet. 
 
But I can assure you, I can assure you of this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We are relishing the opportunity, we’re relishing the 
opportunity this session and in the months ahead to contrast the 
plan of the Saskatchewan Party for the province of 
Saskatchewan and the lack of a plan that’s coming from this 
government in the Throne Speech. We couldn’t agree more 
with the Premier and our only hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
the people of this province have ample opportunity to check out 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

 

those two competing visions, to hear the comments and the 
plans from this side and the politics and the lack of a plan that 
comes from this side. 
 
And if they have the opportunity to check out those competing 
visions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re going to clearly see the 
NDP approach to governance over these many years, and 
they’re going to clearly see that that approach hasn’t changed. It 
is the tired old dogmatic approach to our economy and to our 
government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an approach that relies almost 
exclusively on government. It is an approach that puts 
government ahead of any other sector of our economy. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an approach that has been rejected, 
that has been roundly rejected by every other free market 
economy in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is an approach 
that places a priority on an unwavering confidence in 
government as the solution to our challenges and all too little 
faith and all too little importance with the people of the 
province, with the small-business men and women of the 
province and the workers of our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’ve seen in the Throne Speech is 
representative of the approach of this government. And frankly, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the economic approach that 
governments have offered in this province for 60 years. For 60 
years we have seen the same sort of a strategy and approach 
from different governments of Saskatchewan. And to be fair, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that approach has been forwarded, not just 
by the NDP, but by three other parties — by their predecessors, 
the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and, to a 
large measure, by Liberal governments and Tory governments 
in this province that have not substantively changed our 
province’s reliance on the government. 
 
For 60 years, we have tried precious little else than this 
unwavering and unbalanced dependence on the government for 
everything on the economic side of government and on the 
more soft or social side of government. Governments of those 
four different political stripes have relied on government 
intervention. They’ve relied on a very active Crown corporation 
sector. They’ve relied on direct investment. They’ve relied on 
indirect investment. They’ve relied on a lot of program 
spending, frankly. 
 
One of the best examples that I can think of is the home 
improvement programs that we heard about in the 1980s. Very, 
very costly programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the treasury, the 
benefits of which I think everyone would agree are 
questionable. I remember the home improvement program of 
the ’80s and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that program though, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was matched. In fact, it was exceeded in a bit 
of a bidding war by the NDP. In that 1986 election I know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they wanted to one-up the government of the 
day. They wanted to outspend the government of the day. They 
wanted to out-gift the government of the day. So they 
introduced something, I think it was called the 7-7-7 program. I 
think that’s what the NDP called it. 
 
(21:00) 
 
You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, regardless of political stripe, up 

until this point we have had political parties that differ only on 
the margins. They differ only on the margins when it comes to 
how we can grow our economy and what we can do to turn our 
province around. For the most part, they have agreed and relied 
on government and on the Crown sector. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all that seems to have changed is the 
names of the programs. Maybe a few new Crowns, or maybe a 
lot more new Crowns, under this government — 70-plus and 
counting, if you can believe it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program names have changed, the 
governments’ names have changed, the names of the parties in 
place have changed, the names of the premiers have changed, 
the names on the door of the cabinet offices have changed, but 
what has not changed is our approach in this province and the 
approach of the government, led for the most part by the NDP 
and the CCF. 
 
And so if we’ve tried the same thing over and over and over 
again for 60 years, I think it’s fair to say that now is probably a 
good time — maybe 30 or 40 years ago would have been a 
better time — but now is as good as time as any to try to 
evaluate what those 60 years have wrought for us, what that 
unwavering reliance on government has left us here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1929 our population was just 
under 1 million people. And today it’s just under 1 million 
people. In 1944 the province of Saskatchewan accounted for 
about 35 per cent of the population of the Prairies; and we’re 
down below 20 per now. We account for less than 20 per cent 
of the population of the Prairies. 
 
What about our private sector? Has it grown after these 60 years 
of reliance on government; after all these years of NDP-CCF 
rule, inter-sprinkled by parties that didn’t change much in a 
substantive way in terms of its economic approach? Well no, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
For a province that is 100 years old, for a province that is the 
Dominion’s second-largest producer of oil and gas, the world’s 
number one producer of uranium, a province with the most 
arable acres in all of Canada, all of those assets, you’d think in 
60 years or in 100 years that our private sector would be 
vibrant, our population would have grown. None of those have 
. . . None of that’s occurred, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In fact I think 
the Minister of Finance was lamenting, in some of his 
pre-budget media interviews, he was lamenting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the government, this government had budgeted 
about $300 million in corporate income tax this last budget year 
and they were going to receive about $150 million this past 
year. Half what they budgeted — just barely more than a point 
on the PST (provincial sales tax), Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And perhaps most important, what has this approach to 
government, to the administration of our province, what has it 
done to our ability to afford medicare or a excellent education 
system or social services? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today it’s pretty clear that there are 
precious few resources — too small a tax base, some would say, 
to support the kind of health care we want for our constituents. 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

And it’s more than just rhetoric of course when you consider it 
can be measured in terms of Saskatchewan — Saskatchewan 
having the longest waiting lists, the longest waiting lists in all 
of Canada. 
 
Our education system is creaking under the weight of an 
increasing reliance on the local property tax base, because this 
government, this NDP government downloaded $300 million in 
education funding to local governments and to the property tax 
base. 
 
So what are . . . the reasons for all of this are pretty clear, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And this government perhaps is the best 
example we have had yet. For 60 years we have had 
governments that have focused themselves on cutting up the 
same pie. They have focused themselves on redistributing 
wealth, comfortable that almost all of the corporations in our 
province of any critical mass are government owned and 
government controlled, comfortable with the tired old notion 
that the government can somehow generate wealth, that the 
government can create jobs. They just try to look at that same 
pie, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and find a different way to cut it up. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a 
reason why the province of Saskatchewan, rural and urban, are 
responding to the Saskatchewan Party plan. Because for once, 
in six decades, someone is talking about growing the pie, 
growing the province, so there are more resources, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, so there are more resources for health care, a larger tax 
base to generate wealth for education and social services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, we’re going to be having our 
100-year birthday and isn’t it sad that when we mark that 
special occasion that our private sector, that sector of the 
economy that can do the things that we want it to do for health 
care, education, and social services is so incredibly small? 
 
It’s no wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s that small. The 
private sector, small-business men and women in our province, 
have had to endure 60 years of socialism — 60 years of trying 
to compete with their own tax dollars, 60 years of high taxes on 
investment and high taxes on productivity, 60 years . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take 
a couple of minutes to ask the Assembly to join me, through 
you and with you, to ask the Assembly to recognize my 
youngest daughter, Taylor. And Taylor is visiting the 
Assembly. 
 
And I think the last time that Taylor was here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was when I was elected in 1995 which was seven 
years ago. So she is no stranger to the House, but the last time 
she was here she probably was sleeping in one of my speeches, 
Mr. Speaker. So now she is going to stay awake through the 
whole thing, she said. So thanks again. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we were commenting on how, in 2002, our private 
sector is so unfortunately small in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s little wonder, for what our private 
sector have had to endure, what our small-business men and 
women have had to endure in terms of high taxes on 
productivity and in terms of the ever-intrusive family of Crown 
corporations often competing with those small businesses with 
their own tax dollars. 
 
Well eventually all of that takes its toll, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Eventually all of that has an impact. Eventually entrepreneurs 
get fed up. They are by nature among the most restless group of 
people out there. Entrepreneurs are by nature in a hurry, and 
there’s only so long they’ll wait. There’s only so long they’ll 
wait for the business climate they need to go ahead, make their 
investments, create jobs, and generate a tax base for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this government doesn’t 
understand, and the Throne Speech is more evidence of it, is 
that venture capital investment is the lifeblood of any free 
market economy or society; it’s the lifeblood, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — that venture capital is the only thing, the only thing 
that generates wealth. It’s the only thing that creates permanent, 
lasting, economic development. It’s the only thing that creates a 
job. It’s the only thing that creates employment for people so 
they can pay the PST, so they can pay the income tax, so they 
can pay their property tax, so they can enrol their kids in a 
school division. It is the only thing that allows companies to 
pay their corporate income tax, their corporate capital tax, the 
PST, their small business tax if that’s the case, their education 
tax. That is how we’re going to be able to fund the things that 
we want to fund off of the tax base. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether we like it or not, venture 
capital follows the path of least resistance. It always has and it 
always will. Maybe we wish that it weren’t so, but it is. That’s 
the nature of venture capital — it’ll always follow the path of 
least resistance. 
 
And so what can a government do in that respect, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Well a government can either put barriers in the way 
of that venture capital stream. It can pile rocks in the stream 
until it backs up and eventually just goes elsewhere. Or it can 
remove those barriers. It can get those roadblocks, those dams, 
it can get them out of the way. And that is what the Grow 
Saskatchewan plan is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can pick any one 
element of the plan, and in and of itself it’s not revolutionary, 
whether it might be a reduction on the taxes in productivity, 
reducing the corporate capital tax in Saskatchewan, or maybe 
ensuring that our labour legislation is fair for both employees 
and workers. 
 
But when you take it as a whole, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
you take that plan as a whole, it represents a fundamental 
change for the province of Saskatchewan. In and of itself each 
point may not be revolutionary, but taken as a whole it 
represents the very first time in 60 years that any political party 
has understood how we can grow this economy in a lasting way 
— that’s what it represents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Compare that with the attitude of the speakers 
opposite. Compare that with the remarks from the member for 
Regina Victoria who unbelievably stood in the Assembly and 
said, well you know there isn’t really anything we can do; we’re 
kind of an agrarian economy and other agrarian economies are 
having trouble. And sort of throw up your hands — there’s not 
much you can do. 
 
Well he makes one fundamental mistake in that assertion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There is one thing that we have not tried in 
this province. There is one thing that we have not tried and it’s 
a recognition in the ability of entrepreneurs, it’s a recognition in 
the ability of venture capital to create a tax base for this 
province so that our health care system is sustainable. We’ve 
never tried it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The good news is that after 
the election we will try it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We will try it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you could measure the toll 
of 60 years of this kind of government intervention in statistics. 
You could talk about unemployment statistics. You could talk 
about out-migration. You could talk about demographics. 
 
Today though, I’d like to underscore exactly what the results of 
that kind of approach that we see from this government is in 
terms of a story of a family from my constituency. They are a 
relatively young family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in their 40s or so, 
and my colleague from Indian Head-Milestone assures me that 
that indeed is very young. They live just outside of Swift 
Current and they’re in the constituency of Swift Current. 
 
They came here about 10 years ago and they established a 
business. And throughout that business they were able to 
employ some people — different people at times, sometimes 
one and a half employees, maybe sometimes two but they 
always had people on staff. The wife of the family also started a 
number of businesses, catering. They tried whatever they could, 
whatever they could, and they worked very hard. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, here lately they had to move on and try 
another business but they tried it here in Swift Current, here in 
Saskatchewan. They wanted to make it work. 
 
And while they were here for those 10 years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they did employ people. They paid income tax. They 
paid the sales tax. They paid their property taxes. Their kids 

enrolled in local schools to help an excellent rural division that 
we have called the Prairie West Division and an excellent 
school called Wymark where their kids went. And they 
contributed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the local economy and to 
their area. 
 
And then a week ago Sunday the pastor in our church made an 
announcement. He announced that this particular family was 
moving to Claresholm, Alberta; and he thanked them for the 
work they had done in the church and confirmed that indeed 
they were leaving to Claresholm. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we raise these 
individual cases or when we talk about out-migration in 
general, we often hear the Economic Development minister say: 
well it’s farming, that’s the problem; it’s agriculture; we 
wouldn’t have depopulation if it wasn’t for agriculture. That’s 
what the Minister for Economic Development says. 
 
I want to tell you where this gentleman is going to work, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. He is going to work in southern Alberta where 
they’ve had a drought arguably a year longer than we have and 
he’s going to work in agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He’s 
going to go work on a farm. He’s going to go get involved with 
a feedlot operation there. 
 
And they’re going to be leaving this weekend, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and we hope to see them off because it’s my brother, 
Barry, and my sister-in-law, Glenda, that are leaving. And you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re family, so certainly I’m 
going to miss them and my folks will miss them, their friends 
will miss them, the church will miss them. 
 
(21:15) 
 
But more important for this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
province will miss them. The province is going to miss their 
income tax and their small-business tax and all the consumables 
they purchased. They’re going to miss the kids in their local 
school and their taxes to the local school board, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I have tried, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to understand, 
in light of that recent development in our family, I’ve tried to 
understand the Minister of Economic Development’s remarks 
when he says that, well maybe a good way to look at population 
loss is that there will be more left for the rest of us. 
 
And I can’t square it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because in his case, 
in their case, and in the cases of so many other people that are 
leaving, there will be less for the rest of us. There will be much 
less for the rest of us, and not just in terms of finances, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but in terms of the contribution that they make 
to their community. 
 
And so it leaves me a little bit angry, frankly, when I hear the 
Minister of Economic Development make those sorts of 
comments that a population loss maybe isn’t so bad because 
there will be more for the rest of us. 
 
We need a government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that believes that 
losing families like that is unacceptable, that it’s never good, 
that it’s never right, and we better . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
better move heaven and earth to find a way to keep them in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that’s the difference tonight 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

between this side and that side of the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, for thousands of people, it’s 
too late. It’s too late for my brother and his family. Anything 
that a government could do, any government could do, is too 
late. And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s almost too late 
for a whole other group of people that are planning an exit 
strategy. And they really are. 
 
But the bottom line is, and the good news is, for the rest of us 
it’s not too late just yet, it’s not too late. But it will be if we 
can’t change the government, if we can’t change the attitude of 
the people that sit to your right hand and have a government in 
this province who fundamentally understand that we can do 
better in this province and that we will do better if we try 
something that we haven’t tried for 60 years, if we try 
something that has worked in every other jurisdiction that has 
tried it in earnest. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker one of the barriers I 
spoke of earlier in terms of what the, what the governments of 
Saskatchewan have put in the way of venture capital and 
entrepreneurs, one of the barriers is Crown corporations. Not 
the Crown corporations themselves — the Crown corporations 
themselves and many of the staff and management at those 
Crown corporations, at those Crown corporations are absolutely 
assets; they’re assets to our province. 
 
It’s the management of the Crowns. It’s the direction of the 
Crowns by the members opposite that’s a barrier to growth in 
this province. The only thing, I should think, that consumes 
their thoughts more than Crown corporations and how they can 
further expand their influence and purview, the only thing that 
they obsess more, I think, is our position on Crown 
corporations, is what the official opposition thinks about Crown 
corporations. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we often hear them — and they’re 
chirping from their seats right now to prove the point — we 
often hear them inventing opposition Crown corporation policy. 
I think I heard the member from Regina Wascana in her speech 
say and I quote, that we would, quote, “sell everything that’s 
not nailed down.” Well that’s a genuine intervention in the 
debate, Mr. Speaker. That’s a reasonable statement to make. 
 
We’ve heard other members say, we’ve heard the Minister for 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) say the 
same thing. When he has no answers in question period, he sort 
of resorts to rhetoric and that’s the kind of rhetoric that we hear. 
Every single time, Mr. Speaker, you hear that kind of statement 
coming from those benches over there, you’ll have to know, 
Mr. Speaker, that it is not true — it is not true. And were I 
allowed, I’d use stronger language than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you have a doubt of that I simply invite you and 
through you to any other member in the House to bring some 
sort of shred of evidence, some sort of utterance that we’ve 
made that they can base this outlandish claim on. But they 
won’t do it, Mr. Speaker. They won’t do it because that would 
get in the way of the time-honoured NDP political tactic of 
fearmongering, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it would get in the 

way of. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, people ask us incredulously, how can 
they do that? How can they just say something that they know 
fundamentally isn’t true? To tell you the truth, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t know the answer to that. But we do know, but we do 
know it’s part of their political heritage. We do know that it is 
their political stock-in-trade to fearmonger. That’s what they’ve 
been about for 60 years in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It used to be, it used to be the medi-scare and everyone knows 
about the medi-scare. Anyone who has ever been involved in 
any political campaign in the province of Saskatchewan, they 
know all about the NDP medi-scare. The medi-scare is pretty 
simple, Mr. Speaker. The medi-scare is as follows. Any party 
that opposes them, any organization that opposes them would 
take away your medical care. They’d take away medicare. 
That’s their stock-in-trade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it was a by-election in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, a 
by-election in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in the late 1980s, if you 
can believe this, Mr. Speaker, that the then leader of the 
opposition, Mr. Romanow, sent out a letter and an 
accompanying press release, and I think the letter went to every 
single municipality in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And do you 
know what he said, Mr. Speaker? Know what the letter said? 
Mr. Speaker, the letter said that, if you voted for our opponents, 
for the NDP’s opponents, if you vote for them, they will close 
down every single hospital in the constituency. I think there 
were five. Mr. Speaker, that is the NDP tried and true tactic of 
fearmongering. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the medi-scare tactic doesn’t work any more 
because of what they have done to medical care in the province 
of Saskatchewan, because of the hospitals that they have closed. 
And every time they try to perpetrate that kind of bunk on the 
people of Saskatchewan, they remember things like the 50 
hospitals that were closed. They remember the Plains hospital, 
Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t work any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that party, that party trying to tell the voters that 
they should be scared of the Saskatchewan Party’s health care 
policies, that’s like Dracula telling people that they should be 
scared of Harry Potter, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t wash. 
 
But they’ve moved on to a new scare tactic since the health 
scare, the medi-scare tactic doesn’t work any more. They found 
something else to fabricate. They found something else to whip 
up. And it’s easy to see why they would be a little sensitive 
about Crown corporations, frankly, Mr. Speaker, because what 
is the real fright in all of this is the NDP’s record on the 
Crowns. Their record on the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, is what they 
desperately don’t want the public to know. They’ve sort of 
wavered. For the most part they’ve been about expanding the 
Crowns. 
 
But we found out last session they were looking to privatize up 
to a third of SaskTel. We know they certainly don’t mind 
privatizing non-core assets. They sold a bunch of shares in 
Cameco not long ago, Cameco which used to be, used to be 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) 
which was a member of the family of Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

 

But maybe we should review though, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
certainly prepared to do that. Maybe we should review about 
. . . review the actions of this government as it relates to Crown 
corporations and how the Crowns have strayed from their 
original mandate. There’s perhaps no better example of a 
Crown corporation that has strayed from its original mandate, 
its public service mandate to provide telephony to the province 
of Saskatchewan, than SaskTel. 
 
Last session we found out that SaskTel had lost about a million 
plus in something called IQ&A. IQ&A, Mr. Speaker, was an 
ill-fated attempt by this government to set up another sub of 
another Crown to sell people’s personal health care information. 
 
So they wasted millions of dollars of taxpayer money until they 
found out that no other government in Canada wanted to sell 
their health care information. That was the first example we 
raised. 
 
The second was a company, an ingenious . . . an ingenious plan 
by the government opposite called Clickabid. And Clickabid 
was going to compete, if you’ll remember, Mr. Speaker, with 
eBay, the world giant Internet site that offers on-line auction 
services. And they lost a couple million in Clickabid and 
wrapped that up. 
 
There was agdealer.com, Mr. Speaker, where the government 
invested in a business that directly competes with a burgeoning, 
a wonderful new company in Outlook. They invested in that as 
well — an Ontario-based company to compete with a 
Saskatchewan-based company. 
 
There was tappedinto.com, which is a video/audio streaming 
dot-com in Nashville, Tennessee. The other shoe hasn’t 
dropped on tappedinto.com, Mr. Speaker. We don’t know how 
much money the taxpayers have lost in that. 
 
There was SecurTek, Mr. Speaker, which confirmed — which 
confirmed for us last year, and we’ll hear more this year — that 
they have lost millions of dollars of SaskTel’s money. Money 
that could be used to expand cellular service, money that might 
have been used to improve SaskTel service to the province, has 
been squandered in these ventures. 
 
And what’s worse . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — What’s worse, Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough that 
SecurTek’s been losing SaskTel’s money and the taxpayers’ 
money, but in the bargain — in the bargain — they’ve been 
competing with Saskatchewan businesses. There’s a constituent 
in Swift Current who’s now out of that business because of the 
competition he faced from his own Crown, from his Crown 
corporation. People in Swift Current were very surprised late 
last year, I think it was, when they found out that SecurTek’s 
latest investment was to buy a monitoring company in Medicine 
Hat, Mr. Speaker. Investing in Medicine Hat, the city that poses 
the greatest economic threat to Swift Current, and this 
government through SaskTel throws a little more money their 
way. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I got a call not long after that from a 
business person in Medicine Hat, who were in that same 
business that SaskTel had invested in through SecurTek, and 
they were upset. You know, Mr. Speaker, not only do 
Saskatchewan business people resent competing with the 
Crowns, but apparently Alberta business people don’t like it 
very much either. That was her concern; now she’s competing 
with the Saskatchewan taxpayers there in Medicine Hat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are currently speculating on the Australian 
Stock Market at SaskTel; we know that. We know that they’re 
currently in the ditch and we understand it’s going to get much 
worse before it gets better. If it gets better. We know, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’ve announced $80 million for a place called 
Newcastle, Australia, where they’re going to invest in 
telephony and in telecommunications in Australia. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard members opposite 
stand up and sanctimoniously defend these kinds of schemes 
saying, well we need to do these things to invest in 
Saskatchewan if you want us to build out the infrastructure in 
Saskatchewan. That’s just ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. How about 
the $80 million they’re going to spend in Australia’s 
infrastructure system? A lot of people in Saskatchewan are 
saying, why don’t you use that? Why don’t you use that if you 
need some resources to develop the cellular network to improve 
service in the province of Saskatchewan? Why don’t you put 
the people of Nipawin ahead of the people of Newcastle, 
Australia, Mr. Speaker? That’s what the people of the province 
are asking. 
 
We can move on to SaskEnergy. They’ve been investing for 
some time now in Chile. Last year in Crown Corporations 
Committee we asked, well how’s that going; have you made 
any money? No, no, we haven’t made any money, but boy, 
we’re going to; we’re going to make more money. Like we’re 
so sure we’re going to make more money that in November 
they announced they’re going to spend more money in Chile 
and Mexico to boot. With some hope, some prospect of return 
maybe. But these are high-risk investments — $30 million in 
Chile and Mexico. 
 
SaskPower. What about SaskPower, Mr. Speaker? Well in 
December there was a rate review panel that was commissioned 
to look at SaskPower’s rate increase request. And that rate 
review panel did the right thing. They hired an independent 
consultant. And the independent consultant looks at the books 
of SaskPower and that independent consultant concluded that 
SaskPower International’s plan to spend almost $500 million 
over the next number of years could well show up on our power 
bills. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Saskatchewan SaskPower customers could be paying for still 
more ill-fated, ill-advised investments. That’s what the 
independent consultant said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the latest example of SaskPower comes into place 
close to home, and many members on this side have talked 
about it. It has to do with the wind farm. It has to do with the 
wind farm near Gull Lake where the government kind of, sort 
of, kind of half got it right last year when they went down this 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

road because they wanted to partner with the private sector. 
 
And two companies out of Alberta were ready to play the game; 
they were ready to make an investment. They needed certain 
assurances from SaskPower. They got the assurances they 
needed and the projects went up, I think on time and on budget. 
I think they are generating power. I think they are more efficient 
than anyone expected them to be, and so SaskPower had to look 
at that, I guess, and thought to itself, well . . . and the NDP 
thought to itself, well it worked so well, why don’t we just do it 
ourselves? Why don’t we just leave the partners out of this and 
why don’t we do this ourselves? 
 
And if anybody, Mr. Speaker, has any doubt about the impact 
of that on RMs (rural municipalities) in the area — I think the 
two are Carmichael and the RM of Webb — they need to only 
go down and ask the people down there how that works, 
because the private/public partnership model is paying taxes — 
70,000-plus I think is what they’re paying. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Seventy-six thousand. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Seventy-six thousand, the member for Rosthern 
says. 
 
So how much do you think the family of Crown corporations is 
paying to the RM that they are going to be located in. Bupkis, 
Mr. Speaker. They are paying absolutely nothing. And if you 
want, if you have a question, if members opposite have a 
question, Mr. Speaker, as to what model might be best in the 
future, public partner private . . . public/private partnerships, 
where Crowns might build joint venture relations with other 
private sector companies or just the government blindly, 
ideologically proceeding with the Crowns, if you want to ask 
them the question of which they prefer, the answer is pretty 
clear. They want to try something new. They want to get away 
from this tired, old attitude that the government has to do 
everything. It doesn’t have to do everything. And when it does 
do everything, side by side with a private sector alternative, it 
becomes pretty clear which is more effective, which is more 
beneficial for the tax base. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the latest one that we were talking 
about in this Assembly was a company called . . . was a 
company called Retx. (Retail Energy Transaction Exchange). 
We raised Retx in the legislature last week. Retx is an 
Atlanta-based dot-com company that the government got into a 
couple of years ago. It first got into it with about 49 per cent 
and now it owns well over 60 per cent and the taxpayers have 
$20 million in this thing. 
 
We asked in Crown Corporations Committee last year well how 
is this investment doing. Making any money here? Well no, our 
share of the losses are about $265,000 — Saskatchewan’s share, 
the NDP’s share on behalf of the taxpayers. 
 
So I guess we haven’t gave an opportunity for the minister to 
stand in his place and tell us how much more money they’ve 
made in the months that have passed since then. Apparently it 
hasn’t made any money either, Mr. Speaker. It hasn’t made any 
money. 
 
How many jobs did it create in the province, we asked. None. It 

created a job for a Saskatchewan person in Atlanta but it created 
nothing for the province of Saskatchewan. So then in trying to 
be constructive about the whole mess — and that’s what we 
consider it — we suggested to the government that since it’s a 
dot-com, since it’s Internet-based and its location is not that 
crucial, would the government use its 60 per cent majority 
position and relocate the company to Saskatchewan? You know 
what the minister said? The minister said, that’s ridiculous. 
That’s a ridiculous suggestion. He said it in here and apparently 
he said it out there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, through you and to that minister, maybe he 
lacks the confidence to be able to sell the benefits of this 
province. Maybe he lacks the ability to go down there and tell 
them about a 60-cent dollar they can take benefit from. Maybe 
he lacks the ability to go down and talk to them about our 
burgeoning IT (information technology) industry and how there 
would be some synergies between that sector and this new 
company. Maybe he lacks the zeal or the will to do it but we 
don’t, Mr. Speaker. We are prepared. We would be prepared 
and we will be prepared to go out and attract companies back 
here and sell the assets, not just simply give up . . . the minister, 
the member for Regina Victoria said. Not just simply give up, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue that we raised last week with 
regard to Crowns was the government’s involvement with Great 
West Brewery and my colleague, the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, asked some questions, some very reasonable 
questions. He didn’t argue with the actions of the government in 
’95, but in light of the fact . . . but in light of the fact that the 
employee shareholders and the other shareholders of Great 
West Brewery didn’t ask for the government to convert its 
debenture into equity . . . Nobody asked the government to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. From what we can gather the brewery didn’t 
phone up the minister and say, would you please convert your 
debenture into equity and become an 80 per cent shareholder in 
a brewery. Nobody asked that. They just did it anyway. 
 
And so the member for Indian Head-Milestone stood in his 
place and said, well fair enough; we can’t figure that out but 
won’t you at least commit to an exit strategy? When are you 
going to get the taxpayers out, ensuring the stability of that 
company? But apparently they’re going to just stay in it I guess, 
Mr. Speaker — I’m not sure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the business community from across Canada 
looks in on our province, when they read in the newspapers and 
on the national wire services about these sorts of measures — 
the government investing $20 million in an Atlanta-based 
dot-com; the government converting a debenture to equity so it 
owns 80 per cent of a brewery, even though no one asked it to; 
the government, Mr. Speaker, offering itself as the one true 
solution for what ails our economy and our province — what do 
they see when they look in at our province? These are people 
who potentially could invest. These are venture capitalists who 
are always looking for opportunities. 
 
What do they see when they look across the way and they see 
their actions? Watching the government spout 1970s, left-wing, 
blindly ideological rhetoric — rhetoric — and then putting that 
rhetoric to action in terms of the government getting in the way 
of business and putting more barriers in that stream of venture 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

 

capital. 
 
That’s what they see. See a government sitting at its desk, 
probably working diligently on two inches of shag rug by the 
light of lava lamps I’m sure they have from the 1970s. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to send a signal — not just to our business 
community in the province, but to entrepreneurs and investors 
and venture capitalists from across Canada and around the 
world — we need to send them a signal that Saskatchewan gets 
it. Finally after 60 years they’ve changed the government, 
they’ve got someone running the show that gets it, that 
understands that government doesn’t create jobs but that 
business creates jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And so, Mr. Speaker, and so we’ve mapped out a 
non-ideological position as it relates to the Crown corporations. 
That’s pretty clear. 
 
We’ve said, Mr. Speaker, as regards the four major Crowns in 
the province, we’ve said look, we can’t afford to be ideological 
about it. We can’t afford any particular party or government 
that says government ownership is bad so we have to sell them. 
But neither can we afford any ideology that says government 
ownership is good, so the status quo must remain forever. We 
can’t afford either. We need to be pragmatic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If, for example . . . If, for example . . . If, for example, a 
business from elsewhere in Canada recognizes the strength and 
the ability of one of our major Crowns and they approach the 
Government of Saskatchewan and say, you know we have a lot 
of respect for what that Crown corporation is doing and we 
think we could do a lot more together; there’s some specific 
developments we could pursue. And we think we can 
strengthen and protect head office jobs, maybe add to head 
office jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. We think we can 
do that and all you need to do, and all the government needs to 
do, is consider a joint venture, maybe 51 per cent of their equity 
— maybe 51 per cent of their equity. And in this new joint 
venture that would be located in the province, that would 
employ people of the province, that would protect head office 
jobs, that would add to economic development of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you want the kind of government, do you want 
the kind of government that would just say no to that deal, 
based on ideology? Do you want the kind of government that 
said know what, you know what, we checked the manifesto 
from nineteen tickety-two, and it says that the government has 
got to retain 100 per cent? Is that what the city of Regina 
wants? Is that what the province of Saskatchewan wants? Is that 
the kind of government we want? Or do we want a government 
that says look, let’s put down the ideological textbooks for just 
a second and consider what’s best for the province of 
Saskatchewan. Let’s do that. How about that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And that is the difference between our policy and 
their policy. They have ruled out anything but the status quo. 
They’ve ruled it out. And we, Mr. Speaker, have said look, we 
need to review the Crowns so that we can ensure that they are 
still providing a service, that they return to the taxpayers what 

they should return, that they continue to employ as many 
Saskatchewan people as they can. But outside of that, let’s 
review the Crowns, let’s review them with a view to doing 
what’s right for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We would do a couple of other things. Pending this review, we 
would put a moratorium on all out-of-province investments by 
the Crown corporations. And, Mr. Speaker, we would put an 
end, an unequivocal and absolute end to the amazing practice of 
this government of using the Crown corporations to compete 
with small-business men and women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You bet we would do that. You bet we would do 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is right about one thing in terms of 
this session. He was right about one thing, that this session in 
the months that will follow will clearly demonstrate the 
difference between the Saskatchewan Party and the NDP. It’ll 
clearly demonstrate the different approach. It’ll clearly 
demonstrate the vision that this side of the House has compared 
to the complete lack of vision on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. It will clearly demonstrate that the Saskatchewan Party 
is interested in growing Nipawin, and the NDP would like to 
grow Newcastle, Australia; that the Saskatchewan Party is 
interested in growing Moose Jaw, and the NDP are interested in 
growing Mexico; that the Saskatchewan Party would like to 
grow Alida, and the NDP would like to grow Atlanta. Those are 
the differences in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Because there’s absolutely nothing in this Throne 
Speech that would send a signal to anybody here or to the 
people of Swift Current or southwest Saskatchewan that a 
change is coming, that there’s a government in Regina that 
understands that we need to do things differently. I will not be 
supporting the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
it certainly is my pleasure to enter into the debate for the 
Throne Speech of the third session of the twenty-fourth 
legislature. 
 
But before I get into making some comments with regard to 
some of the rhetoric we heard from the members opposite, I 
think it’s important to point out to the people of Saskatchewan 
who may be viewing this evening that the Throne Speech 
debate is part of our parliamentary tradition where members can 
get up and discuss philosophy and programs about government. 
 
And I must say right off the top, Mr. Speaker, that I support this 
Throne Speech. I believe in this Throne Speech. I believe in the 
opportunity that it talks about, and I do not believe in the 
negativity of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — When they talk about the doom and 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

gloom scenario which they’ve been talking about for years, 
what does this Throne Speech talk about? It talks about 
province of opportunity, Mr. Speaker, province of opportunity. 
 
It talks about what we’ve done, what this coalition government 
has done over the past several years in moving forward 
opportunity in the province of Saskatchewan, and it makes a 
promise to do better with an action plan that makes sense, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite have had a chance to talk with 
regard and debate this Throne Speech, and the member from 
Swift Current was just on his feet, and he talked about Crown 
corporations, and he said a moratorium on investments outside 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(21:45) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that member was a member of a government. 
He worked for the Devine government in the ’80s. And guess 
what, Mr. Speaker? He worked in Economic Development, and 
what were they able to do other than to run up deficits of 
between 500 million and $1 billion every year? And while they 
were running up those deficits, Mr. Speaker, to the GRF 
(General Revenue Fund), what was he doing? Investing Crown 
corporation money outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Joytec, Supercart International, 
GigaText, Promavia — they were the worst offenders of bad 
investments that this province has ever seen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — He’s got the gall, the gall to get on 
his feet and say, we wouldn’t do that any more. Well once 
you’ve got a pattern of behaviour, Mr. Speaker, you continue 
that pattern of behaviour and you cannot trust what the 
members opposite say because they have no track record of 
positive investment in the provinces, in Saskatchewan, or 
outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And they have this philosophy that if 
you invest outside of the province and that investment makes 
money and that money comes back to Saskatchewan where it is 
spent 100 per cent here in this province, that that’s a problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — What’s the problem, Mr. Speaker? 
That is not a problem. What that means is that you have money 
from investments coming back to Saskatchewan, going into the 
General Revenue Fund and keeping taxes lower and keeping 
services higher, and guess what? It’s from investments and the 
rate of return on investments for our Crown Investments 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker, average between 10 and 15 per cent 
— 10 and 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you take investment money and you have some winners and 
losers, but the winners are seven to one, Mr. Speaker. And that 

money comes back to Saskatchewan and every single dime is 
spent here, Mr. Speaker — every single dime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And you know, they had this 
discussion earlier. They’re talking about crop insurance and 
they were saying, you’re sending money back to the federal 
government. And they talk about contracts and they say you’re 
sending money back to the federal government. 
 
Well, guess what? Provincial Crown corporations do not pay 
federal tax. And that means that every dollar stays in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They’ve forgotten that, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re not interested in knowing that. If you privatize all those 
Crown corporations and all those utilities and they’re fully 
deregulated, prices are going to soar, Mr. Speaker, and the 
federal government will take its share, Mr. Speaker, and that 
means less money for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — When we talk . . . when we talk . . . 
when we talk about our approach, Mr. Speaker, and we talk 
about our action plan, we’ve heard lots from the members 
opposite about what they say they would do. Well, this is what 
they said they would do, Mr. Speaker, in the last election. 
That’s their platform. It’s called The Way Up. And guess what? 
In The Way Up . . . in The Way Up, they said what? This is what 
they said. They said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members will come to order. 
Members on both sides will come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — It’s . . . it’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, 
how animated the members opposite get when we pull out their 
platform. This is . . . this is what they went to the people of 
Saskatchewan with in the last election. They had all of their 
heads together, and they came up with this platform, and this 
platform is what they all agreed on, and guess what? What did 
they agree on, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They said they were going to cut taxes 20 per cent, and they 
were going to put a little teeny bit into Highways, and they were 
going to freeze everything else in government. Everything else 
in government was frozen, Mr. Speaker. That meant no new 
money for health care; no new money for education; no new 
money for revenue sharing. 
 
A plan that would have increased property taxes like this, Mr. 
Speaker, and you know what? Now they get on their feet and 
they say, put more money into crop insurance; demand this 
from the federal government; put more money into education. 
And you know what? You’re not putting enough into health 
care because people are still having problems accessing health 
care. A 40 per cent increase in the last three years. Sixteen per 
cent in Education. And they would have frozen it, Mr. Speaker. 
They would have frozen it. 
 
You know, I sometimes wonder if it shouldn’t have been called 
The Way Up but perhaps the frozen plan from the Popsicle 
party, Mr. Speaker — the frozen plan from the Popsicle party 
— because they have no plan. They have no plan today and 



March 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

 

they have no plan for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m just going to talk a little bit now, Mr. Speaker, about 
health care. We heard one of the members opposite talking 
about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Let’s try again. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I just wanted to talk a little bit about 
health care, Mr. Speaker. One of the members opposite was 
talking about someone who had broken their arm. I think it was 
the member from Indian Head-Milestone. And any time that 
there’s a delay in treatment I think every one of us agree that 
that shouldn’t happen in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I think you have to recognize that in this province we have 
over 30,000 patient contacts with some part of the system every 
day; 210,000 contacts a week; that’s 12 million contacts by 
patients each year, Mr. Speaker. And you know what? You 
know what the satisfaction ratings for that system are perennial 
when they’re measured by health districts and hospitals? Over 
90 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over 90 per cent. And in corporate 
America the highest ratings for satisfaction, things like 
Wal-Mart, 63, 65 per cent. So we have a health care system in 
this province that is rated one of the highest in terms of service 
of any service anywhere. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We have some problems. 
We have some problems with accessibility. But you know 
what? This system compared to what they have in the United 
States is light-years ahead, Mr. Speaker, light-years ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And to just give you a recent 
example of a positive response from a patient, I’ll just give you 
this example. A patient saw his family physician, was referred 
to a specialist for chronic sinus problems. He saw the specialist 
within two weeks, saw the specialist on a Monday. The 
specialist booked him for a CT (computerized tomography) 
scan which was done on the Friday. He got the results from the 
CT scan the Monday and started treatment the Tuesday. 
 
That happened here in Saskatchewan; that happened here two 
weeks ago. And you know what the cost to that patient was? 
Not one dime, Mr. Speaker, not one dime. And these sorts of 
positive examples happen every day in this province, but the 
members opposite don’t want to hear about the positive 
examples. They always want to do . . . is bring up the doom and 
gloom scenarios, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could go on about what we’re doing in 
health care. I can go on about how we had the Fyke 
Commission bring forward its proposals. I can go on about how 
we had to drag the opposition party into the standing all-party 
committee on health care. They didn’t want to participate. They 
had to be dragged, kicking and screaming, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the same party . . . This is the same party that said, we 
want to have free votes; we want to have more all-party 

committees. And when they have the chance they have to be 
dragged kicking and screaming into that process. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, we already know they’re the Popsicle party, but 
do we also know they’re the party of shifting principles and 
flexible policies, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard the doom and gloom. We’ve heard the doom and gloom 
from the members opposite. We’ve heard what they’ve said and 
how they flip-flopped back and forth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know what? When you talk about philosophies, as the 
member of Swift Current talked about, when you talk about, 
what do parties mean, and we talk about the New Democratic 
Party, and we talk about the Liberal Party, and we talk about the 
Conservative Party on the national scene, and you can talk 
about libertarian conservatives, and you can talk about red 
Tories. But nobody talks about the Saskatchewan Party having 
any philosophy. They don’t know what they stand for, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t have a philosophy. They have no program. 
They have no principles. They have no philosophy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So what are the people of Saskatchewan going to expect from 
the members opposite? Well guess what? It’s a cloud. It’s a fog. 
They’re the sultans of doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when you sort of shift through what they’ve been saying, 
you can come up with a few things, Mr. Speaker. They want to 
privatize Crown corporations — willy-nilly sell-off, Mr. 
Speaker. They want to gut health care and privatize that too. 
They want to privatize the bus corporation. They want to 
privatize the liquor stores. It’s all obvious what their plan is. 
They want to privatize everything because guess what? 
Government is no good. 
 
Well I don’t believe in that. The members of this party and this 
coalition don’t believe in that. We believe that governments are 
there to serve the people of this province. They don’t believe in 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And, Mr. Speaker, we all know that 
their platform, we all know that their platform, you know, really 
didn’t say too much other than tax cuts and everything else 
frozen. 
 
So they go out and they’ve got this new program called Grow 
Saskatchewan. Well is it Grow Saskatchewan or gut 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because that’s exactly what The 
Wilkie Press says here. They talk about growing Saskatchewan. 
They have their little meetings, 44 communities. And I mean 
they are little meetings, three or four or five people in some of 
them. And I think they’re trying to increase their popularity, but 
when you come into a community and you have a meeting and 
the report in the local paper says, what are they growing, I think 
they’re going to gut Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know one of the most irritating, one of the most 
irritating things that I find from the members opposite in their 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 25, 2002 

 

rhetoric is their policy on agriculture because their very leader, 
the Leader of the Official Opposition, what did he say in 1998, 
right after he was elected? You know what he said? 
 
He said he didn’t believe in subsidies for agriculture. He said he 
didn’t believe in any subsidies; he believed in a level playing 
field. 
 
And you know what? Day in after day out we have the 
members opposite say, more for crop insurance, more for AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), more for CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program),; while their leader sits there 
saying, I don’t believe in subsidies. 
 
Well you either believe in tax cuts or you believe in services or 
you believe in helping the people of Saskatchewan. You have to 
believe in something, Mr. Speaker, and guess what? I cannot 
find anything that those members opposite believe in, Mr. 
Speaker, because they change their minds every other day. 
There’s no consistency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — They’re flip-flop, flip-flop all the 
time. And I can see why that happens, Mr. Speaker, because 
when you have a coalition of Liberals, of Tories, of Reformers, 
of Alliance, of whatever, an alliance of malcontents, Mr. 
Speaker, you’re not going to get consensus on anything. 
 
And I’m very glad to have participated in this speech tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(22:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members, it now being 
one-half hour before closing time on the sixth day of the 
resumption of debate on the motion to the . . . to be presented to 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor, it is incumbent upon me 
at this time to call the vote. 
 
The motion before the Assembly is the one moved by the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone and seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda M. Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
The division bells rang from 22:02 until 22:03. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 

Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 25 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Eagles 
McMorris D’Autremont Bakken 
Wall Kwiatkowski Brkich 
Wiberg Weekes Harpauer 
Hart Allchurch Huyghebaert 
Hillson   
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 
the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 
granted to Her Majesty, and to consider the ways and 
means of raising the supply. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:07. 
 


