















































Hansard: June 05, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1817 
 June 5, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand to 
present a petition from people throughout the province who are 
concerned that Humboldt maintain its territorial operations 
office for Saskatchewan Housing Authority. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Lake Lenore, Middle Lake, and the cities of 
Saskatoon, and the city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
this petition on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
closure of the Humboldt territory operation office for the 
Saskatchewan Housing Authority. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Muenster, 
Middle Lake, Annaheim, Humboldt, Bruno, and Quill Lake. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens in my constituency who are 
concerned about the crop insurance program changes. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Signatures on these petitions this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the communities of Melfort, Tisdale, and Kinistino, and 
I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of citizens concerned about the 

overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Willowbrook, Bredenbury, Saltcoats, Hudson Bay, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
dangerous condition of Highway 42. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life, and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity to the area. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Eyebrow, Brownlee, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about retaining their school in Pangman. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to maintain K to 12 education in the 
community of Pangman. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Pangman and Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to improve 
Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury and loss of life and 
to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in this area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Tugaske and Central Butte, 
Eyebrow, Brownlee. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

from citizens concerned about the high crop insurance 
premiums. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Biggar and Clavet, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition with citizens concerned about Highway No. 
15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its budget to address the concerns of the serious 
condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan residents. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Simpson, Imperial, 
and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
again in the Assembly to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned with the Besnard 
Lake situation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Debden, Air Ronge . . . (inaudible) . . . Allan, Saskatoon, and 
La Ronge. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise in the House with a petition from citizens who are 
concerned about the lack of cellular telephone coverage in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone services to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Orkney, 
Bracken, Climax, and Val Marie. 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning the closure of the Humboldt territory 
operations office for Sask Housing Authority; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 11, 18, 23, 129, and sessional paper no. 132. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 60 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: in the 2002-2001 fiscal 
year, how much did the government pay out under the farm 
land education tax program; and (2) how many applications 
were received under this program; how many were 
approved; and how many were rejected because they were 
submitted after the deadline? 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour 
to follow my colleague from Saltcoats and give notice that I 
shall on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: for each municipal sewage 
treatment plant in Saskatchewan, what was the specified 
requirement in terms of allowable coliform count in water 
being discharged in the year 2001; in the case of each 
facility how many times was this requirement breached; 
and what date did such a breach occur in the case of each 
facility; what was the coliform count on those days? 
 
And I have similar questions for the year 2000, 1999, 1998, 
and 1997. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly a group of 14 grade 12 students seated in your 
gallery. These students come to us today from the school of 
Southey. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Diana Ritter, 
chaperones Arlene Stubar, Tammy Mohr, and Donna Siebert. 
I’ll be meeting with them, Mr. Speaker, after question period 
and I’m sure they will have many questions for me after 
witnessing question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have another guest 
here today. Seated in your gallery is a long-time friend, Ms. 
Clara Gee, who is a former resident of Southey who actually 
just moved to Regina from Southey a couple of months ago. 
She’s a keen political observer and has watched us on television 
and so on, and she’s here to witness the proceedings today. I 
would ask all members to welcome these guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce a number of guests who are here 
today to witness the second reading of The Ethanol Fuel Act. 
And I want to apologize in advance to any who we met with 
earlier before the session convened if I don’t have them on my 
list. 
 
From Shaunavon are Jack Salmon, Sharon Dickie — the mayor; 
from Weyburn, Ray Hamm; from the southeast REDA (regional 
economic development authority), Dylan Clarke; from Tisdale 
Alfalfa Dehy, Jim Boxall; from the town of Tisdale, Doug Hay; 
from AGB Technologies, Bill Russell; from the Eden REDA, 
Roger Vogelsang; from Treaty 4 Executive Council, Senator 
Roland Crowe and Marv Hendrickson; from Melville, Mayor 
Michael Fisher; from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), Ken Engel; from the Canadian 
Renewable Fuels Association, Roy Button; from AgriBuild, 
Dan Prefontaine and Monty Stewart; from the livestock 
industry as well, Wayne Morsky; from Agrivision, Red 
Williams; from the SAC (Saskatchewan Agrivision 
Corporation) Hibernia (Ethanol) Task Force, Lionel Labelle; 
from the Saskatchewan Research Council, Doug Soveran; and 
from the Moose Jaw REDA, James Leier; and from the Regina 
REDA, Tim Feduniw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these men and women are very interested in 
diversifying and building on our agriculture industry in rural 
Saskatchewan. I know all members will be supporting this 
legislation because that’s exactly what it allows to happen. And 
I would ask all members to join with me in a very warm 
introduction to these very interested and hard-working 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of the legislature, 28 students from the Lashburn School. 
They’re sitting in the east gallery. They’ve come a great 
distance, Lashburn being one of the further schools from 
Regina, and we appreciate them taking the time and the 
opportunity to come and see what goes on here. 
 
All those from the Lashburn School — there’s a lot of students 
up there — could you put your hands up so we know. There 
you go. So will you in the legislature welcome these students 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very happy and very honoured to introduce to you and the 
members of this Assembly, Mr. Vance Petriew who is seated in 
your gallery accompanied by his wife Jennifer and his daughter 
Emily. 
 
Vance Petriew was born and raised in Saskatchewan on a farm 
northwest of Saskatoon. He has a degree in physics from the U 
of S (University of Saskatchewan) and a diploma in computer 
engineering technology from Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Arts and Sciences. Vance lives here in the city and works as a 

computer consultant. 
 
He is also, Mr. Speaker, a dedicated amateur astronomer. Vance 
discovered astronomy as a young boy and his parents bought 
him his first telescope when he was 12. His interest in 
astronomy led him to acquire an impressive 20-inch reflecting 
telescope. And, Mr. Speaker, last August Vance took his 
telescope to Cypress Hills Interprovincial Park to join other 
amateur astronomers, including Richard Huziak who assisted 
Vance with this discovery, for an outing called the 
Saskatchewan Summer Star Party. 
 
Our wonderful Cypress Hills Park is an ideal place for 
stargazing, Mr. Speaker. It is far from urban light pollution, has 
crystal clear air, and it’s the highest spot between Labrador and 
Rocky Mountains. 
 
Vance was guiding his telescope towards the famous Crab 
Nebula when he noticed a curious smudge of light in his 
eyepiece. At first he thought it might be a distant galaxy, but he 
soon realized he had discovered a new comet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Discovering a new comet has always been a great triumph for 
astronomers. Comets are named for their discoverers and 
finding one brings instant fame. Hale-Bopp, Hayakutake and 
Shoemaker-Levy are just a few of the names we know because 
of comets. Lately though, most comets have been found by 
robots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to point out a small irony here in that 
Vance has clearly demonstrated that we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. If the member 
could complete his introduction. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the official opposition, I want to join with the 
government in welcoming the business people and community 
leaders who are interested in the ethanol industry in our 
province. I hope they enjoy the proceedings this afternoon when 
we finally get Bill No. 1 up for second reading for the first time. 
So if everyone would join me in welcoming them here once 
again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have in our Assembly many traditions that we observe and 
that we’ve grown to appreciate. Whether it’s the daily entry or 
whether it’s question period, these are traditions that we’ve 
come to expect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have another tradition in this House and that is 
an annual visit from the social studies grade 12 class at Balfour 
Collegiate, and they’re with us again this year. They are seated 
in your gallery, and I would like to draw your attention and that 
of the members to these students. They’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Karen Jackson. 
 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

I would like all members to join with me, and also the member 
from Elphinstone who wants to extend a special welcome to his 
neighbour, Katrina. I would like all members to join me in 
extending a very warm welcome to these students on their 
annual visit to the legislature. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to add my welcome to all the community leaders that have 
come here this afternoon. 
 
I would also like to welcome someone else who’s travelled here 
from Melville, a long-time friend and his wife, John and 
Carman Persson, hard workers in our community. And I would 
like everybody to help me welcome them to the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Federal New Democratic Party Leader Resigns 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, “An important part of 
leadership is knowing when to pass the torch.” Those were the 
words of Alexa McDonough as she announced she was 
resigning as leader of the federal NDP (New Democratic Party). 
 
In 1980 McDonough became the first woman to lead a 
recognized federal or provincial party. For the next four years, 
she was the only woman in the Nova Scotia Assembly. She 
served there for 14 years, laying the groundwork to form the 
official opposition and to be in contention for provincial 
government. 
 
McDonough sought and won the leadership of the federal NDP. 
At a time when the party was without official standing in the 
House of Commons, McDonough and her caucus led the fight 
that produced an NDP breakthrough in Atlantic Canada in 
1997, helping to secure the official party status and position the 
party as a Canada-wide electoral force with representation from 
coast to coast to coast. 
 
In her last appearance in Regina, she reminded us that we move 
medicare forward not by abandoning the sick and the injured to 
the mercies of the marketplace, but by building on our Canadian 
values of compassion and co-operation. 
 
McDonough’s parliamentary highlights include leading the 
fight for victims of Westray mine disaster. McDonough also 
shifted national political priorities away from tax cutting 
towards rebuilding the health care system and other social 
programs. 
 
In closing with a quote of her own words, “If there’s one thing 
that fuels my passions about politics, it’s the understanding that 
we’re there to serve the public interests.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we wish her well in all her future endeavours. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Crisis Shelter Receives Funds 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
weeks ago the staff of Saskatoon’s YWCA (Young Women’s 
Christian Association) expressed their concerns regarding the 
possible closure of the crisis shelter unless immediate and 
significant financing was made available. 
 
The YWCA’s 34-bed, 24-hour crisis shelter plays an important 
and a valuable role in the Saskatoon community, Mr. Speaker. 
And the members on this side of the House thought that the 
hundreds of women and children who access its services every 
year deserve to know just how high up on the NDP’s list of 
priorities they were. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they got their answer because none of the 
members opposite were willing to commit to financially helping 
victims of violence and abuse. None of the members opposite 
thought it important to keep Saskatoon’s largest crisis shelter 
open for the most deserving and often forgotten members of our 
society. 
 
Instead, in what we’ve come to expect from the members 
opposite, the staff of Saskatoon’s YWCA were told they should 
talk to the federal government. Well, Mr. Speaker, they did. 
And I’m very pleased and encouraged by their response — 
$300,000 in federal funding has been arranged. The Saskatoon 
YWCA crisis shelter will remain open for the time being. 
 
But I also note, Mr. Speaker, that it seems these federal funds 
were not secured for a long term. In fact the Saskatoon YWCA 
will once again be approaching the government to ensure that 
adequate and sustainable funding will be made available. 
 
We sincerely hope that the members opposite realize that 
keeping a 34-bed, 24-hour crisis shelter open is truly the right 
thing to do. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Addresses Climate Change Issue 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue of climate 
change is of critical importance to our collective future. In 
Saskatchewan, where we rely on the burning of fossil fuels to 
generate the bulk of our electricity, this issue is of especially 
great concern. We currently await further direction on a national 
climate change strategy; however, that doesn’t mean we are 
standing still on this issue. 
 
One very important example, Mr. Speaker: I want to salute the 
proactive work of SaskPower in trying to address the issue of 
climate change — work documented in the 2001 progress report 
on SaskPower’s long-term climate change action plan. 
 
The plan outlines SaskPower’s short-term strategy to rely on 
offsets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Until commercially 
viable technology is developed, offsets will help SaskPower 
balance the need to preserve the integrity of the environment 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

 

while providing customers with cost-effective electricity. An 
example of these offsets is an agreement with Saskatchewan 
Environment which has secured 22 million tonnes of offsets in 
northern Saskatchewan forest. 
 
Other proactive activities noted in the progress report include 
the purchase of 11 megawatts of wind power from the 
SunBridge wind power project and the announcement of plans 
to install an additional 6 megawatts of wind power in 2002. 
 
These and other measures are very much needed. They’re steps 
in the right direction and we need more of them, Mr. Speaker. I 
would urge all members to join me in commending SaskPower 
for their leadership in tackling the very important issue of 
climate change. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tricky’s Troop Raises Funds for Cancer Research 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about the continuing remarkable achievements of Tristan 
Vincente of Bladworth. 
 
The members recall Tristan took part in the Relay For Life 
fundraising event for the Canadian Cancer Society this time last 
year. This past weekend Tristan and his fellow youth members 
of Tricky’s Troop took part in the Saskatoon Relay For Life 
event and once again Tristan won first prize for the most money 
raised by an individual by raising $1,479 for cancer research. 
 
His team also finished first by raising the most money for any 
team with $3,526 towards cancer research. This represents a 
first overall province-wide as the relay grew from three events 
last year to 10 events across Saskatchewan in 2002. 
 
Tristan’s parents, Lou and Carol Vincente, are obviously very 
proud of their young son who continues to battle cancer with 
bravery and courage. Indeed, Tristan remains an inspiring 
leader of all those people, young and old, who are currently 
coping with the effects of cancer. 
 
Tristan’s spirit, inspiring spirit, is at it again in 2002 and his 
team won first prize for best decorated campsite in the Relay 
For Life. Also on the team was my three-year-old nephew who 
had a battle with cancer, and thankfully today he’s still healthy. 
 
After the great challenge of raising money for the Relay For 
Life, Tristan now faces the prospect of a major operation at the 
end of June which will help him with his fight with cancer. I 
would ask that every member pray with me in hoping that he 
gets through this, and congratulating Tristan on his remarkable 
achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Building Naming Ceremony at Innovation Place 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, the tenants of our two research 
parks contribute nearly $400 million a year to the economy of 
Saskatchewan and they employ almost 5,000 people directly 
and indirectly. They are significant players in our provincial life 
as well as being beacons of our commitment to research and 

technology, in partnership with the government, universities, 
and industry. They are a tribute to the vision of far-sighted 
individuals. 
 
And this morning, Mr. Speaker, one of those individuals was 
honoured in a ceremony at Saskatoon’s Innovation Place 
attended by the ministers of Crown Investments Corporation 
and Finance, university and community officials, and members 
of the individual’s family. 
 
The newest building in our park is named after Dr. Jack 
McFaull. Dr. McFaull was an original member of the 
Management Advisory Committee of Innovation Place and 
served until his death in 1999. He was also a member of the 
Board of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan when 
Innovation Place was created more than 20 years ago during the 
administration of Allan Blakeney. 
 
He was also involved with companies like SED Systems and 
POS, companies which are typical of the tenants of Innovation 
Place — a man who, in his life, typified the partnership I 
mentioned earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Jack McFaull Building is completely full. It is 
environmentally friendly and energy efficient. It provides 
flexible spaces to accommodate a variety of requirements — 
and it is a good-looking building to boot. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Eastend/Frontier Super Cities WALK 
for Multiple Sclerosis 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Sunday, June 2, I had the pleasure to welcome more than 50 
area residents to the Eastend/Frontier Super Cities WALK for 
Multiple Sclerosis. The Super Cities WALK for MS (multiple 
sclerosis) is a fun, one-day, non-competitive walk that takes 
place all across Canada in over 140 communities. They’re 
going to raise funds specifically for MS research. 
 
Now this was an extremely successful fundraising activity for 
our region as the local group there raised over $13,000 in one 
day for MS research. 
 
On Sunday, Mr. Speaker, it actually rained in Eastend but 
organizer Bonnie Gleim indicated that, rain or shine, we walk. 
Ms. Gleim has been one of the driving forces behind this 
successful fundraiser and last year was the recipient of an award 
of inspiration provided by the MS Society for having shown 
great determination in helping to raise funds in order to find a 
cure for MS. 
 
Other successful events for the group’s fundraising schedule 
included an MS music night, providing entertainment to a 
sold-out crowd, a K to 6 dance at the school in Frontier, and a 
planned walk by students of the Eastend School in support of 
the Super Cities WALK. Many from the area will be 
participating in the Regina MS bike tour scheduled for August 
17 and 18. 
 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

The Eastend/Frontier organization’s mission is to be a leader in 
helping to find a cure for multiple sclerosis and enabling people 
with MS to enhance their quality of life. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
all members to join with me in congratulating the 
Eastend/Frontier MS Society, and the volunteers and 
organizations who assisted throughout the day, and the walkers 
who participated in this very successful event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for the Information Services 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the NDP announced its intention to create 
a new Crown corporation with the mandate to automate 
Saskatchewan’s paper-based land titles system. By the time that 
the NDP had announced the formation of the new Crown 
corporation in January of 2000, the mandate of the ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) was 
expanded to, and I quote: 
 

. . . seek markets for new products and services made 
possible because of the new (integrated LAND information 
system.) 

 
Mr. Speaker, ISC has been operating for more than two years 
now. Will the Minister rise to his responsibility and share with 
the people of Saskatchewan how much money ISC has spent 
marketing its land titles program outside Saskatchewan since 
January 2000? And what is the total value of sales ISC has 
made outside the province during that time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member, who must surely know more about information 
technology than he indicates in his question, that corporations 
engaged . . . new corporations engaged in IT (information 
technology) are engaged in a complex operation, Mr. Speaker, 
which requires a longer term strategy for marketing than in 
most instances. The member I’m sure will know that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have a land titles system here which I 
will quote from a Microsoft ad . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, I’m sure you . . . I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite have heard a lot of things that they haven’t taken any 
notice of. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, as I 
was saying, Mr. Speaker, recognized by Microsoft as being 
industry leaders in land information systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 

I ask the members to show some faith in the information 
technology skills and attributes of people in this province to 
support that, Mr. Speaker, to support the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
minister verbally circumvented the globe, but he never touched 
down and answered the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in December of 2000, former minister of 
Economic Development, Janice MacKinnon, sent a memo to 
the NDP cabinet warning that ISC . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
would ask for a little more order so that we could hear the 
question. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Former minister 
Janice MacKinnon sent a memo to NDP cabinet warning that 
ISC was out of control and operating far beyond its mandate. 
According to Ms. MacKinnon, ISC had no business plan to 
demonstrate how they were going to turn a profit by expanding 
into areas far beyond handling land titles services in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MacKinnon warned that ISC’s expansion could threaten the 
growth of private information technology and cost taxpayers 
millions of dollars. Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon was right. 
In just two years — just two years — ISC has lost more than 
$17 million. 
 
Will the minister admit in the House today that the NDP has 
lost control of Information Services Corporation at a cost of at 
least $17 million, and the number is growing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
will know of the endorsements of ISC from across Canada. Not 
just, Mr. Speaker, from leading . . . the leading computer 
companies but from others involved in land titles systems as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me just . . . Maybe I can ask the member 
opposite a question. What is it, Mr. Speaker, what is it in the 
genes of the members opposite that stops them from 
recognizing the technological advancements of ISC? And what 
is it that stops them from indicating, from knowing, from 
saying, that Saskatchewan is the most technologically 
sophisticated jurisdiction in the world? You can get high-speed 
Internet where you live; you can’t get it in New York City. 
That’s how good it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister asks, what 
is it about ISC that bothers the official opposition? It’s the same 
thing that bothers the taxpayers of this province. 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

 

This government promised an automated system that would 
cost them between 20 and 30 million. The bill is now $60 
million and rising. They promised them a system that would 
respond within 24 to 48 hours. It’s not doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
They promised a system that would work, and it doesn’t work. 
That’s what bothers the people of Saskatchewan about this 
system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday at Crown Corporations 
Committee the CEO (chief executive officer) of ISC, Fraser 
Nicholson, testified that indeed he wasn’t able to say whether or 
not ISC had a sales target even for these overseas sales of the 
technology. We couldn’t even determine if they have a sales 
plan. 
 
What we do know . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I ask members to come to 
order. The member has got 10 seconds. 
 
Mr. Wall: — What we do know, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
haven’t made a single sale of this technology. So the question to 
the minister is this: will he finally admit that their international 
sales program for this technology is a failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
will know of representatives of land titles systems from other 
parts of the world, from Australia, from Scotland, from other 
places, Mr. Speaker, who’ve come to see Saskatchewan’s 
system. Why does the member think they come to see the 
system we have in Saskatchewan? Because it is, as it’s 
described by experts in the field, Mr. Speaker, the leader in land 
titles systems in the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that system works. Mr. Speaker, the system 
is cheaper, as the member knows. And Mr. Speaker, the 
numbers of transactions that have been carried on by the system 
are truly monumental. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just ask the member once again, what is it 
that he has against the information technology industry in this 
province that says to him that he can’t support the major 
advances that are taking place here? Why doesn’t he support 
Saskatchewan industry rather than somewhere else? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that minister, like 
many of his colleagues, is very anxious to ask questions of the 
Saskatchewan Party. They’ll have ample chance to do that after 
the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday even the NDP members of the Crown 
Corporations Committee, even the NDP member for Saskatoon 
Greystone had some very legitimate concerns. They had 
concerns that ISC would try to sell its computer program 
internationally until its LAND (Land Titles Automated Network 
Development), automated land titles system, actually was 
operational here in the province. 

Since those NDP backbenchers don’t have the opportunity to 
ask questions in question period, and since likely their questions 
can’t be heard over the yelling within their own caucus that we 
hear that’s going on these days, we’ll ask the question for them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is the NDP allowing their officials at ISC to travel the 
world selling a system that isn’t yet fully operational in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the ISC has, as the 
member knows, obtained contracts overseas for consultancy 
work based on land titles systems. The member will also know 
. . . he doesn’t know how to run a country music hall of fame, 
but he must know that in this industry people . . . in this 
industry, Mr. Speaker, people first get consulting contracts then 
they go on to get further contracts after that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this institution, ISC, will make money next year, 
Mr. Speaker. It will be in profit next year as budgeted. Mr. 
Speaker, this is the world leader in land titles systems. I know it 
hurts for the members to hear that but, Mr. Speaker, it’s true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
minister’s own colleague, own NDP colleague, the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone had some serious questions yesterday in 
Crown Corporations. 
 
Here’s what he said, he said, quote: 
 

. . . I don’t want to see an all-out sales pitch on this 
technology until we’ve got it fully operational in this 
province. 

 
He said, here’s what he said, Mr. Speaker, this is the member 
for Saskatoon Greystone: 
 

I just can’t imagine ISC finalizing a sale until it’s got a 
fully operational system in this province with, you know, 
with all of the conversions completed in the eight centres 
and with the objectives that we set with the technology here 
in Saskatchewan . . . 

 
That’s what their own members are saying. 
 
So the question to the minister is this: if that’s what his own 
members are saying and if that’s his position, will he put a stop 
to ISC’s world globe-trotting to try to sell a system that isn’t 
working yet in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the system is 
working, as the member knows. The system has been tested 
first in Moose Jaw, and then to Regina, now over almost all the 
rest of the province. Very shortly the whole province will be 
covered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will know that what was learned in 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

Moose Jaw was implemented in Regina and throughout the rest 
of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the system works. The member knows the system 
works. Mr. Speaker, the member knows that the IT industry is 
partnering with ISC in this work, Mr. Speaker. And I guess it’s 
just another one of those successes that the members opposite 
just simply can’t stand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is it, Mr. Speaker, in their genes that says to them if it’s 
built here in Saskatchewan, it doesn’t work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister keeps saying that it works. The testimony the 
committee received yesterday clearly contradicts the minister, 
and his own member contradicts the minister. Here’s what the 
member for Greystone went on to say. This was in the context 
of the member’s position . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — The member’s remarks were made in the context 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s comments were made 
in the context of his concern that we would be selling 
something before it’s operational. Here’s what he said: 
 

And obviously (the member said) we want to see a higher 
percentage of successful transaction completions than 
(we’re currently achieving) . . . 

 
Well that doesn’t sound like the system is working. 
 
So the question to the minister is this: does he agree with his 
member that the system is not yet working as it should be, or is 
it his position that everything’s fine and they should continue to 
spend money travelling the globe, selling a system that frankly 
has far too many bugs in it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would just ask . . . take a 
minute here to ask members to please refrain from overdoing it. 
I’m just seeing a little too much gratuitous and repetitive 
heckling which ends up to be noise, and it’s very difficult for 
the question to be put and the response to be given. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe I 
could give the member opposite a few facts about how the 
system is working. I don’t suppose he’ll like these either. 
 
But there are, Mr. Speaker, eight servers have performed 22.5 
million computer transactions since August 2001, Mr. Speaker 
— 22.5 million — at a success rate, Mr. Speaker, of 99.82 per 
cent. I’m sure we could do better, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
we’re not doing too badly there. 
 
More than 275,000 paper titles converted to electronic form; 

more than 30,000 title transfers; more than 27,000 interests and 
mortgages, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a system that has been working. 
And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member doesn’t want to take my 
word for it, but how about the director of New Brunswick’s 
land title system: there’s nothing on the market with ISC’s 
LAND product capabilities. How about, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Paul 
Martin, Mr. Speaker, who I’m sure they listen to: the system 
seems to be working pretty well, Mr. Speaker. Or David Chow, 
they know about David Chow, Mr. Speaker, a prominent Moose 
Jaw lawyer, he says: we’re quite pleased with the system now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s the situation. 
The NDP promised an automated land title system for between 
20 and 30 million. The bill is already up to over 60 million 
taxpayers’ dollars. The project’s way behind and it is filled . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members, I will have to 
interrupt you more on an more often basis. Simply finding it 
impossible to hear the questions and to hear the responses. And 
I just ask you once again to use your good judgment and to keep 
the quips down to wits . . . witty quips but not to go into a 
system which involves . . . to be noise. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, they promised a 20 to $30 million 
automated LAND titles project. The bill is already over $60 
million, Mr. Speaker. They justify the massive expenditure 
though — the NDP do — by saying, well don’t worry we’re 
going to sell this technology all over the world, Mr. Speaker; 
that’s what they said. 
 
And they launch an all-out international sales blitz to achieve 
that. Mr. Speaker, last year they spent over $200,000 on this 
international sales blitz. The problem of course, Mr. Speaker, is 
that they didn’t make any sales. 
 
So then the president of ISC, Mr. Nicholson, comes back and 
tells members of the committee that well, actually it was never 
really part of their plan to make any sales. That’s what he 
intimated yesterday at the Crown Corps Committee. They never 
actually predicated their plan on making sales. 
 
So the question is this to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Has ISC 
given up on selling its product outside Saskatchewan? Are 
international sales of their technology still a linchpin part of 
their plan for automated land titles in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know 
that the mandate of the corporation is broader than the one he 
indicated and it was broadened prior to it being instituted in 
January of 2001. 
 
And the member will know too that the work being conducted 
by ISC, both here and elsewhere, and bringing people from 
elsewhere to Saskatchewan is all part of that mandate and, Mr. 
Speaker, none of it is outside that mandate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say too that the member will know, I’m 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

 

sure, that the market in the United States is a viable, strong 
market for ISC. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the member might look to 
the Alberta system which is practically falling apart, Mr. 
Speaker. So there are opportunities across this province . . . 
across this country, Mr. Speaker, south of the border, and other 
countries. 
 
But I want to ask the member once again: what is it that stops 
him from admitting that Saskatchewan is the most 
technologically advanced, technologically sophisticated, 
jurisdiction in the world, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, so 
far the minister has contradicted his own colleague, the member 
for Saskatoon Greystone, and by his last answer now he’s 
contradicting the word and the information provided by the 
president of his Crown in the Leader-Post where he said . . . 
where the Leader-Post reported: 
 

. . . Nicholson continued the effort Tuesday, telling 
committee members it wasn’t correct to say the LAND 
project was “originally positioned on system sales”. 
 
“The original business case presented to CIC did not 
contain a single system sale,” . . . 
 

So who’s right, Mr. Speaker, the member for Greystone, the 
minister, the president of ISC? We don’t know for sure, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the ISC president also told the Crown 
Corporations Committee that it would be revealing a secret if he 
had to divulge whether or not ISC even has a sales target, Mr. 
Speaker — not what the target is, not who the target is, but 
whether or not they even have a sales target. He said that was a 
secret. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree with that? Does the 
minister agree that it’s a secret to be kept from the taxpayers 
that this runaway wreck of a Crown has even a target for sales 
to return some of the taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what is not a 
secret. It’s not a secret that Microsoft says that our LAND title 
system is the industry leader in land information systems, Mr. 
Speaker. And maybe what the member could do is start 
spreading that word rather than the word he wishes to search 
. . . 
 
(14:15) 
 

Drought Relief Program for Livestock Producers 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the recent rains that we’ve just 
had in our province will hopefully help the crops in the southern 
part of our province. But it’s probably not enough moisture to 
address the feed and water shortage for the cattle industry. 
 
And two weeks ago the Saskatchewan Party called for new 

money for well digging and dugout digging, and water pipeline 
equipment. But the Minister of Agriculture said, Mr. Speaker, 
he said that it was a dumb idea. And now he seems to have 
changed his mind a little bit. And the minister now says the 
province, you know it will be willing to put in provincial money 
into a federal-provincial water program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister spoken with Lyle Vanclief about 
a new drought relief program and are they working out on 
developing a new program for our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully to the 
Leader of the Opposition when all of the Canadian . . . the 
Western Canadian premiers were in Saskatoon just recently. 
And the Leader of the Opposition stood in front of an assembly 
of people and said, you know what, in Saskatchewan today we 
invest 5.5 per cent of our budget in agriculture, is what he said. 
 
And then he went on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian 
government doesn’t invest only 1 per cent in agriculture in 
Canada. And he pled, Mr. Speaker, he pled with the leaders 
from Ottawa, the three federal leaders from Ottawa, and said 
you need to put money into Saskatchewan, is what he said. 
 
And then a day later, the member opposite stands up in the 
House — from Watrous — and says you know what, 
Saskatchewan taxpayers and farmers should be paying 100 per 
cent for their own difficulties that they’re having in 
Saskatchewan today, contradicting the Leader of the Opposition 
within 24 hours of when he made the statement, Mr. Speaker — 
within 24 hours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when is our 
minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely astounding, and 
it is no wonder that it takes this NDP government so long to 
recognize a problem when they don’t even know the difference 
between trade distortion and water infrastructure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Cattle producers have been talking about 
water and feed shortage since last fall and yet as recently as just 
two weeks ago that minister was saying that there’s plenty of 
hay around, don’t worry about it. And he said helping cattle 
producers with well digging was a dumb idea. 
 
And now after cattle producers are already in a crisis situation 
— they’re selling off their herds — the NDP finally realize that 
it’s time to start talking to Ottawa. Well, hello. And, Mr. 
Speaker, why did it take so long for the NDP to realize that 
there’s a problem in this province? 
 
And how much longer is it going to take to get a program in 
place so that the cattle producers can actually start digging 
wells and dugouts? 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member opposite would know or 
should know, as the Leader of the Opposition should know, that 
in Saskatchewan last year when we had a drought that was less 
severe than it is this year — but severe — we went to Ottawa, 
Mr. Speaker, and we got additional money for two fronts. 
 
We got money, Mr. Speaker, last year for $200 million for 
Saskatchewan producers in this province. And then we went to 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. And I would ask the member for Humboldt to try to 
restrain some of the hollering. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Last year we went to Ottawa and we found 
200 million more dollars that we brought back to Canadian and 
Saskatchewan producers in our province right here — 
Ottawa/Saskatchewan money. And then we went to Ottawa and 
said we need an additional $1.5 million for water for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We said we needed five. They gave us 1.1 and we ponied up, 
unprecedented fashion, another 1.5 for Saskatchewan, giving 
Saskatchewan producers money for water from Ottawa, 
matched. This year, Mr. Speaker, the member from Watrous 
comes up and stands up in this House and says we should get 
100 per cent water money from Saskatchewan people. 
 
And to that, Mr. Speaker, I say where Saskatchewan people are 
asked to pay for all of the services in Saskatchewan which are 
Ottawa’s, that’s what the media is saying is dumb, dumb, dumb, 
Mr. Speaker, is the member opposite saying that it should be 
paid for by Saskatchewan people. 
 
That’s the dumb part, Mr. Speaker, to get money for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s getting more 
and more difficult to take this NDP government seriously when 
they can’t even get their own story straight. 
 
Yesterday when the minister was out in the rotunda telling the 
media that he was willing to put provincial money into a water 
program, his own NDP member from Coronation Park was in 
the House saying that there would be no provincial money for 
well digging in this province. It’s no wonder that no one takes 
the NDP seriously in this province. In fact, the member from 
Coronation Park said he doesn’t even listen to the Minister of 
Agriculture and the minister’s comments have no relevance to 
him. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan producers know the 
minister is irrelevant, but it’s interesting to hear that his own 
colleagues are saying the same thing about him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cattle producers need help now. How soon can we 
expect to see a federal/provincial program to address the water 
shortage? How much longer is this minister going to just talk to 
Ottawa before we see any action in this province? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — But first I ask for some order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this province, on this side 
of the House, when we needed money for farmers, we provided 
additional money for farmers for emergency aid. Mr. Speaker, 
on this side of the House, we provided money for emergency 
aid. When we needed additional money for water 
unprecedented — which was a national responsibility — the 
Saskatchewan government came forward and put additional 
money in. This year, Mr. Speaker, where the federal 
government has still not ponied up any money, we said that 
we’ll put some money in to assist because it’s a difficult time, 
Mr. Speaker. We said we’d put that in. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have an agricultural industry that requires 
a lot more. We have an agricultural industry that needs to build 
an ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And on that 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, everyday they criticize the 
building of an ethanol and the livestock industry, in this House, 
connected. 
 
And today, when we have a second reading of a Bill that will 
build the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, not one member of 
the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and would help us build an ethanol industry. 
No, they object to the ethanol industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And who is it over there who is going to participate, Mr. 
Speaker, in building an ethanol industry in Saskatchewan with 
us? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. Order, 
please. Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order. Order, please. Order. No, order. Order, please. 
Order, please. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all 
apologize for trying to make a lengthy introduction and to also 
thank the Assembly for leave. And I’ll just continue where we 
started off, Mr. Speaker. I would point out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to make a personal 
statement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1827 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Introduction of Vance Petriew 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very, first 
of all, very appreciative of the fact that we had co-operation to 
make this statement, so I’ll start, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m very happy and very honoured to introduce to you and to 
the members of the Assembly Mr. Vance Petriew, who is seated 
in your gallery, accompanied by his wife Jennifer, and his 
daughter Emily. I’d ask Vance to stand up. 
 
Vance Petriew was born and raised in Saskatchewan on a farm 
northwest of Saskatoon. He has a degree in physics from the 
University of Saskatchewan and a diploma in computer 
engineering technology from the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Arts and Sciences. Vance lives here in the city, Mr. 
Speaker, and works as a computer consultant. 
 
He is also a dedicated amateur astronomer. Vance discovered 
astronomy as a young boy and his parents bought him his first 
telescope when he was 12. His interest in astronomy led him to 
acquire an impressive 20-inch reflecting telescope. And last 
August, Mr. Speaker, Vance took his telescope to Cypress Hills 
Interprovincial Park to join other amateur astronomers, 
including Richard Huziak who assisted Vance with this 
discovery, for an outing called the Saskatchewan Summer Star 
Party. 
 
Our wonderful Cypress Hills Park is an ideal place for 
stargazing, Mr. Speaker. It is far from urban light pollution, has 
crystal clear air, and is the highest spot between Labrador and 
the Rocky Mountains. 
 
Vance was guiding his telescope towards the famous Crab 
Nebula when he noticed a curious smudge of light in his 
eyepiece. At first he thought it might be a distant galaxy, but he 
soon realized he had discovered a new comet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Discovering a new comet has always been a great triumph for 
astronomers. Comets are named for their discoverers and 
finding one brings instant fame. Hale-Bopp, Hayakutake, and 
Shoemaker-Levy are just a few of the names we know because 
of comets. Lately though, most comets have been found by 
robots, computer-controlled telescopes that relentlessly scan the 
sky looking for near-earth asteroids and comets. So when an 
amateur astronomer finds a new comet it is a remarkable and 
noteworthy event. 
 
I am proud to point out a small irony here in that Vance has 
clearly demonstrated that we humans are not yet ready to be 
replaced by computer technology; the same technology that 
provides financial resources for Vance’s astronomical activities. 
 
I am sure, Mr. Speaker, when the Comet Petriew returns to the 
neighbourhood of the earth in about four years from now, 
Vance and many other amateur astronomers will be watching 
for it, and that amateur astronomers will continue to have a role 
in furthering our understanding of the cosmos. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud — the government 
is very proud of Vance. And on that note I’d like to announce 

that on August 10 in conjunction with this year’s Saskatchewan 
Summer Star Party, Saskatchewan Environment will be hosting 
a small celebration and installing a plaque to commemorate the 
discovery of Comet Petriew and to recognize Vance Petriew as 
the first person in Saskatchewan and only the eighth Canadian 
to discover a comet. 
 
Vance, to your entire family, to your community, we’re very 
proud of you. Good luck and keep up the great work. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
on his feet . . . (inaudible) . . . The member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle has asked leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and members. During the introduction of guests by the Minister 
of Industry and Resources there was one member from 
Shaunavon that was not on his list who I would like to 
introduce to the House — Gary Wicentowich who is the general 
manager for Great Western Railway Ltd., one of our short-line 
railroads in the province. He has been very active in their 
ethanol development committee and is also seated in your 
gallery. And I would like him to be welcomed as a part of the 
gathering here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 258 converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re extremely 
pleased today to stand on behalf of the government and table a 
written response to question 259. 
 
The Speaker: — A response for 259 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll convert for debates 
returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 260 converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I’m pleased today to . . . I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government and table a written 
response to 261. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 261 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Ethanol Fuel Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I am very pleased to rise today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 1, The Ethanol Fuel Act. This new 
legislation supports my government’s plans to create the 
necessary climate for the private sector to lead the way in 
developing a vibrant ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of this legislation Saskatchewan will 
become the first jurisdiction in Canada to establish the legal 
framework to allow for mandating the use of ethanol-blended 
gasoline. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, during the past year a 
great deal of good work has been done to help understand the 
opportunities for ethanol development in Saskatchewan. And I 
want to thank my cabinet colleagues, the MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) for Regina South and for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, for the work that they did on this file. 
 
As members of the Assembly know, Saskatchewan is well 
positioned to be the home of Canada’s ethanol industry. We 
have an abundance of the kinds of raw materials needed for 
ethanol production; we have reasonably priced land; and, Mr. 
Speaker, we have an extensive transportation infrastructure, rail 
and road, that is needed to move ethanol to market. We have 
access to relatively inexpensive electrical power and an 
extensive water supply. And we have, Mr. Speaker, a 
government that is committed to support the growth of ethanol 
and the development of the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, to our 
natural advantages there are several reasons why now is the 
time for us to capitalize on these opportunities. 
 
For instance, improved technology has helped us to reduce the 
cost of producing ethanol. As well, there is a need for additional 
ethanol in order to help the United States meet its commitments 
to reduce smog in its major cities and improve their air quality. 
And potential international agreements to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions such as Kyoto, along with the public’s 
heightened environmental awareness, has made cleaner-burning 
gasoline a very attractive option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact, Canada and American governments have 
both stated their desire to increase renewable fuel content in 
gasoline to reduce their dependence on foreign sources of oil. 
 
There are also economic reasons why now is the time to pursue 
ethanol. Many people believe that ethanol production can boost 
the economy of rural Saskatchewan by opening doors to 
farmers to diversify and to add value to their operations. And 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy identified the expansion of the ethanol industry as a 
prime opportunity. 
 

Because ethanol production creates many useful co-products 
which can be used as a protein or an energy component of 
livestock feed, we believe the growth of the ethanol industry 
can assist in the development of a livestock industry, creating 
even more jobs for rural Saskatchewan. Our province is ideally 
suited for the feedlot industry to expand alongside a growing 
ethanol industry. So, Mr. Speaker, quite clearly, there are a lot 
of solid reasons why this industry is poised for growth. 
 
And our Greenprint for Ethanol Production outlines the main 
reasons where government has a role to play in supporting the 
industry’s growth. Mr. Speaker, as part of our strategy, we’re 
introducing legislation that will provide a legal framework for 
us to establish a mandate to sell ethanol-blended gasoline in 
Saskatchewan. This legislation will provide the regulations and 
provisions to allow us to create the right climate for the private 
sector to develop a vibrant ethanol industry here in our 
province. 
 
When it is proclaimed, The Ethanol Fuel Act will require every 
distributor to sell ethanol-blended gasoline in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, while it is important to introduce this legislation 
now in order to demonstrate the government’s commitment to 
supporting the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, the existing 
industry does not currently have the capacity to supply enough 
ethanol to meet our consumption needs. Therefore, we will need 
to allow the industry to develop at its own pace, based on 
careful planning, solid business plans, and direct private sector 
investment before we enact this legislation. 
 
Once the industry has had a chance to develop enough to 
support our domestic market needs, then cabinet will be asking 
for its approval to proceed with the mandating. We will then 
proclaim the Act to allow for mandating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this legislation will make distribution of 
ethanol-blended fuel mandatory, there may still be a need to 
have fuel for sale that is not blended with ethanol. Straight fuel 
will have to be made available for specific purposes. Therefore, 
in order to deal with these issues, this legislation contains 
provisions to allow us the flexibility needed to accommodate 
these circumstances. 
 
Over the coming months, we will be consulting with vehicle 
manufacturers, retailers, consumers and others to determine 
what exemptions are needed. And we will look to other 
jurisdictions, like Minnesota, where the use of ethanol-blended 
gasoline is also mandated to see how they have handled specific 
concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members of the Assembly know, ethanol is an 
environmentally responsible energy source that will reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. With this legislation the province is 
taking a leading role in reducing environmental contaminants 
for Saskatchewan and Canada by promoting the use of ethanol. 
 
Ethanol has a great potential for improving the environment 
while achieving a more diversified economy in rural 
Saskatchewan. And this legislation is just one component of our 
strategy to nurture and grow the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Detailed information on all of the components of the 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

 

government’s plan can be found in our Greenprint for Ethanol 
Production document which I am pleased to say is now 
available through my department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that all members of the House will 
work together to ensure a speedy passage of this legislation to 
support and to grow the ethanol industry in our province. 
 
And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by thanking the people of 
Saskatchewan who have moved this issue forward, who have 
brought to the attention of this government the need to diversify 
and build our rural economy, working together in a spirit of 
co-operation, who have joined with other communities to put 
together and put forth plans for us to build a stronger rural 
Saskatchewan, a stronger agricultural economy. And it is in that 
spirit, Mr. Speaker, that I move and I now present The Ethanol 
Fuel Act, second reading. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
although there may be a lot of shouting across the floor, I don’t 
think there can be any question that both sides of the House 
believe that the ethanol industry is extremely important for our 
province. We may differ on the strategy of that. We may differ 
on what policies we feel is important to see the industry expand. 
But ultimately, we do agree that it’s extremely important to see 
the ethanol industry developed and expanded in our province. 
 
And there’s a number of reasons and the minister just 
mentioned a lot of them. There’s, you know, environmental 
advantages to the use of ethanol in our fuel. There is a job 
creation advantage in the construction of plants. When the 
plants are operational, there will be jobs created. And there will 
be service industry that will be dependent and grow from those 
ethanol plants through trucking, through suppliers, and other 
service industries. 
 
And it’ll be an advantage to our agricultural sector by the local 
use of products, by adding value to our grains, and spinoff 
industries for those plants that may also be in conjunction with 
the feedlot. 
 
So it will be good for the economy of the province as a whole. 
But the difference I find, one of the major differences that we 
have from this side of the House to that side of the House 
perhaps is policy and strategy, but it also . . . we have a huge 
difference in the sense of urgency. 
 
This side of the House has been looking at ethanol also for 
some time and I know there’s been a lot of chanting going on 
today where they’ve suggested that we’ve held up the Bill or 
there’s been a problem with the Bill on this side of the House. 
Well the Bill was introduced, Mr. Speaker, on March 21 and 
this is only . . . that was the first reading of the Bill and it has 
not come to the floor of this Assembly since then. 
 
And I can name other Bills, such as example, there was a Bill 
introduced on March 22, that’s Bill No. 2, and it’s already 
passed. There was a Bill written on . . . or introduced on March 
19 — that was before this Bill — Bill No. 5, and it’s already 
been passed through all the readings. 
 

So it’s a little disappointing when they sit there yelling at us 
that perhaps we held up the Bill, perhaps we had a problem with 
the Bill. They never brought the Bill to the floor of the House 
and that is their option to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So with that we do feel it’s important and it 
is not a usual practice in the House for a Bill to be introduced 
for second reading and then be sent to Committee of the Whole 
on the same day, but that is what will happen in this Assembly 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So basically the one question I have initially 
is, what took the government so long? They announced, and 
they’ve re-announced, and they have announced again, 
initiatives for the ethanol industry in this province. 
 
And this industry is not new globally, and it’s certainly not new 
in our province because . . . And the members opposite have 
heard me speak a number of times on Pound-Maker 
Agventures, which is over 10 years old in our province. 
 
And it was built by a group of investors, yes, with partnership 
in some larger private companies. And these investors had a 
vision for the future. They had a vision that the future needs of 
environmentally friendly fuels was going to be important. And 
they had this vision before there was the downturn in 
agriculture that we’re seeing today, and they had this vision 
before the value added became a common buzzword throughout 
our province. 
 
And it took their vision, it took their leadership, and it took their 
wisdom to recognize the potential market. And it took — those 
private investors, Mr. Speaker — it took their willingness to 
take a risk. 
 
And since that time the ethanol plant has done extremely well in 
my community and the feedlot has expanded from that. And 
they are leaders in that community that I am proud to say that I 
am the member representing. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And now within Canada, within actually the global situation, 
there’s an appetite for renewable, environmentally friendly fuel 
that’s accelerating at a rapid pace. And there isn’t a wheel to 
reinvent here. 
 
Globally there are more and more jurisdictions putting into 
place policies and initiatives to increase the production and the 
use of renewable, environmentally friendly fuel. There are lots 
of jurisdictions in which to study and look at and I myself have 
done some travelling doing exactly that. So what has this 
government been waiting for? 
 
Most of us, I’m sure in this room, I have no doubt have heard of 
the success of the Minnesota model. They saw a potential for 
the future. They had a vision. They saw their state as a leader. 
They felt that they could lead their country in production and 
they were willing to take a risk. Even if it could prove to be a 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

mistake they had the intestinal fortitude to do it as a stand-alone 
state. 
 
And it’s interesting that the minister who spoke just before me 
said that, you know, he’s quite proud that we’re doing this as a 
stand-alone province. And yet I remember being at function 
after function . . . One in particular was an ethanol conference 
that was held in Saskatoon. It was hosted by Agrivision and I 
was there along with the member from Regina South, who was 
the minister at the time, who said there was no way we should 
do this as a stand-alone province. He argued that point. He 
really thought that my idea of it being a stand-alone province 
was just wrong, that we couldn’t do that. 
 
And you know, Minnesota did it for a number of reasons. They 
did it for environmental reasons. They did it for economic 
reasons. And they did it to assist their agricultural sector 
because most of their plants, the majority of their plants, are 
producer owned. And they put forward specific and 
well-thought-out policies and regulations and incentives, and 
they turned their vision into a reality, and the rest has been 
history for that state. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party has had a similar vision for our 
great province. And it will take certain policies and regulations 
and incentives to make it happen here. 
 
But . . . And in fact the Saskatchewan Party had a news release, 
dated September 19, 2001, quite considerably before the 
government made their own announcement. 
 
And that news release said: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government would promote the 
expansion of the ethanol industry by introducing an 
environmental tax credit for ethanol blended gasoline and 
requiring all gasoline sold in the province to be 10 per cent 
ethanol blend. 
 
(The) Saskatchewan Party leader Elwin Hermanson made 
the announcement this morning during a breakfast meeting 
with the Regina Chamber of Commerce. 
 
“Saskatchewan has the opportunity to lead the way in the 
production and consumption of environmentally friendly 
ethanol,” Hermanson said. “Ethanol production has the 
potential to create new jobs, diversify the struggling 
agriculture industry and contribute to a cleaner 
environment but we must act now.” 

 
And at that luncheon, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party: 
 

. . . committed to cut the corporate tax in half for all new 
capital investment in the province. 
 
“Lower (the) taxes on capital investment will stimulate 
expansion of (the) ethanol production right here in 
Saskatchewan using Saskatchewan grown wheat, feed 
grains and straw.” 
 
Hermanson warned that Saskatchewan doesn’t need 
another crown corporation taking an ownership position in 
the financing, construction or operation of (the) new 

ethanol facilities. 
 
He said that: 
 

1. Ethanol is (a friendly) an environmentally friendly 
substitute or additive for gasoline so burning more ethanol 
as fuel means cleaner air and cleaner environment for 
Saskatchewan families; 

 
2. Ethanol production would create a new market for 
Saskatchewan grown wheat, feed grain and straw; 
 
3. The construction and operation of ethanol production 
facilities would create hundreds of new jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 

 
And there’s more in that announcement and it was . . . I’ll just 
give the members opposite the date again, September 19, 2001, 
because they often say, what’s your plan? This is it; this was 
our plan. This was our plan last year and it still is what we will 
say this year. It hasn’t changed. 
 
So of course we agree with the introduction of the NDP’s 
ethanol Bill. I would suggest it needs to be . . . to even go a 
little farther, because there isn’t a lot of substance in that Bill as 
it exists. It doesn’t commit to anything. Everything is in 
regulations. Nothing is in the actual Bill itself where it can be 
debated on the floor of the legislature. 
 
It needs to be a little bolder and a little more direct and 
forthright, because we’re competing with other jurisdictions for 
the investors that we need. 
 
We need to look at the exemption of the excise tax and I know 
the government has said that they will do this. We need to look 
no further than here in our province to see why that is 
important. When Pound-Maker first established, the road tax 
was exempt and the sales of ethanol-blended fuel rose to 3 
million litres in our province. And that was at the time when 
there wasn’t the environmental concerns or knowledge, quite 
frankly, on the benefits of using ethanol-blended fuel. 
 
But in 1995 this NDP government, who say they’re such leaders 
in the ethanol industry, terminated that tax rebate and they 
created an unlevel playing field, Mr. Speaker, with our own 
neighbouring provinces. And the sales that were at 3 million 
litres in our province plummeted to 500,000 litres. That’s the 
vision for ethanol that this government has demonstrated in the 
past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there is no doubt that now they’re talking about again 
exempting that road tax. We absolutely support that initiative 
— 100 per cent support it. They announced it in their 2000 
budget speech. They didn’t implement it but they did announce 
it two years ago. We absolutely supported it then and we 
absolutely support it now. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party also supports a legislated, mandatory 
level of ethanol in all gasoline sold in our province. And we 
understand fully that it needs to be phased in as the production 
allows within our province. And we realize that there may be 
some resistance from oil companies. But we realize the oil 
companies also are understanding that there is an importance. 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

 

And in actuality, I have no doubt that some oil companies will 
probably consider — maybe not here; maybe the opportunity 
won’t be here — but oil companies have in the past and I’m 
sure oil companies will in the future consider partnering with 
other investors in building ethanol plants. 
 
Once all the fuel sold in our province is 10 per cent 
ethanol-blended fuel, locally producing and consuming 160 
million litres in our province — and those local sales will mean 
445,000 metric tonnes of our feed grain will be consumed right 
here in our province. 
 
And it won’t stop there. Because I think more and more 
jurisdictions are looking at requiring the use of a renewable, 
environmentally friendly fuel. So the export potential is 
enormous because we have the feedstock here in our province 
and we have what it takes to make this industry work. We have 
what it takes right here within our province to make the industry 
grow. 
 
We could, and I believe we will, become a leader. But we need 
to ensure that the industry grows and expands here and not in 
Manitoba and Alberta and BC (British Columbia). We need to 
do what it takes to attract capital investment. And the 
suggestion the Saskatchewan Party has given is to cut the 
corporate tax in half. The advice that the Saskatchewan Party 
has given is, don’t be competitive; don’t make the investment 
dollars be competitive with the Crown corporation. That is a 
deterrent to attracting capital dollars to our province. It has 
proven to be a deterrent in the past and it’ll be proven to be a 
deterrent in the future. So it’s going to be extremely critical. 
 
Manitoba is also putting forward initiatives to develop the 
ethanol industry in their province. So this is a critical time for 
our province to make decisions because private sector investors 
are going to be looking at both provinces. And they’re going to 
be looking at where they want to spend their money. And quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see those dollars come 
here. I would like to see us put policies into place that will 
encourage those dollars to come here to Saskatchewan. 
 
The Minnesota success story didn’t just happen. The Minnesota 
success story took smart decisions, Mr. Speaker. And they went 
from 2 to 14 plants in a very short period of time. And none of 
those plants, Mr. Speaker, are state owned. Most of those plants 
are farmer owned. So it’s the producers that are taking . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I ask the 
member from Sask Rivers to come to order, please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s very, 
very important that we involve as many producers as what’s 
entirely possible. When you talk value added, Mr. Speaker, and 
you’re taking a low priced commodity, it is only to the 
advantage of the farm gate if you add value to it. If you sell it 
for the same price that you could sell it anywhere else and 
someone else adds value to it, you have not realized an 
advantage at the farm gate. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
extremely important for this province. We need the farm gate to 
have an advantage at the . . . for the expansion of this industry. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know the ethanol industry is going 
to expand. And I know it’s extremely important. But I think that 

we need to be very, very careful and we need to put policies that 
will encourage and not discourage outside investment; and we 
need to allow the private sector to be as involved as they 
possibly can. And we need to involve the producers of this 
province. We need producer involvement in order to add value 
at the farm gate. And that’s extremely important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s do what it takes. And today, as I said before, the 
Saskatchewan Party will speak to this Bill, but we will see it go 
to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
the second reading debate on Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker, and in so 
doing there are several members on our side of the House that 
wish to speak to this Bill. 
 
They will complete their second reading remarks though, today, 
so we can, in what is a very rare thing for this House, so we can 
move it quickly to the Committee of the Whole for deliberation 
there. 
 
And before I get into the body of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s also important that we recognize again that if there is 
any hope for this industry to grow in the province of 
Saskatchewan, for this industry to contribute to some economic 
renewal in this province, that we need to know . . . we need to 
understand that it is the people at the grassroots level, the 
people in community development, the people at the 
community level that have come together and identified ethanol 
as a way to help keep their areas viable. 
 
That’s who deserves the credit for any industry that we are able 
to develop in this province and the Saskatchewan Party 
certainly understands that. 
 
You know though, through the remarks of my colleague, the 
member for Watrous, several of those members were chirping 
from their seats, Mr. Speaker, about, well, why don’t you vote 
the Bill off today, why don’t we get the whole Bill done today? 
What’s the holdup? 
 
And that’s hard to believe, Mr. Speaker, because this 
government introduced this Bill two and a half months ago — 
that’s when they gave it first reading. For two and a half months 
they have sat on their hands. For two and a half months they 
have refused to bring this Bill into the legislature for whatever 
reason. 
 
And now in some sort of an attempt for perhaps some political 
grandstanding or to score a few points, what they did, Mr. 
Speaker, is they brought it in today. They brought it in today 
maybe hoping that we would hold it up so they could be able to 
score some cheap political points. 
 
But they should have known, Mr. Speaker, that our party has 
been on the record in terms of what this Bill intends to do at 
least what it is intended to do. We have been on the record in 
support of those changes, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll remain on the 
record in terms of this particular Bill in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the concerns though that we have 
with the Bill, we’re going to deal with them in Committee of 
the Whole. We’re going to get it to committee. Because you 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

know, if you take a look at the body of the Bill there’s nothing 
in it. There’s nothing in it in terms of achieving the specifics 
that the former minister of ethanol said we needed to achieve 
. . . well it’s the truth. 
 
(15:00) 
 
He doesn’t agree with me but I’d ask him to point out 
specifically how it mandates ethanol and gasoline, other than 
providing the framework and giving all that authority to 
cabinet. Mr. Speaker, that is what the Bill does. There are no 
specifics in this Bill. 
 
And let no one be confused by the fact that there are no 
specifics in the Bill. What the government of the day is doing, 
Mr. Speaker, is saying trust us. That’s what that minister is 
saying — trust us as a cabinet, trust us to pass the right 
regulations, and we’ll achieve these sorts of things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well that is an amazing argument. It comes from the same man 
who said we’ll have to put 100 million taxpayers’ dollars into 
this industry directly because all of the companies that may 
want to come into the province need a guarantee from the 
province, from Saskatchewan, from the cabinet, will need a 
guarantee that the rules aren’t going to change. 
 
Well how about for a start, Mr. Speaker, putting the rules in the 
Bill? How about that to send the right signal to the industry, to 
any company whether they’re US(United States)-based or 
otherwise? Put it in the Bill. 
 
Maybe that’s why these companies are a little bit concerned 
about making an investment here, because they had a look at 
Bill No. 1. It’s been introduced two and a half months ago. 
Maybe they had a chance to look at it and realized that there’s 
nothing specific in it. 
 
So these are the questions that we want to ask at the Committee 
of the Whole level. We want to make sure it’s the right piece of 
legislation. It’s also why we’re prepared to move it very quickly 
today to that level, so we can get the job done. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it should be lost on anyone that 
this government, this government, introduced this Bill two and 
a half months ago — two and a half months ago. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they bring the Bill in today, they vote it off today — 
how absolutely absurd and how ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, on the 
part of that minister. 
 
Maybe it was some sort of political scheme that he had cooked 
up that he thought might play to his favour. Instead of worrying 
about the industry, Mr. Speaker, he wanted to practice a bit of 
politics. Instead of worrying about developing the ethanol 
industry he thought he’d slip a quick one past people, thinking 
for some reason we’d oppose a Bill which we’re on record as 
supporting. 
 
And so for two and a half months, Mr. Speaker, the Bill has 
remained in first reading, has not moved to the point that it 
needs to be today. So there are some specific questions that 
we’ll be wanting to ask about the Bill when it gets to 
Committee of the Whole. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when the ethanol policy for this 
government was first announced by the former minister who 
we’ve said time and time again had it right, he was pretty clear 
about the government’s intention with respect to this industry. 
He was very clear. He simply said that the government wasn’t 
going to be the leaders in terms of developing this industry with 
direct investment. In fact, he said quite the opposite. He said the 
private sector would lead the industry. 
 
And only when the media pursued him at the end of his news 
. . . or, from what I understand, at the end of his news 
conference, Mr. Speaker, did he say, well as a last resort — as a 
last resort — we might invest directly in the industry, but we 
want to give the private sector a chance. That’s what he said. 
 
He also went on to say that they weren’t going to get involved 
in dictating the scale of plants or the location of plants and they 
wouldn’t pick winners and losers. And those are his words, Mr. 
Speaker. And so we wanted to hold him to those words, and his 
successor to those words. 
 
And that’s what we have tried to do in this Assembly; 
understanding that there have been groups on the ground long 
before the minister ever stood in this place and gave first 
reading to this Bill. There were groups across this province, 
including the one in southwest Saskatchewan that I’m most 
familiar with, that have been working hard on this project long 
before he ever stood up and indicated what the government 
policy was. 
 
Well we know now because of the testimony in Crown 
Corporations Committee that, while the former minister was 
committing that the government wouldn’t be involved in this, 
Mr. Speaker, that minister, the current minister of ethanol, and 
maybe the current Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), was negotiating a deal with a 
company to get directly involved in the ethanol industry. 
 
And how is it wrong for any responsible opposition at any given 
time to stand up and call a government when they have so 
obviously, Mr. Speaker — so obviously — played a bit of a 
misdirection play on the people of Saskatchewan about what 
they say they will do and what they’re actually doing, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And there are more than just the former minister 
that are on record as saying the private sector must lead it. The 
current Minister for Government Relations and the member for 
Melville, a week ago, said the same thing. He said it’s our 
intention . . . we got to let the . . . give the private sector a 
chance. And I’m paraphrasing, but I don’t think I’m being too 
. . . I think I’m being fairly generous with what the member 
stated. That’s what the member for Melville said last week. 
That’s what we agree with today. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, last Friday even the Minister of 
Industry went outside in a scrum and portrayed, once and for 
all, that he completely understands the problem with economic 
development in the province. He understands that we are 
plagued by a history — and it’s a non-partisan thing because 
it’s a history that spans five decades and three different political 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

 

parties — but we’re plagued by a history of a government all 
too ready to intervene directly in the economy and send that 
signal to venture capitalists and community groups that they 
ought to first stop at the Government of Saskatchewan if they’re 
pursuing a project, or at least that should be at the top of their 
list. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I was in the practice of economic 
development for five years at the city of Swift Current. And I 
could tell you this, Mr. Speaker, I could tell you this. If a 
project like this came along for the city of Swift Current, if a 
project like this came along for the city of Swift Current and 
that group had gone to the government and the government had 
indicated a willingness to invest directly in that project, Mr. 
Speaker, we would pursue, we’d pursue it at the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
And that is the problem with the province of Saskatchewan. We 
do not blame any community group in this province that’s 
trying to grow its community and further its own development. 
We don’t blame them for exploring all of the avenues of 
venture capital they can. 
 
The problem is, Mr. Speaker, that in this province, in 
Saskatchewan, for five decades the first stop, or at least one of 
the first stops for venture capital, has been the taxpayers, Mr. 
Speaker. We don’t blame them for recognizing that reality, Mr. 
Speaker. Absolutely that’s what projects are going to do. That’s 
what they’re doing with respect to the ethanol industry. 
 
But you know the difference is this, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
vision and we have a plan for this province that one day, one 
day, Mr. Speaker, the very first stop for venture capital on the 
part of projects like this will not be the government, will not be 
the taxpayers, but will be private sector venture capital. That’s 
our vision and we can debate and argue that — and the minister 
is a very able debater — we can debate about whether or not 
that’s achievable or not. 
 
I think the minister agrees that it’s something we should try 
because he said that last Friday. He said the problem with the 
province is that the government intervenes in the economy too 
much. The difficulty with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it was pretty clear that the minister 
was saying the problem in Saskatchewan has been government 
intervention. Mr. Speaker, that’s what he said and he’s right and 
he’s right and he’s right. 
 
And so what we’re going to need in this province is a 
government that has the courage to step off the merry-go-round. 
To step off and say, you know what, we are going to put the 
environment in place. We are going to pass the necessary 
ethanol regulations, as we’re debating here today. We’re going 
to do the right thing with respect to capital tax. We’re going to 
look at some innovative ways we could possibly activate the 
giant pool of RSP (registered saving plan) capital in the 
province. 
 
We’re going to encourage outside venture capitalists to look at 
the province and we are going to try what we haven’t tried for 
five decades under three different governments — to grow this 
economy in the only way that it has been grown with any 
success and any sincerity in any other jurisdiction in the 

Western world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re the only place doing this. And how has it worked so far? 
How has it worked so far? Well it’s not, it’s not working so far, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s not working. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, does 
not blame any local group, any local group for accessing 
whatever venture capital they can to make dreams happen at the 
local level. We just fundamentally disagree, we fundamentally 
disagree that that venture capital, the equity, the risk capital 
should come from the taxpayers. 
 
And until we can make a change, what choice do communities 
have, Mr. Speaker? Until the Saskatchewan Party can 
fundamentally start to change how we do economic 
development in the province, how can communities . . . how 
can any community do anything but what it has to do to make 
projects a reality? And we wish it wasn’t that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a feeling that if we hadn’t gone down this road so 
many decades ago and under three different political parties — 
Liberal, Progressive Conservative, NDP — if we hadn’t gone 
down this road, we might not have chased away all the venture 
capital. Mr. Speaker, we might not have sent venture capitalists 
away from our province. 
 
Why would they come with the spectre of competing against 
the government in any number of industries? Why would they 
come? Of course they’re not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the minister, for the minister to portray our 
questionings of him on this file in any way other than a 
responsible opposition, asking questions of a government 
poised to spend $100 million taxpayers’ dollars, a government, 
Mr. Speaker, whose track record involves . . . most recent track 
record involves a $28 million loss in the potato industry, if it’s 
his position . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask all members to 
concentrate on the debate and to refrain from engaging with any 
visitors that are in the galleries. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . it’s his position that we shouldn’t ask those 
questions, if it’s his position that we shouldn’t lay out a 
competing vision for the province that says, look, we have to 
take those first few steps to developing a private sector venture 
capital pool or at least attracting the interests of venture 
capitalists from across the country, if it’s his position that we 
shouldn’t do that, then we’re going to sorely disappoint him 
because that is exactly what the Saskatchewan Party is going to 
do now and up to the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And we’re going to implement a plan for 
economic development in this province the likes of which we 
haven’t seen under three different governments, but the likes of 
which, that where it has been tried in earnest, has worked. 
 
It has worked for the people in those jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s attracted businesses that’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina South 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

amazingly is the one yipping from his seat. I can’t believe it, 
Mr. Speaker. This is the same member who only two months 
ago stood up and said, the government’s not going to lead the 
charge in this, the private sector is. All the while he knew, or if 
he didn’t know he should have known, that his officials were 
working on a deal for direct government investment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well let me just conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that where 
the government has been inconsistent, where the government 
has flip-flopped on its position in a matter of two months, 
we’ve been consistent. The Saskatchewan Party’s been 
consistent, and we’ll continue to be consistent, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll continue to speak to an economic plan for our province 
that can cultivate the kind of environment and atmosphere that 
attracts private venture capital, Mr. Speaker, that attracts private 
venture capital to grow these kinds of industries. We’re going to 
continue to speak to that. 
 
And we’re also going to, Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to 
indicate very clearly that this party doesn’t blame any 
community group, any local economic development group, or 
any group of interested investors from dealing with the situation 
they find themselves in. And the situation they find themselves 
in, unfortunately, in the province of Saskatchewan, is that the 
number one venture capitalist is the NDP government opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other members will want to have a few remarks 
today but I can’t emphasize enough that we do intend to move 
this Bill immediately to committee from this second reading 
debate that we’re having right now. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one or two 
comments that I would like to add, and it’s a very short few 
comments that I’d like to make regarding the ethanol plant. 
 
I want to assure the people that are here, the people that are 
watching today, the people in the gallery, that in fact the 
Saskatchewan Party is very much in favour of the ethanol 
development in this province. 
 
Ethanol is a very important part of the future of our province. 
It’s an opportunity that has come along in this province and 
maybe only comes along once in a while. But now, now is the 
right time. There’s spinoff opportunities for ethanol. We’ve 
talked about it. Both sides agree on the value of the 
opportunities, not only with ethanol but of certain . . . as I 
mentioned the grain spinoff, the cattle spinoff, the materials, the 
value-added that will result from this. And we certainly want to 
move it along. 
 
(15:15) 
 
This is one of the few times in the last few months, Mr. 
Speaker, that I’ve seen some optimism in the agriculture in this 
province. Here’s something that we can get a hold of, people 
can visualize it, and we have to make sure that it becomes 
realized. We want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that it’s done in 
the right way with the right fundamentals in place. 
 
My colleagues have talked at length about some of the 

problems that we see with the existing ethanol program that the 
government is putting forward. When I looked at the Bill 
recently, it is very short of detail. It shows very little direction 
as to what should be done, how it’s going to be done, and yet 
there still is the euphoria of the future. But it’s not a panacea for 
all the problems on the farm. And I think that’s an important 
statement that has to be made. We cannot look at ethanol as the 
item that’s going to fix all the problems. 
 
One of the things that is troubling to me, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that, other than the details that are left out of the legislation 
and I assume will be coming in regulation — which would be 
outside the control or purview of the legislation — I see that 
maybe we’re falling into the same trap that we have in other 
opportunities we have in this province. When there was an 
opportunity for irrigation and that moved into potatoes — 
everyone understands what has happened with potatoes — we 
ended up with a great deficit on our hands at the expense of the 
taxpayers of this province and also the private investor in those 
particular businesses. 
 
One of the things that we do in this province — and we’ve had 
a tradition of doing — is saying, we can grow wheat, we can 
grow crops. The world owes it to us to come and buy our 
products. We have to get away from this mentality of, we can 
do it, therefore we will grow it and they will come. That hasn’t 
worked in the past. 
 
Where I’m going, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that I haven’t seen 
any information that has come out about a strong business plan 
for marketing and the marketing of the product, marketing of 
the by-products of the ethanol. I’m sure that those studies have 
been made. If people are putting . . . are offering to put money 
on the line, I’m sure that they’re going to be giving it due 
consideration. 
 
But in this province where we see that the government is 
anxious to put their money in place, our money in place, 
taxpayers’ money in place, due diligence has to be done on the 
. . . on terms of marketing. How is this going to . . . How are we 
going to market not only the ethanol in this province from these 
very large, expensive plants, how is that going to affect the 
cattle population, the feeder cattle population? How is that 
going to affect the grain grown in particular areas? How is that 
going to divert from the normal agriculture practices in an area? 
Because a lot of those kind of things will make a huge impact in 
the different regions. 
 
I’m sure that will be done. But if we are putting taxpayers’ 
money upfront and at risk here, I think we owe it to the 
taxpayers that business plans outlining exactly what the 
consequences of that investment are and the consequences 
agriculturally of that, I think that becomes a very important 
issue. And I haven’t seen it and I don’t think that that has been 
forwarded to people in this province. 
 
When we look at the . . . We ran into that same, we ran into that 
same trap when we decided that we would in this province start 
supporting things like pasta production, semolina production. 
We grow it in this province. The whole theory is then that we 
should be having a plant in this province and people will come 
to us and take it off our hands. That is not a marketing strategy 
that fits into the 21st and into the future — 21st century and into 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

 

the future. 
 
We have to make sure that we . . . everybody that’s involved, 
including the producers and those people that are investing local 
money, understand exactly what those consequences are. Once 
that is determined, then I think we’re going to be able to see 
even more confidence — not just euphoria but confidence — 
that we can move ahead. It’s the confidence that triggers 
investment, and it’s investment into businesses exactly like this 
that we need. 
 
We cannot afford to get involved in signing up contracts with 
companies with exclusivity clauses. That is not the way to move 
in this province and we want to be very clear and be on record 
that that is not an acceptable way. That does not create 
confidence in this province by investors. 
 
If they understand that some plants will have government funds 
in it, other investors will not come and compete against that. It’s 
just not a level playing field. That has to be established, and 
established very clearly. 
 
Again the track record of government being in business is not a 
good track record. That kind of a signal is not the greatest for 
attracting investment. If we have a good project, we are going 
to get adequate investment. And there is investment available 
for these projects. 
 
Talking to some of my colleagues that have interest in their 
areas for ethanol plants, the investment doesn’t seem to be a 
problem. They have not gone to the government. They have not 
gone to CIC with their hand out asking for that kind of money 
and that kind of investment. I understand that several of these 
projects would be able to be carried on very well, thank you, 
without that kind of involvement. 
 
And the reason . . . That is exactly the reason that we shouldn’t 
have them involved in any of the projects. It should be private 
enterprise driven entirely and that is the position of our party, 
that is the position that the government started with and now 
has made 180 degree turn on that particular investment issue. 
 
There’s other issues that need to be addressed in terms of 
taxation. There’s things that we can agree on in terms of the 
taxation on the ethanol itself. But we also have to look at the 
taxation on the capital investment. That is certainly a penalty 
type of taxation. It’s not on productivity, just on investment, 
exactly the thing that we need. We need investment. We don’t 
need those penalties. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those thoughts, particularly emphasizing 
the fact that we need that outside investment, we need the 
confidence, we need the non-exclusivity needed for outside 
investment and confidence in that investment, we need to have 
a very clear marketing strategy and a strategy of consequences 
for the agricultural area surrounding these regions and for the 
private investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in fact do support the ethanol industry in this 
province and we encourage it to move ahead. We continue to 
think it’s an opportunity just waiting. If the fundamentals are 
correct, it will advance and it will advance quickly. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s with pleasure that I have an opportunity to speak 
briefly on this very important issue that’s before the House 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the northeast part of the province has always been 
identified as one of the very logical areas of the country where 
value-added grain projects should happen because really it 
doesn’t matter, from our part of the world if you transport grain 
to the East or West Coast, we have the highest freight rates, and 
so we have the greatest natural competitive advantage to have 
value-added projects happen in the agricultural sector in our 
neck of the woods. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, ethanol has certainly increasingly been a 
topic that has identified and caught the attention of people in 
our part of the world, in the communities that I represent, and 
also the combination of those communities through the Eden 
REDA there has been a great deal of interest and work done 
around the whole issue of the ethanol industry. 
 
I was pleased a year or so ago to attend meetings at Iogen, for 
example, were having. And it’s my understanding that they are 
moving forward in trying to identify all of the opportunities to 
use straw to build an ethanol industry that would be perhaps 
centred in the Birch Hills area. And so that is an exciting 
possibility for the whole northern part of the province and 
particular the northeast. 
 
And we think that that is an important initiative and we hope 
that the advanced technology that Iogen is experimenting with 
is going to bear fruit so something of this nature could happen. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this project that the 
government has proposed, and projects in our area that 
community people from our community centres have proposed, 
and they’ve proposed in, I think, in a fairly responsible way in 
that they said they’re not going to identify a particular 
community where this project should be attached to; they’re 
going to look at where the greatest, best benefit is going to be 
for the project and make the decision on a business case model. 
 
And I think that kind of an approach to things in a pragmatic, 
sensible way is to be commended and it allows local initiatives 
to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s of some confusement to me is why the 
government has to make something so obvious so difficult. 
Why they have to bring forward Bill No. 1, the very first Bill 
presented in this legislative session, and leave it sit on the order 
paper for 55 sitting days, and then suddenly get into a great 
confrontation about saying that it now has to go forward in a 
matter of two hours. 
 
Well I think that people can judge for themselves. If we we’re 
working on this in a common-sense, collaborative way it would 
been moving forward much sooner than this. And if the 
government could have got its story straight so that we could 
have some comfort, as an official opposition, about what 
message was coming from the government it would have been 
very helpful and I think we could have moved this forward. 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker we have heard that there’s going to be the potential 
of an exclusive arrangement with one single company. Then we 
hear the government say there’s no exclusivity. And that’s why 
it’s so difficult when we get those constant missed . . . mixed 
messages to really understand what’s going on. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for us to stand in this House 
and say, look it, if there’s no exclusivity, that’s an important 
concept. Let’s say that clearly once and for all on the record that 
there’s no exclusivity. 
 
Let’s say once and for all on the record that private investment 
is going to be encouraged and everything that’s possible be 
done for these projects to access private investment is going to 
happen. Let’s make sure those kinds of concepts are on the 
table. Let’s make sure that the government isn’t telling these 
groups that they have to take CIC on as a partner. Let’s make 
sure that it’s on the record in a clear and simple way, and this 
industry can move forward very effectively and efficiently 
because it will simply make sense to do so. 
 
It’s hard to understand from our part where the government’s 
going when there’s different messages coming from the 
member who was in charge of this file before, when the head of 
CIC comes out with a different sort of statement, and when the 
current minister is being less than forthright in terms of saying 
what’s going on now. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for us to stand in the House and 
say we are supportive of the ethanol industry. We applaud and 
commend agencies and organizations in our communities who 
are doing their very best to bring forward ideas that are going to 
make sense and are going to benefit not only our communities, 
but the province as a whole. They need, as much as we do, 
clarity on this issue. And I certainly hope that today’s 
discussion and the fact that this Bill is coming forward is going 
to assist that clarity. 
 
I certainly hope that when we get into Committee of the Whole 
in the next few days and this Bill is discussed in detail, we will 
be able to have an opportunity to further get clarity and 
clarification from the minister when the discussion happens in 
detail in Committee of the Whole. Because, Mr. Speaker, all of 
us in this House on both sides, I think, are very much interested 
in that this province takes maximum advantage of the ethanol 
industry and all its potential. And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side 
certainly support that principle. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Wood River on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the east gallery this afternoon we have 14 students from the 
Limerick School in the east gallery, and they’re accompanied 
by their teacher, Shirley Bourhis; their chaperones, Darrel 
Goruick and Agnes Markovinovich. 
 
We’re in a debate this afternoon on ethanol and I hope you get 
to hear some of it. We’re just finishing up the debate on 
ethanol, but I’d ask members to join me in welcoming the group 
to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Saskatchewan Health 
Research Foundation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Health 
Research Foundation Act. In developing this legislation, 
consultations have taken place with a wide range of groups 
concerned with health research. 
 
I wish to thank all of our partners for their dedicated hard work 
in helping bring about this Act today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge the vital role that 
health research plays in improving the health of Saskatchewan 
residents. Health research contributes significantly in a number 
of important ways. It focuses attention on health issues of 
particular relevance to the province. Diabetes, for example, is 
an issue affecting a large segment of the Saskatchewan 
population. 
 
Health research also provides evidence for sound health care 
decision making. It helps attract additional health research 
dollars from outside the province. 
 
And last and very important, medical and other health care 
specialists are attracted to locations with a strong research 
environment. By strengthening research opportunities we hope 
to keep and attract the best and brightest minds to stay right 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
With these considerations in mind, the Saskatchewan Health 
Research Foundation is being established to manage and 
allocate most of the Saskatchewan health research funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe the creation of this new foundation has 
many advantages. First, it will ensure that research will be 
funded on the basis of scientific merit and impact. The 
foundation will review funding decisions for consistency within 
an overarching health research strategy. 
 
Through peer review processes there will be an assurance of 
fairness and objectivity. The total provincial government budget 
for health research in 2002-2003 has increased by $4 million, 
doubling the commitment made in our action plan last 
December. 
 
By moving to a more strategic way of funding research, the 
possibility increases of the foundation attracting more health 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

 

research dollars from the federal government and others in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the foundation is being established as a 
corporation and will be governed by a board consisting of a 
chairperson and vice-chairperson as appointed by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. Up to 10 additional members 
will be appointed to three-year terms. 
 
Members will be selected to ensure a broad representation of 
the clinical, biomedical, health services, and population health 
research communities. Members will include representatives 
from the University of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, 
regional health authorities, and three provincial government 
departments — Health, Industry and Resources, and Learning. 
 
We anticipate the foundation will be in operation by the fall of 
this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
quality, accessible, and responsive health services for the 
people of Saskatchewan, we believe it is important to bring this 
legislation to the House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is an interesting Act in the creation of a health 
research foundation. You would almost think that health 
research has not been taking place in the province of 
Saskatchewan and so you need some avenue by which to 
promote health research. 
 
Or perhaps you would think, Mr. Speaker, that a health 
foundation is being put in place to try and attract private 
investment in health research, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not the 
case. So you really have to wonder, why is there going to be a 
health research foundation? 
 
The government is simply transferring money that it has been 
allocating for health research through the Department of Health, 
through the department of Education — Post-Secondary 
Education — now into this foundation. 
 
But to what advantage, Mr. Speaker? What changes is this 
going to mean for the actual research being done in the province 
of Saskatchewan on health? If it enhances it, if it means that 
there is more research, Mr. Speaker, well and fine. That’s good 
that there be more research. In fact we need to encourage more 
research in health both for the health of our citizens and, Mr. 
Speaker, for the economic developments that can be translated 
from that. 
 
But if this is simply an exercise in bureaucratic shuffling, then 
what’s the point of it, Mr. Speaker? And the minister in his 
speech didn’t really outline any real reasons to have a research 
foundation, Mr. Speaker. How this would be better than what is 
in place today? 
 
The minister talked about the mechanisms involved but he 

didn’t talk about the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
important to have a health foundation rather than what we’re 
doing now. So it’s a mystery, Mr. Speaker, why this needs to 
happen. What are they shuffling and why are they shuffling it, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
When you look at the makeup of the board of directors for this 
particular foundation when it comes into place, it’s a 
representative from the University of Saskatchewan engaged in 
teaching or research in health sciences; a representative from 
the University of Regina in the same fields; a member from the 
Department of Health; a member from the Department of 
Learning; a member from Industry, Trade and Resources; and at 
least one member from a district — or official, Mr. Speaker — 
from a district health board someplace in the province. 
 
Well how is that that much different from what’s already 
happening? The Department of Health is looking after the 
money that it allocates for research. The department of 
Education — or Learning now after the shuffles — looks after 
the money that they are providing for educational research. If 
Industry and Resources are providing money, they look after 
that. So what really changes, Mr. Speaker? What benefit is there 
to health research in the creation of a new entity? 
 
It’s not like the government is going to get a tax benefit, Mr. 
Speaker, from the establishment of a foundation, which is a 
reason why a lot of foundations are established. You have to 
question what is the government trying to do here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the establishment of a board of directors with 12 members, 
the ones that they’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, all come from the 
cities of Regina or Saskatoon. There’s not one designated from 
outside of those two cities, Mr. Speaker, and not all health 
research takes place in Regina or Saskatoon, even though 
perhaps the majority of it does. 
 
I would like to see, Mr. Speaker, that when it says under clause 
4(2)(f): 
 

. . . a member or official of a district health . . . 
 
that that be health district outside of the two major cities, Mr. 
Speaker. And that it not say official, that it say a member. 
 
Now under the current scheme that is virtually a government 
official appointee anyways, because all the members of the 
district health boards under . . . The new Bill that is being 
presented that will be debated after this one, Mr. Speaker, 
appoints all of the members of the district health boards. So 
perhaps it’s irrelevant that we ask for a member to be appointed 
to this board because they are a government representative. 
They’re selected by the government, by whatever criteria the 
government of the day may feel is important to them. You 
know, are they philosophically aligned and those kind of 
considerations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think it would be worthwhile if at least one of the 
members on this board came from outside of the two major 
cities, that they came from outside of one of the departments, 
that they came from outside of the universities, Mr. Speaker. 
And so that’s why I would suggest to the minister that it be a 
member of a health district outside of the two major cities. 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

I do like one part of the Bill though, Mr. Speaker, where it talks 
about that no member shall hold office for more than two 
successive terms. I believe that is an important criteria so that 
you don’t get stagnation on the board by having the same 
members sitting there for virtually the eternity, Mr. Speaker — 
that you do get some change; you get some new and fresh ideas, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health research can be a good economic generator, 
Mr. Speaker, a good opportunity to enhance the knowledge and 
the capabilities of the people of this province, a good 
opportunity to enhance the capabilities and teaching abilities in 
our universities, Mr. Speaker. Therefore there are some benefits 
certainly to be accrued from health research and we would want 
to encourage them. 
 
But I guess the real question is, Mr. Speaker, what advantages 
does a health research foundation provide over the system that 
is currently in place today? And so we’ll give the minister the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to do his research and come up with 
that answer. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Regional Health Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Regional Health Services Act. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, in December following extensive 
consultation with the public and our partners in the health care 
system, the Premier and I announced the action plan for 
Saskatchewan health care. The action plan is this government’s 
response to addressing the challenges in the health care system. 
It provides us with the ability to guide future decisions and 
investments in our health care system in order to make the best 
use of our health care resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our approach in this government is to undertake 
measured, balanced change at a manageable pace with the 
support of our health care partners. This plan, Mr. Speaker, is a 
solid blueprint for achieving this goal. 
 
The Regional Health Services Act which I’m speaking about 
today, Mr. Speaker, is yet another step in fulfilling the 
commitments made in the health action plan. The purpose of 
The Regional Health Services Act, Mr. Speaker, is to improve 
coordination, province-wide planning, and accountability in our 
health care system. We must ensure that we make the best use 
of our available health care resources. 
 
To further this goal, Mr. Speaker, the action plan will reduce 
the number of health districts from 32 to 12 new regional health 
authorities. This Act allows for the formation of those 12 new 
regional health authorities from the existing 32 districts in the 
province. 
 
The Regional Health Services Act will also improve long-range 
planning in the regional health authorities. It’ll provide longer 
term, multi-year funding targets for regional health authorities. 
It’ll clarify and strengthen the authority of the Minister of 

Health to set province-wide priorities for the health care system. 
It will define the responsibilities of regional health authorities 
so that they are better able to organize, manage, and deliver 
health care services across the province. And it will establish 
community advisory networks to ensure public involvement and 
communication in each regional health authority area. 
 
The new Regional Health Services Act, Mr. Speaker, prescribes 
a new regime of accountability within the health care system 
and a new relationship between the regional health authorities, 
affiliates, and other health system partners, along with the 
provincial government. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The Act will also clarify the responsibilities of the Minister of 
Health and the minister’s increased role in strategic . . . setting 
strategic direction for the health care system, establishing 
performance goals, developing standards, and creating health 
policy. As well, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will clarify the 
role of the regional health authorities by assessing health 
service needs and preparing annual budget plans and delivering 
quality health care services and evaluating performance in the 
health care system. 
 
The Act also mandates the establishment of the community 
advisory networks to make certain that the appointed regional 
health authority boards benefit from local participation and 
involvement. In order to ensure that regional health authorities 
are accountable to the public, there will be a requirement that all 
meetings of the regional health authority boards are open to the 
public, except for some very specific situations, and that annual 
reports of the regional health authorities are tabled in this 
legislature. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the Act allows the minister to take 
action in the event of non-compliance with provisions of this 
Act and to an order . . . and to order inquiries into any matters 
deemed necessary. Mr. Speaker, much of The Regional Health 
Services Act pertains directly to board members and employees 
of districts. 
 
In February this year, Mr. Speaker, we took the first step in 
establishing the new regions by appointing the new regional 
health authority planning committee Chairs and committee 
members. Mr. Speaker, we received nearly 500 applications 
from interested persons across the province. The members that 
we appointed, Mr. Speaker, bring a wide range of experience 
and impressive qualifications to their planning committees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I meet on a monthly basis with the newly 
appointed regional health authority Chairs and have met often 
with the planning committee members since they were 
appointed in January. I can say with certainty that they bring 
experience, enthusiasm, and commitment to their work in the 
health care system and to the people of the communities they 
represent across Saskatchewan. 
 
They will sit on the new planning committees until the regions 
are officially created by the Act before us today, Mr. Speaker. 
They will then become the board members of the new regional 
health authorities. 
 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

 

We have maintained continuity, Mr. Speaker, between the 
former health districts and the new regional health authorities 
by appointing a combination of existing board members and 
new nominees to the new regional health authority planning 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advise that the planning 
committees are currently working with our existing district 
health boards and other health system partners to ensure a 
smooth transition from 32 districts to 12 regions. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to publicly 
thank the outgoing district health board members for their 
strong leadership over the years and for the co-operative 
approach they have taken in ensuring a smooth transition to the 
regional health authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other aspects of this Act that I would like 
to mention, which are unique and represent some firsts in the 
health care systems in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will replace The Hospital Standards Act 
and The Housing and Special-care Homes Act. Those Acts 
govern acute and long-term care standards in the province. By 
replacing them with this new Act, we are updating standards in 
legislation that have been in place for many years. The new Act, 
Mr. Speaker, reflects the increased level of integration of those 
services within the new regional health authorities and across 
the province. 
 
No other jurisdiction in Canada, Mr. Speaker, has an Act that 
has taken such a comprehensive approach to upgrading and 
integrating standards for a wide range of acute and long-term 
care health services. Hence the title, Mr. Speaker, The Regional 
Health Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act also establishes a process requiring the 
regional health authorities to report critical incidents to 
Saskatchewan Health when they occur. Each critical incident 
report will be analyzed by the regional health authority and the 
Department of Health to determine the circumstances leading to 
the incident with a goal of preventing future occurrences. 
 
This formalized reporting and review process will promote the 
highest standards of patient safety and the delivery of quality 
health care services in Saskatchewan. We’ll be the first 
province to require such critical incidents reports within the 
health system. 
 
The action plan proposes the establishment of a surgical registry 
to manage solutions related to waiting times for surgical 
services. This registry will provide province-wide guidelines to 
access patient priority in obtaining surgical services. This 
registry will support the commitment in the action plan to 
increase access to surgical services in the province and ensure 
effective use of our resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this legislation is to make sure that 
our health care system integrates the improved standards of 
quality for the delivery of health care services directly with the 
organization and performance of the regional health authorities. 
This, Mr. Speaker, requires that both quality and accountability 
combine in the operation of the regional health authorities and 

the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are leading the country not only in what this 
legislation mandates, but also in the way it has been developed 
and the manner in which it will be implemented. This is an 
important wide-ranging piece of legislation which signals a new 
approach to the way we organize our health care system in this 
province. We are not forcing major change upon the health 
system without consultation as we observe has happened in 
other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. This Act, and the action plan 
from which this legislation arose, are the culmination of 
extensive and ongoing discussions with the public and our 
partners in the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is how the people of Saskatchewan have been 
consulted. The Commission on Medicare, headed by Mr. Ken 
Fyke, hosted numerous meetings where many interested 
persons and groups from across Saskatchewan expressed their 
views about our health care system. The commission also 
consulted hundreds of health care professionals and other 
members of the public throughout the province. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, the commission sent a survey to all Saskatchewan 
households to ask their views about the future of our health care 
system. More than 33,000 people replied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will recall that the Standing Committee on 
Health Care was created in this legislature last year on May 16. 
The committee was instructed by motion of this Assembly to 
receive and report on representations from the public with 
respect to the final report of the Commission on Medicare 
authored by Ken Fyke. 
 
The standing committee consulted with our health care partners 
and the public about the recommendations in the final report of 
the Commission on Medicare. Mr. Speaker, you and members 
of this Assembly, will recall that the Standing Committee on 
Health conducted hearings over a six-week period concluding 
in late July. During that time, 109 individuals and organizations 
appeared before the committee, from which the committee 
received 134 written briefs. The committee received an 
additional 512 written submissions from a cross-section of 
interested individuals in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of this committee was about listening to 
the people of Saskatchewan and hearing their views about what 
changes they thought needed to be made in the health care 
system. Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank the member from Saskatchewan Eastview and her 
committee for their excellent work. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, during the development of our action 
plan for Saskatchewan health care we’ve formed eight working 
groups in the Saskatchewan Department of Health that 
consisted of nurses, doctors, board members, administrators, 
and other health care professionals. We consulted with these 
committees regularly on an array of issues from primary care to 
governance. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we consulted our health partners on the 
proposed legislation and have received their comments. We 
found their advice and expertise to be extremely valuable 
throughout all of these processes and it has resulted in an 
excellent piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. Nowhere else in 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

Canada do we see a health care system that has taken such a 
co-operative approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that once again we have demonstrated 
that by working together we can create a Made in Saskatchewan 
solution. Our collective effort has resulted in a leading edge 
piece of legislation designed to improve and sustain our health 
care system into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Act will allow us to build a stronger, more consistent and 
coordinated province . . . provincial health care system. 
Together we are improving province-wide planning, clarifying 
roles, increasing accountability, and establishing quality based 
standards for health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that our health care system is one of the 
best in the country. With our action plan and our new Regional 
Health Services Act, we are providing leadership in making the 
changes needed to strengthen and sustain our health care system 
for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of this Bill, 
The Regional Health Services Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
interest I listened to the minister’s speech concerning Bill No. 
61, an Act respecting the delivery of health services, 
establishing and governing health regions and regional health 
authorities, governing health care organizations and so on. 
 
It’s a very important Bill that the people of Saskatchewan are 
very interested in. And I believe there’s going to be . . . going to 
need to be a great deal of care taken in discussing this issue 
with the stakeholders in the province — not only the health care 
professionals but the citizens of Saskatchewan — concerning 
the problems in health care and the whole aspect of 
reorganization and reducing the number of health boards and 
establishing regional health authorities. 
 
There’s a number of questions that we as an opposition have 
and the citizens of Saskatchewan have concerning the changes 
in the health authorities, the amalgamation, and the boundaries, 
and of course where the CEOs and the staff of the various 
districts fit in. 
 
So we would like to take this and speak to the stakeholders and 
talk to the citizens of Saskatchewan that are very concerned 
about health care, and at this time I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Health Statutes Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur la santé 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Health Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 
2002. The proposed Bill will amend the following three 
bilingual Acts: The Co-Operatives Act, 1996. The Interpretation 
Act, 1995, and The Vital Statistics Act, 1995. 

Since these are all bilingual statutes, any changes made to them 
must be made in both French and English and require a separate 
Act to convey consequential amendments required by both The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2002 and The Regional 
Health Services Act. 
 
Amendments to The Co-operatives Act will update the 
definition of hospital and show the authority by which 
community clinics are funded as a result of changes made 
within The Regional Health Services Act. 
 
The amendment to The Interpretation Act, 1995 will correctly 
define the phrase duly qualified medical practitioner once 
provisions to regulate podiatric surgeons within The Medical 
Profession Amendment Act, 2002 are proclaimed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 
2002 amendments will address incorporation, discipline, and 
housekeeping issues as well as providing the authority for the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan to 
regulate podiatric surgeons. 
 
An amendment to The Vital Statistics Act, 1995 will update the 
definition of hospital as a result of changes made within The 
Regional Health Services Act. Since The Hospital Standards 
Act will be repealed, the definition needs to changed to 
reference the new Regional Health Services Act under which 
hospitals will be designated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each of these amendments are being made to bring 
these statutes up to date. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move 
second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure to speak 
on Bill No. 62 although the minister has outlined basically that 
it’s an update of various, of various areas in the statutes, and 
one of them as being including the Bill in the French language 
and bringing many of the different areas up to date. 
 
So again, we will take this to the stakeholders and discuss this 
with the stakeholders and see if there’s any concerns. And at 
this time I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(16:00) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my left is Bryon Burnett, who is the ADM 
(assistant deputy minister) of industrial development; to my 
right, Larry Spannier, the deputy minister of the department; to 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

 

his right, Debbie Wilkie, who is executive director of corporate 
resources; immediately behind me is Dan McFadyen, who is the 
ADM of resource development; Denise Haas is — Denise 
moved on me — Denise is to his right. Denise is the executive 
director of investment services. 
 
And in the back are Jim Marshall, the assistant deputy minister 
of economic policy; George Patterson, the executive director of 
exploration and geological services; Bruce Wilson, executive 
director of petroleum and natural gas; Roy Anderson, president 
and CEO of Tourism Saskatchewan; Louise Usick, director of 
finance and administration for Tourism Saskatchewan; John 
Treleaven, president and CEO of Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership, and boy I hope they’ve left someone in the 
department to run the place. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
welcome to all your officials here, and I’m going to turn it over 
to my colleague from Redberry Lake for just a couple of 
questions, if you don’t mind. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
minister and his officials. I’d like to ask the minister about a 
situation in my constituency, Redberry Lake. Just a bit of a 
background to the situation concerning a UN (United Nations) 
biosphere reserve which needed some grants to open this spring 
and of course that time has passed. 
 
The biosphere was designated by the United Nations as a 
pelican nesting site and ecological area located about 100 
kilometres north of Saskatoon and is a world biosphere reserve 
making it 1 of 375 such areas in the world and 1 of 10 in 
Canada. 
 
And the centre, the interpretive centre, was closed for lack of 
funding leaving school groups unable to use the facilities, 
displays, and library. The local committee has been working 
quite diligently at trying to get funds to reopen the centre. Their 
funding was cut back by the provincial government some time 
ago and leaving the interpretive centre there but unable to hire 
staff to look after it. 
 
The committee in the Redberry Lake area, the citizens of Blaine 
Lake and Hafford, have been working diligently at 
encompassing the biosphere as a really a source of economic 
development. 
 
And not only just opening up the interpretive centre to allow 
school groups in and as a source of tourism and an 
informational site, they also would like to hire a reserve 
coordinator. And the reserve . . . the biosphere coordinator 
would assist to conserve biological diversity, promote research 
and monitoring, assist the agencies, the community . . . sorry, 
the community committee and a variety of scientific, cultural, 
and education and development agencies to develop the 
Redberry Lake biosphere reserve as a model of sustainable 
development in the service of the community and the people of 
Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
And the coordinator will also facilitate co-operation exchanges 
at regional and international levels. Specifically what the 
committee in the Blaine Lake/Hafford area, the biosphere, 
would like the biosphere coordinator to maintain the Redberry 

Lake Interpretive Centre for the use of school groups, the 
general public, the partner agencies under the direction of the 
community committee; conduct and coordinate the 
development and delivery of interpretative programming to 
school groups and the general public under the direction of the 
community committee; assist at meetings of the community 
committee and it’s five standing subcommittees as follows. 
 
The first one is culture, research, and education; number two, 
economic development; number three, health and social 
welfare; number four, ecosystem research and conservation; 
and, number five, agriculture. 
 
Also assist research partners through coordinating logistical 
support, assist in the preparation of partnership proposals, 
maintain accurate records including visitor statistics and 
partnership project records. 
 
And lastly, other activities under the direction of the community 
committee. 
 
And I would like to ask the minister, there was somewhat a 
vague promise from the Premier when he visited the area this 
past spring, and left the committee and the public in that area 
with what, as the paper said, is with great optimism and 
dedication the community believes that the centre will reopen. 
 
And unfortunately funding did not arrive in time for this year 
and was just asking, we’d like to ask the minister: is he aware 
of the biosphere and the needs that they have for, really, start-up 
money to open the interpretative centre and also broaden the 
whole . . . the area of economic development in that area? And 
is there any assistance or future assistance that this group can 
get from the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the 
member for the question. I have had the good fortune, as a 
matter of fact, to be at the Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve 
sometime ago. I’ve seen the operations, had the opportunity to 
tour the lake as a matter of fact on a, on a little ship that they 
had out there. It was a very good experience. Peter Kingsmill 
was kind enough to take us around and I appreciated that. 
 
The Redberry Lake Biosphere Reserve has requested about 
$220,000 in funding over a four-year period for core 
operational expenses. In the 2002-2001 fiscal year the former 
Department of Economic and Co-operative Development along 
with Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management 
each provided $15,000 in support to assist the . . . to maintain 
operations of the interpretative facility. 
 
I would want to say to the member, we certainly recognize the 
importance of that facility to the community and to the school 
children that have the opportunity to visit the environmental 
significance of the area. However we do face a financial 
situation that doesn’t afford us the ability to give support, 
further support, and the four-year support that was requested at 
this time. However the request is still under review and I can 
assure the member that we are looking at what we might be able 
to do to achieve some funding as it relates to that reserve. 
 
I can say that a number of local people have met with me 
directly. I talked with . . . As a matter of fact, interestingly 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

enough, just the other day the former member for Redberry, Mr. 
Jess, was in the legislature. I think he might have been 
introduced here. And he was asking me what we might be able 
to do to find some funding to facilitate the longer term support 
for this initiative. And I indicated to him that we’re looking at it 
and we’re attempting to find funds, and I would say the same to 
you, sir. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the fact 
that the government is short of funding and . . . But I would like 
to emphasize a couple of points. 
 
The biosphere at Clayoquot Sound on Vancouver Island 
received $12 million from the federal government and it was, I 
believe it was opened the same year as Redberry Lake 
Biosphere. And there certainly seems to be an issue with the 
federal government concerning the funding for these projects. 
 
And I would just like to ask the minister, have you or will you 
in the future work with the committee at the biosphere to try to 
access some of this federal funding? 
 
And also, as a secondary question, to supply funding just 
initially to keep the interpretive centre open — because I know 
the RMs (rural municipality) and towns and individuals have 
donated money to the interpretive centre — and at least as a 
first step, keep the interpretive centre open? As a promotion, it 
will develop more clients and tourism and hopefully in the 
future earn extra funding, and with federal and provincial help, 
go on to the next phase of the added plans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Right. I’m informed by my officials 
that we are, you know, looking internally, but as well we’re 
talking with the federal government to see if we could attract 
their interest. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
my . . . I have another colleague that has a question that he’d 
like to get out of the way. I think it’s rather an important 
question because it’s focusing, it’s focusing very much on 
economic development and into the future. And I think it’s 
important to have the question on record and I’d sure appreciate 
your answer. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in the 
Speech from the Throne, your government indicated that you 
were going to be establishing a Saskatoon . . . a Saskatchewan 
synchrotron institute. And to date I haven’t really heard much 
more about that other than your . . . the commitment in the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you bring us up to date as to if 
there’s been any movement in this area? I think it’s a vitally 
important issue that needs to be dealt with. 
 
The people in Alberta are far ahead of us once again in 
establishing an Alberta Synchrotron Institute. I attended the 
official opening of the synchrotron building a year ago this past 
winter, and at that time the Alberta people already had their 
institute up and running. They had an information display there 
and so on. And Saskatchewan at that time had nothing to 
compare to that. 
 

And seeing that this world-class facility is being built in 
Saskatoon, it’s the largest scientific project to take place in this 
country in the last 30 years, I’m just wondering where 
Saskatchewan is and what plans your government has to 
capitalize on the opportunities that — the huge opportunities — 
that the synchrotron will present this province with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can 
say to the member opposite that we have signed an agreement. 
There are four partners. There’s the Canadian Light Source 
itself, the University of Saskatchewan, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the Government of Canada. The funding has 
been identified; the final agreement is awaiting announcement. 
And if I can find a day out of this place, I’ll go up to Saskatoon 
and make that announcement along with others. 
 
But it’s imminent, the agreement was there, we’re willing, and 
we’re just ready to make the announcement. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I’m certainly pleased 
to hear that there is movement in this area. I guess a follow-up 
question that I would have is . . . Putting in place a synchrotron 
institute is one thing — it’s a good step forward. But I think 
your government has to do more than that. 
 
I wonder, I don’t see any demonstration of a plan that your 
government has to capitalize on the opportunities that this 
scientific installation is presenting us . . . the opportunities it’s 
presenting us with. 
 
I think what the . . . I talk to the people at the Canadian Light 
Source on a relatively frequent basis and they are . . . they have 
expressed some concerns that perhaps the light source, the 
synchrotron, isn’t given the importance that it should be. They 
tell me that there are numerous opportunities for your . . . for 
various departments of this Government of Saskatchewan to 
make use of the synchrotron, to reap its benefits. And that is 
one whole area. 
 
And then another area would be of course what initiatives your 
government is looking at to encourage the economic spinoffs 
that can . . . are . . . be associated with scientific installation of 
the magnitude of the synchrotron. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
if you could perhaps tell us what other initiatives your 
government is looking at, or perhaps hopefully has in place to 
deal with the opportunities that the synchrotron presents us 
with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would 
take some umbrage with, frankly, the comment that he makes 
and says that we’re doing nothing. The member may know — 
or he may not know — that the former department of Economic 
Development put $25 million into the project to match the $56 
million that the federal government put in through the 
Foundation for Innovation, and that the federal government put 
in $21.8 million, and that the University of Saskatchewan put in 
$7.3 million, and that the city of Saskatoon put in $2.4 million, 
and that SaskPower put in $2 million. 
 
So I would say to the member opposite to suggest that this 
government has done nothing is in no small way inaccurate. We 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

 

want to say to members opposite that the CLS (Canadian Light 
Source) is owned by the U of S and we are participants in terms 
of their board of directors. We work very closely with them. We 
meet on a regular basis with them. 
 
I can tell you that the Saskatchewan Research Council is very 
much a part of what’s happening as it relates to the CLS; but 
most importantly, sir, the private sector is going to be I think 
very interested in what is happening up there. 
 
We will be establishing, as I’ve said earlier, a Saskatchewan 
synchrotron institute. We have developed our partnership; 
we’re putting funding into that. 
 
We have put funding into the building of the CLS, it’s the 
largest technology and research project in the history of our 
country. And members of this side of the House, of this 
administration, were able to attract that largest investment in 
research in the history of our country, right here to this 
province. 
 
So I think a far cry from having done little, we have done lots. 
And I would want to say with respect to the institute that you 
asked about, we’ve also hired I think a man who’s very 
reputable and who has a reputation not only in Saskatchewan 
but across Canada, Dr. Dennis Johnson, who is the executive 
director . . . will be the executive director of the light source . . . 
or of the institute. 
 
And so I think we have done a lot. But to say that we’ve done a 
lot, we can do more, and we will do more. And the synchrotron, 
the CLS, will be a big-time success and it’ll be supported by 
this administration for many, many years to come. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
think we’re arguing with you that the Government of 
Saskatchewan hasn’t put its money in place to build . . . to help 
build the facility, but that’s only one part of this whole strategy 
that needs to be put in place. 
 
I’m afraid, and those of us on this side of the House are afraid, 
that if this scientific facility isn’t given the importance in your 
government that it should be, that we will be simply the 
operators of the facility. That we will provide a few scientists 
and a few technicians who will operate the beam lines. The 
scientists will come in from all parts of the world, do their 
research, leave, and once again we will simply be the providers 
of a scientific facility, and the operators, but really gain very 
little other than that. And that’s not good enough, Mr. Minister. 
 
What your government needs to do is realize the exceptional 
potential of this facility and have a policy throughout 
government to facilitate its successes, other than just simply 
being the operators of a beam line. 
 
You need to have a strategy throughout government that 
wherever . . . to encourage the use initially by government 
departments. And there are numerous examples of your 
government not doing that. 
 
I’m told that a number of months ago the university hosted a 
symposium and brought in a world specialist in medical 
imaging through the use of a synchrotron. And I’m also told 

that there wasn’t one person from the Department of Health at 
that seminar. Now those are the types of things that we are 
talking about. 
 
You need to have strategies in place throughout the government 
departments that help bring the scientists and the people 
required to maximize the use of the synchrotron and help with 
all the various problems that the university and the operators of 
the synchrotron may encounter. And again I don’t see that in 
place, Mr. Minister, and those are the . . . that’s the question I’m 
asking. 
 
Does your government have a strategy that says, look, we have 
a valuable installation that’s being built in our province; as you 
indicated, the biggest scientific project in this country in the last 
30 years. And do you have a strategy in government to make 
sure that the good things that can accrue from this installation 
will happen in this province? And that’s what we are asking, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, very interesting the words 
from the member. And I’m kind of disappointed that someone 
from the Department of Health wasn’t there but the member 
may want to know and understand that a beam line — a medical 
beam line — will be driven by the College of Medicine, 
University of Saskatchewan, not by the Department of Health. 
It will be driven by academics. 
 
The institute, the Synchrotron Institute, is going to be there to 
train scientists from both the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan so that they can be functional 
operators of the beam lines. So the institute is training 
scientists; the College of Medicine will do its work as it relates 
to medical research. That’s what universities are about. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I guess what I’m asking your 
government to do is to be, if nothing else, the promoters and the 
champions of the synchrotron. And the example that I used is 
an example where perhaps your government could have done 
more. There are other examples of where the people of this 
province can benefit through government agencies being the 
promoter of this scientific installation. 
 
And that’s what we’re asking. And we’re not seeing that 
happening to the extent that it should have, Mr. Minister, and 
we’re afraid that we will simply be the operators of a scientific 
installation of a light source. 
 
And I am told that just simply operating a beam line, if you 
want to use a ratio, will generate a dollar. But having the 
wherewithal to interpret and facilitate the information that 
comes from the research will generate $10. It’s a 10:1 ratio, and 
I think Saskatchewan needs to have a piece of that action. 
 
And it is . . . I think this is where our government can play a 
role as a facilitator, facilitator to see that these types of things 
happen, Mr. Minister. And that’s the concern that I would like 
to express today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And, Mr. Chairman, I think the 
member is exactly right. We need to help to facilitate to market 
the research . . . or the synchrotron. And we do. We do it when 
we’re on trade missions with Saskatchewan Trade and Export 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

Partnership. We try to create awareness in the private sector 
whenever we travel. The synchrotron itself has a marketing 
arm, the member should know. 
 
The Saskatchewan Research Council is very active in 
promoting synchrotron and very active in facilitating interaction 
between different arms of government, the private sector, and 
opportunities in synchrotron. There are some, I think, some 
very good, positive things happening as it relates to developing 
knowledge and understanding of our synchrotron. 
 
And I would want to say that we have been very proactive as a 
government on trade missions and other initiatives ensuring the 
people understand and industry understands, whether we’re in 
Dallas or whether we’re in Los Angeles or whether we’re in 
Ireland, you know, England. We travel around. Our people 
travel around, from my department. 
 
And one of the things we promote is a positive image about this 
province. We promote the fact that we’re the world’s largest 
producer of potash. We’re the world’s largest producer of 
uranium. We have the largest area of farm land in this province. 
We’ve got a good investment climate. We’ve got a good 
business climate. We’ve got a positive image about ourselves in 
this province, and there’s a lot more that we can do. 
 
We’re promoting this province all the time not only on the CLS, 
but we promote this thing internally as well. 
 
Today we’re promoting a brand new industry, and it’s called the 
ethanol industry. And we’re promoting the people, the private 
sector people, who are putting together the investment dollars. 
Whether it’s Commercial Alcohols who will bring money to 
this place or whether it’s Broe who will bring money to this 
place, we’re promoting this place as a good place to invest. 
 
We promote the CLS as part of what we can do in this province 
to develop wealth opportunities for the private sector, wealth 
opportunities in medical research and medical knowledge. 
We’re promoting this all the time. 
 
And we would only say to members opposite: join us in 
promoting this province. It’s a good place to do business, a 
good place to do research, a good place to make money, and by 
golly you’ll find you wake up in the morning and you feel a lot 
better about it and so will the people that you talk to, as a matter 
of fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, let me 
go back a step. I’d like to try and get a better handle on this new 
Department of Industry and Resources, particularly with the 
economic development . . . economic and co-operative 
development function that has been in place for some time. 
Now it’s blended into a much larger ministry. 
 
We’re now looking at mining, petroleum, minerals, forestry. 
Can you tell me how the economic development . . . economic 
and co-operative development focus that you had before is now 
being looked after and looked after adequately in this new, 
expanded format? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I 
would want to say that I had been quite fortunate in that I had 
the, I would say, very pleasant experience of being minister 
responsible for the former department of Energy and Mines for, 
I think, almost seven years. And so I got to know not only the 
people involved in that department, but I got to know the 
stakeholders of the department and I got to understand the 
corporate culture within the department. 
 
And I got to understand why we’ve been able to double oil 
production in this province in the last 10 years. It’s because it’s 
a good-business-sense department. It’s got a culture of 
economic development. It’s got a good relationship with the 
stakeholders and shareholders. 
 
I had about 10 months to be able to experience the Department 
of Economic and Co-operative Development and I guess 
unencumbered by my duties as the minister of Energy and 
Mines. So I had the opportunity to understand how this 
department markets the province, how it relates to tourism, how 
it relates to trade issues, and how it relates to assisting 
businesses in Saskatchewan to develop business opportunities. 
 
And so when you look at that and when you look at forestry as 
a component of the economy, I guess, again from a personal 
standpoint, I had the chance to look at forestry development 
because I represent a forest industry town, as many of your 
members do, so I had some understanding of that. 
 
So it only made sense that if you put together, in terms of a 
one-stop shopping arrangement, an opportunity for business to 
access government through a single door, that that could be a 
very positive benefit because I think you have a stronger 
department; you have a stronger voice for government within 
the department. 
 
And I think we’ve created some synergies. I don’t . . . the fact 
that it’s a larger department, I don’t believe will encumber the 
ability to serve the industry which is really what all of these 
departments are about. I think it creates some very positive 
synergies. I think we have a more strategic approach to 
economic development and I think we can move a little faster. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But what we haven’t done . . . And I want to say to the member, 
I’m sort of noticing that within this newly established, newly 
developed department that we give a . . . we are giving the 
opportunity for the best entities and the best components of all 
of these different departments a chance to rise to the top and be 
a model for the rest of the department to achieve that level of 
excellence. 
 
And I think the member opposite and I have talked about 
Energy and Mines, as an example, and how’s it been perceived 
to be a pretty pro-business and a pretty proactive kind of a 
department. So the merge with Economic and Co-operative 
Development, I think, has been really quite positive from my 
perspective. It’s new and we’re still learning and the department 
has some wrinkles and there’s some things that happen within a 
reorganized entity, as you will know. But I think, ultimately, we 
will end up with a department that will serve the business 
community and serve the people of Saskatchewan very well. 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I agree. The areas that you’ve 
talked about have a lot of potential in this province. And I think 
they may need a lot of further development. There’s 
considerable potential and opportunity in this province. 
 
When I see the multitude of . . . multi-faceted department that 
you have, you have to be juggling a lot of balls at the same time 
to make sure that all of those different areas are covered. That 
puts a lot of pressure on you. Are you depending much more 
heavily now on deputy ministers and other officials? 
 
The reason I’m asking is even in an expanded department with 
expanded definition of mandate your . . . the budget is less, the 
full-time equivalents are less. It would appear to me to have an 
expanded mandate with fewer resources and fewer FTEs 
(full-time equivalents) is not a good combination for success in 
the long run. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
say to the member opposite that probably what will result as a 
. . . and has been resulting as a result of the merger, is the ability 
to coordinate the duties of economic development; the 
opportunities for economic development become more 
streamlined. You know, as it relates to a ministerial calendar of 
events and things that are required of a minister, I think it helps 
in terms of being able to coordinate events as well. 
 
Tourism is, as you will know, is part of the umbrella of this 
portfolio. Some very competent, capable people. I mean 
ultimately, basically what has happened, is what used to be 
within a former government department has been spun out; it’s 
now more of a private sector entity — driven, managed, and 
controlled in the day-to-day operations by the private sector. 
 
And certainly there are events that, as minister responsible for 
tourism, I’m asked to attend. I was at one this morning that I 
was really quite excited to be at because I think it’s going to be 
a lot of fun, and I think it’s going to be good for tourism in 
Saskatchewan too. And it’s a photo contest that Tourism 
Saskatchewan has put on. 
 
The department of Energy and Mines, the people in there . . . 
it’s always been a very lean and a very small department in 
terms of personnel. And what we’ve been able to do is focus 
more on the day-to-day operational aspect of the department. 
Some of the policy issues have been brought together and there 
was perhaps some duplication within the department that’s been 
consolidated. 
 
So I think ultimately, although we all face financial pressures 
. . . And I mean, the department did face some downsizing. We 
in the context of putting together this budget and working 
towards a balanced budget this year, had to sacrifice as all other 
departments of this government did. 
 
I mean people are asking us for a lean and an efficient 
government; members of the opposition are asking for the 
same. As I recall we hired a few firefighters and a few front-line 
people, not this budget but the last budget, and some of them 
are right up North now trying to protect our assets and our 
homes and our things. And there have been some pretty 
unfortunate circumstances. 
 

But they don’t happen without personnel. So there’s a few more 
dollars there. We had to give up a bit of that so we can ensure 
those kinds of activities were able to be done by the department, 
now of Environment, and you know so you give and you take a 
little. But we have enough to do our job and we think we will 
do it well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, are there some areas that have 
been overlooked? Is there areas that have been taken away from 
the department, have been transferred into something else, 
wound down, cancelled? I’m thinking of SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) as an example. Can you explain 
how SOCO as an example — but maybe there are others too 
that have been removed from your mandate — how that now 
fits into economic development and the ability to do the things 
that they were doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised by my 
deputy that we have done some mergers within the department 
but that we haven’t dropped any functions. 
 
As it relates to SOCO, it was a subvote of the department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development. That has been 
moved from the subvote; it’s not within the Department of 
Industry and Resources. The functions of SOCO are now dealt 
with through Crown Investments Corporation as it relates to the 
management of Innovation Place and the assets of Innovation 
Place. 
 
So that was moved . . . that subvote was moved from the 
General Revenue Fund side of government; it’s now over at 
Crown Investments Corporation. But in terms of the functions 
of the department, none have been, none have been repealed or 
removed as it relates to budget initiatives or any other 
initiatives. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, are you . . . is your 
department trying to stimulate economic development right 
across the government departments? Are you working directly 
with other departments to try to develop economic development 
initiatives there? 
 
I’m thinking of rural revitalization. We’ve been debating 
ethanol most of the day and we’ve talked about that. But other 
than that, I can see rural revitalization as almost a negative at 
this stage. 
 
Can you tell me how you’ve been working with other 
departments rather than just individually? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that’s really 
been one of the challenges within governments of all stripes 
forever and forever, is to achieve intergovernmental harmony 
and relationships in terms of how they work together. 
 
I can say to the member opposite . . . And I’ll give just a couple 
of examples. The Department of Agriculture is working very 
closely with the Department of Industry and Resources, along 
with the department of . . . or, well, Crown Investments 
Corporation, along with, I am assuming, the Department of 
Environment when we move further along on the ethanol file. 
 
But we’re working very closely with the Department of 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

Agriculture because it’s required if you want to develop and 
build and grow the intensive livestock industry and the cow/calf 
operations to support the feeder cattle operations. So of course 
we’re doing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I understand. 
 
The member opposite, Mr. Chair, has a neighbour that is in 
conversation. This happens in here on occasion. I think we’re 
okay now. 
 
But we work very closely with the Department of Agriculture 
and with other departments. Forestry is an example. The new 
Department of Environment and my department is working 
very much hand in glove. We’ve got some very positive 
initiatives that are hopefully going to come to fruition. There’s 
discussions ongoing now with the possibility for a pulp mill 
with a newsprint plant, which will in turn spawn a couple of 
new, major-sized saw mills, if we can bring that together. 
 
That is also have . . .has to be coordinated with Crown 
Investments Corporation because it has some implications with 
respect to power. The Department of Environment will be 
involved as it relates to water and water quality issues and 
environmental issues. And I think it’s fair to say through . . . 
there are some very positive interdepartmental relationships that 
have been building. And I’m really quite excited to see that 
those relationships grow and build and become a matter of, you 
know, of assistance in developing our economy. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, as an example of the reason 
for the question was, when Premier Doer in Manitoba addressed 
the Romanow Commission on health care, one of the positive 
aspects of his submission was very much focusing on the 
advantage that Manitoba has with their health care as a 
economic development tool in that province. When we talk 
about health, I’ve never heard anybody here talking about the 
economic development opportunities in Saskatchewan which 
relate to health. That was one example. 
 
And it seems to me that all departments have a function to do 
what they can to develop our province, to make our province 
grow. I think it’s . . . the onus is on you as the minister to make 
sure that each of those departments are trying to direct their 
focus on what they can contribute to growing the province. 
Certainly they have to make sure that their mandate is fulfilled. 
But ultimately, we want to attract people here, we want to 
attract investment, we want to grow this province. And that’s 
why I think it’s so critical that your overview of not only your 
department, but coordinating with other departments, is very 
critical. I’d appreciate your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I think that really is sort of the overarching role of 
this department is coordinate different activities of different 
departments as it relates to economic development. That’s 
really what we’re about. 
 
Whether it’s through the Department of Agriculture, or 
Municipal Government, or whether it’s the Department of 
Agriculture, it’s one of coordination. And as you know, you 
will know, that coordination takes co-operation, and I would 
want to say that I think we’ve been really quite successful. 
 
If you look at the work that’s taking place at Innovation Place 

as it relates to veterinary research through VIDO (Veterinary 
Infectious Disease Organization) and the fact that some of that 
may in fact turn into, not animal health, but turn into economic 
development as it relates to animal health, but as well to human 
health. 
 
And the support that this government gives, not only through 
this department, but through other departments in terms of 
assisting the funding of those operations, you know the 
ag-biotechnology that is happening, the work that’s taking place 
out at the research farm in Swift Current. These are all things 
that require coordination; it’s part of what this department does. 
And I think that there’s always room for improvement, my old 
grandmother used to say when I asked her if I’d been a good 
boy. And there always is room for improvement. 
 
But I think, you know, that the department has been doing 
overall a pretty good job. And just . . . and if I can give just one 
example of why I think I can say that, you know, with some 
confidence, in the last 10 years oil production in this province 
has doubled. And that takes coordination, and that takes the 
support of the former department of Municipal Government, 
and the former department of Environment and Resource 
Management —and I would have to say that I found the 
co-operation between those departments and Energy and Mines 
to be very supportive; the co-operation from the Department of 
Finance as it relates to ensuring that we have competitive 
royalty and taxation rates, which is sort of an ongoing process. 
 
So there you have in just oil and gas development, you’ve got 
one, two, three, four departments. That takes coordination, it 
takes co-operation, and that’s I think what makes Saskatchewan 
a successful place to do business and a successful place to 
invest. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, the success though, has to be 
tempered with the fact that our GDP (gross domestic product) is 
probably the lowest in this last year, the lowest in Canada. And 
I think you also have to remember when you’re referring to oil 
production and how the industry is moving along, $26 to $28 a 
barrel has to have something to do with that. Because we’re in 
that particular cycle that development of the oil industry, as you 
well know and as I well know from my area, is very dependent 
upon return on investment. 
 
And the return on investment is coming in, not particularly for 
reasons of economic development, because the head offices of 
virtually all of those companies in my area is on the Alberta 
side. They seem to find that the royalty rates or the royalty 
structure being different, the taxation being different, the area, 
certainly economically, is moving ahead. But based on 
petroleum, I agree. But about one . . . I’m told about one well 
drilled on the Saskatchewan side for about every five or five 
and a half wells drilled on the other side. 
 
Nevertheless at the end of the day, we need more investment in 
this province and that’s, and that’s the signals that are being 
sent out of your department. And I think it’s crucial that you, 
your department, puts the confidence, at least the fundamentals 
in place for those . . . for that confidence. 
 



June 5, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

 

And I notice in the budget items, and I’m looking at (IR07), 
investment programs, there’s substantively less of those kind of 
fundamentals in place that were there to try to assist the 
industry by being there to give them an idea of where you want 
to have the emphasis. And that particular part of the budget has 
been cut substantively. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well let me say to the member, 
he’s right that in 2001 we did have a zero growth in terms of 
GDP. We also had a fairly severe drought and it was also the 
year of 9/11 and a turndown in the North American economy. 
But what I want to say to him is, the year 2001 was on the heels 
of eight years of successive growth of an average of 3.5 per cent 
of the GDP growth. And I think the member, you know, the 
member opposite, who in his former world before politics, has 
an understanding that a growth rate of three and a half per cent 
over an average of eight years, in GDP growth, is not bad — 
not bad at all. 
 
As a matter of fact it’s quite phenomenal. And when you look at 
the fact that you’ve got an industry in those years under 
pressure by international trade — one of our major industries, 
being agriculture — the fact that you’re still able to grow your 
economy by an average of 3.5 per cent over eight years is no 
small feat. 
 
And I mean, even in spite of the fact that the media is not 
always as kind to this administration as I’d like to see, even 
they have to come out with some headlines that will tell you 
what’s really happening in the province. April, 2002, “Building 
through the roof, construction activity jumps 85 per cent in the 
city.” March 30, “Construction enjoyed record year in 2001.” 
“Investors bet high on Saskatchewan diamond area.” “Housing 
starts rise in the Queen City.” “Kalium adding a phosphate 
centre.” Mr. Chairman, I could go on, and maybe I will. “New 
car sells remain strong.” That might be enough to make my 
point. 
 
What I want to say, Mr. Chairman, one of the concerns I think 
that I have, as someone who is doing business and has done 
business in this province all of my life, is the attitude portrayed 
by some who believe, and have a philosophical belief, that this 
province has been a financial disaster for the last 50 years. 
 
And he just walked in the door, the member from Swift Current. 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I think that concept and that 
attitude is . . . does more to create failure in this province than 
anything I can think of. 
 
And I want to give you examples of why I say that to be true. 
I’m not willing to buy the theory that my father and my 
grandfather were part of a province and part of electing 
governments over a period of 15 years, were part of a big 
failure, and part of a big economic disaster, an experiment that 
was a failure. I’m not willing to accept that, sir. And I’m going 
to tell you that I believe the vast majority of the people in 
Saskatchewan aren’t willing to accept the theory of the member 
from Swift Current that we’ve had 50 years of successive 
failure — not willing to buy that. 
 
And I’m not willing to accept, sir, that because that member 
worked for five years as an economic development officer in 
the city of Swift Current, that he is the be-all, the know-all, and 

the understanding and the future of a vision for economic 
development in Saskatchewan. I’m not willing to accept that 
and I want to tell you why. 
 
I indicated a little earlier today that in this province we’ve 
doubled our oil production in the last 10 years. And I agree with 
you that it’s partly price driven; it is. Because it’s an industry 
that needs price and they’re price takers, and they’ve got to be 
able to make a return or they’re not going to drill and they’re 
not going to make money. 
 
But it’s more than that because we put in place in 1993 a 
horizontal drill program that’s very well receptive. We’ve done 
some things like work on high-water-cut wells. We’ve done 
some things like deep-rights reversion. 
 
And if you look at the royalty charts as we compare to our 
neighbours in Alberta — and I’m going to send you some 
across because I think you need to have a look at them —the 
upfront incentive in terms of those royalties gives a payback 
that is absolutely phenomenal. It’s a quick payback and then the 
royalty curve is pretty much equivalent to Alberta. 
 
And there are outside factors, and I know that — the corporate 
capital tax we talk about. Well I want to get back to attitude. 
You know here in this province we have the home of the largest 
potash industry in the world. And you know something? For a 
while it was private sector, and then it was public sector. And 
you know what? Now it’s private sector. And it’s successful 
and it works and it’s efficient. And the Saskatchewan people 
have been very successful in developing it. 
 
We’ve got the largest uranium industry in the world. And you 
know something? The federal government owned part of it for a 
while and the province owned a part of that corporation and it 
was publicly owned for a while. And you know what? Now it’s 
privately owned. But you know what it is? It’s the biggest and 
it’s the most successful uranium industry. 
 
And I want to say to the member — you and your colleague 
from Swift Current — that we delivered, this province 
delivered, my parents and my parents’ parents delivered a 
program for this province called medicare, which is more than a 
social program. It’s an economic program. Because what it does 
is it ensures that people aren’t going to go without medical care 
and risk their health, risk their health because they can’t afford 
to have it. 
 
And I want to say the CommunityNet in his riding and in every 
riding in the rural ridings that you represent would not be there 
if TELUS was your private sector operator. I’ll tell you it 
wouldn’t be. 
 
It wouldn’t be. It wouldn’t be in Shellbrook. It wouldn’t be in 
. . . It’ll be in Shellbrook. It isn’t there now but it’ll be there. 
And it wouldn’t be in Birch Hills, which is the announcement 
the Premier just made the other day. 
 
So now I say to members opposite, if you believe that this 
province is a social experiment and a failure, you believe that. 
But I want to tell you that you do not have the support of the 
people of Saskatchewan and that’s why you guys . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh no. That’s why you guys never govern. 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 5, 2002 

 

That’s why you guys never govern. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan support their Crown corporations, 
first of all. They support . . . Well, they can chirp all they want, 
sir. They can chirp all they want, Mr. Chairman, but the people 
of Saskatchewan support their Crown corporations. Why? 
Because they work for them. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan don’t trust you with the Crown 
assets. Why? Because you can’t be straight with them. When 
your premier . . . or your former . . . When your aspiring 
premier, your wannabe premier, delivers his economic 
development game plan in Saskatoon, he’s privatizing Crowns 
and he’s cutting taxes and he’s cutting the civil service. 
 
You want to know something, Mr. Speaker, this is day 54, 53, 
whatever day, and we never hear about that plan from him any 
more. And now he trots the member from Swift Current out, he 
trots him out, explaining what he really meant by privatizing the 
Crowns; explaining what he really meant. Oh, well, now we’re 
going to cut the core services. 
 
And he’s taken on by a SaskTel worker in a paper here. It’s 
kind of an interesting little paper called the prairie dog. And I 
watch his explanation to it and do you want to know something, 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chairman? He hasn’t got an explanation to it. 
 
Do you want to know why? Because if they ever had power 
they would do what the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party, said they would do and that’s sell off 
the Crown assets to give tax reductions to their big corporate 
friends. 
 
But you know what? I want to say, I want to say that you know 
what, you know what, you know what we’re going to do my 
friends? What we’re going to do is continue to create a balance 
of corporate tax reduction, of personal tax reduction, of 
small-business tax reduction, as this province can afford it. 
Because that is what’s going to grow this economy in a 
sustainable way. 
 
And we aren’t going to, and the people of Saskatchewan are not 
going to allow you folks the ability to sell off their assets to pay 
for unsustainable tax reduction, and then create great big debt 
loads. 
 
And I want to say, we will have this debate. The member from 
Swift Current and I will have this debate, but I want to say 
there’s a fundamental difference here. You believe that our 
parents were failures and I say to you that they were very, very 
big successes in terms of the kind of society they built, the kind 
of an economy they built. 
 
And they ain’t never going to buy your theory because they had 
Bennett in the 1930s, they had Grant Devine in the 1980s, and 
they ain’t taking you guys in the year 2000 because they’re 
afraid of you and they don’t trust you and they know your track 
record. So you can trot out your political philosophy all you 
want, but I say to members on that side of the House, people 
won’t buy it because you can’t be trusted. 
 
And they’re calling for an election, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
going to get an election. And when they get it they’re going to 

get as good a whupping as they had ever in their political 
careers. And there’s going to be just a few of them sitting over 
there, Mr. Speaker, still whining and lamenting about the fact 
that they couldn’t sell the Crown corporations off and that we 
aren’t going to deficit budget in this province. It’s going to be 
disappointing for them, but you know what, they’ll live through 
it like they always do on that side of the House. And there you 
are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:02. 
 


