















































Hansard: June 14, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2055 
 June 14, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the surplus from the Saskatchewan Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund being transferred to the General 
Revenue Fund. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to refund the $1.6 million intended for the 
Saskatchewan Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and 
discontinue its present policy of using this money for other 
government purposes. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And there are a couple of hundred signatures on this petition, 
Mr. Speaker, almost entirely from the city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, have come from the communities 
of Langenburg, Roblin, Manitoba, and Marchwell. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
deplorable and dangerous condition of Highway 58. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Shamrock. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about crop insurance. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan and of Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed the citizens from Tuxford, Tugaske, Central Butte, 
Regina, Keeler, and Eyebrow. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional paper 
no. 7, 11, 22, 23, 146, and no. 165. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 67 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: how much funding is 
allocated for this year on Highway 42; if so, which sections 
on Highway 42? 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 67 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: has the provincial government written off any 
long-term debt in TML Foods; and if so, how much has 
been written off? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before I introduce the guests that are here to watch our 
proceedings this morning, I want to just remind everybody, and 
I’m sure everybody knows, that we are blessed in this great 
province of Saskatchewan with people who are certainly 
talented and bring a great deal of pride to our province. 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

I also just wanted to mention that, on the occasion, that it’s 
appropriate that these visitors have come to be with us this 
morning. It’s the 25th anniversary of Elvis Presley’s death, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But having said that, what . . . I’d like to introduce to you and to 
all the members of this Assembly and people that are watching, 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Rory Allen who is a 
world-class entertainer and Elvis Presley tribute artist. And I 
had heard some rumour that someone had seen the king in the 
hallways of this hallowed building. So I wanted to assure 
people that Mr. Rory Allen was here. 
 
Mr. Rory Allen has performed internationally on stage, radio, 
and television. And, ladies and gentlemen, he was born here in 
Saskatchewan — at Colonsay as a matter of fact — and from 
Colonsay. He attended Davin and Balfour. Gospel music and 
singing in church was a huge part in developing his success. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are an awful lot of things that I could 
say about this talented entertainer who’s with his lovely wife, 
Lorie, and manager as well. And there are many, many 
accolades from many groups and communities that Mr. Allen 
has performed for. But the ultimate, the ultimate Saskatchewan 
compliment I must read, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I just wanted you to know that I shut down the combine in 
the middle of harvesting to catch your show. It was worth 
it! 

 
This comes from a Yorkton area farmer. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask everyone to welcome Rory 
and Lorie here today and I’d also like to remind folks that there 
. . . some very talented artists from the United States, the 
Jordanaires, that some of you older folks would remember, that 
backed up Elvis Presley, are now backing up Rory Allen. And 
they will be performing here in September as well. 
 
So what I’d like to say on behalf of everyone here to Rory and 
his wife Lorie is — and ask you all to welcome him — is, thank 
you, thank you very much for being here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as an avid fan of Elvis 
Presley’s music, we . . . on behalf of the official opposition, I 
would just like to also extend our greetings to Rory and his wife 
here at the legislature. 
 
You know we were just — literally, Mr. Speaker — we were 
just talking about Rory, several members of our caucus and 
myself, yesterday at lunch, myself and the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone and the member for Cypress Hills. I was 
talking about a gospel disc that Rory has recorded, and 
indicated that it sounds so much like Elvis it would almost 
defeat the purpose because it sounds so much like Elvis that 
people might just think, well I should just get the Elvis disc. But 
there’s a few tracks on there that Elvis never recorded and it’s 
an excellent one indeed. 
 
So on behalf of the opposition we also want to thank him for his 
work and welcome him here to the legislature. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in your 
gallery this morning I’m pleased to introduce to you Linda 
Burkowski. Linda lives in Regina Dewdney. She is a 
rehabilitation consultant with Co-operators Insurance. She is 
also part of the power team our party is putting together in 
Regina Dewdney. I don’t know what the member for Regina 
Dewdney is doing in his next life, but my recommendation is he 
start sending out his resumés right away. 
 
I’d ask all members to kindly welcome Linda Burkowski. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also 
introduce this morning to you and through you to the Assembly, 
some guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who are here to 
watch this morning’s procedure. They are members of the 
Saskatchewan Arts Alliance and the artistic community. And I 
would like to introduce them to you and ask them to stand. 
 
It’s Mr. Allen Lefebvre, president of the Alliance; Ms. Brenda 
Niskala; Mr. Patrick Close; Mr. Bill Siggins; Mr. Michael 
Millar; Ms. Sheila Roberts; and Ms. Marnie Gladwell. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these fine 
people to our Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
may have noticed, Mr. Speaker, since we began the 
introductions that some 50 students have quietly taken their 
places in the west gallery; and it’s my pleasure to introduce 
them, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly. 
 
Seated in the gallery are students who are grade 4 and 5 
students from King George School in Moose Jaw. They’re 
accompanied today by their teachers, Sandi Kerney and Donna 
Humbert; and chaperones, Dara McIntosh, Brian Wilson, Mark 
LeBere, and Brenda Winch. 
 
After being here in the gallery for a while, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
going to be taking a tour of the buildings, and I look forward to 
meeting with them for a photo and the possibility of a short visit 
later this morning before they head away from the building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may be of interest to members of the Assembly 
to note that these students from King George, at one and the 
same time, go to school every day in the oldest . . . one of the 
oldest and one of the newest schools in all of Saskatchewan. 
King George School was renovated just a couple of years ago 
from being one of the — on the outside — one of the absolute 
oldest schools in the entire province to, on the inside, one of the 
newest. And they are well known for their enthusiasm about 
school. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to join me in 
welcoming these students, their teachers, and chaperones from 
King George in Moose Jaw. Good to have you. 
 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the official opposition, I also would like to join the 
member from Melville in welcoming the members of the Arts 
Alliance here to the Assembly this afternoon for the second 
reading of The Status of the Artist Bill. So again welcome on 
behalf of this side of the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Father’s Day 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
honoured to rise in the Assembly today to ask all members of 
the House to recognize the hard work and many contributions 
of one of the most important people in our lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Sunday is Father’s Day and we would be 
remiss if we did not take this opportunity to say a warm and 
heartfelt thank you to our dads for everything they have done 
for us over the years. Mr. Speaker, all of us in the House know 
the important role that our fathers and our fathers-in-law have 
played in our lives throughout the years. Their strength, 
guidance, help, and on the odd occasion financial support has 
always been given in good faith and on our part gratefully 
received. 
 
Their words of wisdom, acts of discipline have helped in 
shaping us into becoming responsible and contributing 
members of society. For those that will be remembering their 
fathers in memory, we respectfully acknowledge your loss and 
we know that time cannot erase the special place that a father 
holds in your heart. 
 
For those that will be fortunate enough to spend this Sunday 
with their fathers and their fathers-in-law, may you enjoy the 
day and treasure the moments you are able to spend together. 
From all of us here in the House to our fathers, wherever they 
may be, we say thank you, we couldn’t have done it without 
you. 
 
And on a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I’m very fortunate to still 
have my parents, and my father will be 85 years old this year. 
So I’d just like to say Happy Father’s Day, Dad. I love you. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Science Labs for SIFC 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, of course first of all, as well, 
Happy Father’s Day from the government side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more good news on the building of strong 
partnerships between First Nations people and the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(10:15) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, funding from this government has 
allowed Saskatchewan Indian Federated College to proceed 
building new labs that will train the next generation of 
scientists. The provincial government is contributing $602,000 
from its Innovation and Science Fund to build and equip eight 
laboratories in SIFC’s (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) new building. SIFC is contributing 2.4 million for the 
labs and its new interdisciplinary research facility for 
Aboriginal science and health. Science will therefore become an 
integral part of First Nations self-determination and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal students will be ready to join the 
Saskatchewan workforce of tomorrow and there will be many 
jobs for trained young scientists in this great province. 
 
Funding of these new labs speaks to two directives of this 
government. One is supporting research and development 
through education, and the other is innovation partnerships and 
fresh approaches to have First Nations and Métis people as full 
participants in the new economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we salute Eber Hampton, the staff, and the board 
of Saskatchewan Indian Federated College for this tremendous 
success story. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipalities Declare Drought Disaster Areas 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to relay to 
the legislature a message that I received very recently from the 
deputy reeve and councillor for the RM (rural municipality) of 
Turtle River No. 469. And I quote: 
 

I wish to inform you that the RM of Turtle River has 
declared itself a drought disaster area. It’s the second year 
of drought in a row. 

 
The message goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say that: 
 

We have had less than one-tenth of precipitation since our 
very small amount of snow cover. 

 
The message also contains a plea for assistance for water 
development and for assistance for transporting feed for 
livestock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the vast majority of the province has been 
blessed with either an abundance or certainly an adequate 
amount of rainfall, the northwest region around Lloydminster 
received none whatsoever in this last 10 days. 
 
Other municipalities in the area have now also included 
themselves in this disaster drought area list. It’s the RM of 
Eldon, the RM of Hillsdale, the RM of Senlac, and the RM of 
Britannia. The situation continues to be most serious for these 
farmers and ranchers and continued consideration should be 
directed to their current and ongoing predicament of 
deteriorating crop and feed conditions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

New Food Distribution Processing Centre in Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, 
the CEO (chief executive officer) of the Saskatoon Regional 
Economic Development Authority, Dale Botting, and the 
president and CEO, Erla Glesby, of Westco Storage Ltd. 
announced another exciting addition to Saskatoon’s already 
dynamic economy . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — A $5 million investment in 
Saskatoon’s growing food processing industry. 
 
Westco, a successful and established company based in 
Winnipeg, will begin constructing a state-of-the-art, 
multi-temperature food distribution facility this summer, on 
60th Street in my constituency of Saskatoon Northwest. 
 
The facility is expected to be up and running by January 31 of 
next year. The investment will create new jobs with more to 
come with the possibility of a phase 2 expansion. The 60,000 
square foot facility will provide value-added services to 
Saskatoon’s expanding food processing industry, such as 
inspecting meat imports and exports, stock rotation, inventory 
control, material handling, and storage. 
 
The Westco project marks the start of an exciting new phase for 
food processing in Saskatoon and across the Prairies — the 
creation of a food park in which Westco would become the hub. 
This new food park is already well on its way to becoming a 
reality. Westco’s food distribution centre will complement the 
recent $34 million investment by Centennial Foods located 
immediately east of the new 8.75 acre site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating Erla Glesby and Dale Botting in this exciting 
new project for the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Trade Injury Compensation Federal Responsibility 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
agricultural support and emergency payments required due to 
natural disasters are rightfully shared between the two levels of 
government, federal and provincial. However, international 
trade is not a shared responsibility. It falls solely under the 
jurisdiction of the federal government. 
 
For that reason my party and I are strongly of the view that 
trade injury compensation required for Canadian farmers is 
exclusively a federal responsibility. Following the Uruguay 
Round of trade negotiations, Ottawa eliminated many grain 
subsidies including the historic Crow benefit. 
 
The European community and the United States did not follow 
suit. Both increased the subsidies they pay their farmers 
culminating in the US (United States) farm Bill this spring. 
 
According to Agriculture Canada, 25 per cent of the collapse in 
grain prices is directly due to subsidies paid by our trading 
partners. This translates into a loss to Canadian farmers of 1.3 

billion, or for Saskatchewan 470 million. 
 
The federal government’s own figures show that the request of 
a 1.3 billion trade injury payment is fair and needed, and I call 
upon the federal government to recognize its responsibility and 
do the right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Woodland Campus Graduation Ceremonies 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’m on my feet, 
our colleague from Prince Albert Northcote, Minister of 
Industry, is attending the awards presentation at Woodland 
Campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology) in Prince Albert. This afternoon the 
graduation ceremony will occur as graduation exercises are also 
taking place across the province in Saskatchewan in high 
schools and post-secondary institution. 
 
During the morning exercises, SIAST Woodland will present 
130 scholarships and awards with an approximate value of 
$62,000. This afternoon about 800 students will graduate from 
the more than the 50 certificate and diploma programs offered 
at SIAST. This is good news for students who have successfully 
completed their course of study in applied science or in 
technical and paraprofessional fields. One of those professions 
is forestry management which was talked about earlier in the 
Assembly this week. 
 
But it’s even better news for Saskatchewan because, as we 
know, 92 per cent of the students who seek employment will 
find it within six months, and a huge number of them will find 
jobs right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, 2,000 students attend 
Woodland Campus plus several hundred other part-time and 
extension students. It employs 300 faculty and staff and 
contributes about $3.8 million annually to the Prince Albert 
economy. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, and the minister would want me to ask all 
members to congratulate these graduates and wish them well as 
they enter the workforce. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SARCAN Depot Reopens in Moosomin 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Monday I had the privilege of joining with the members and 
clients of the Moosomin SARCAN centre as they officially 
opened — or reopened — a brand new SARCAN depot, and 
then shortly after, opened a thrift store. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new depot certainly replaces one that was 
becoming very crowded, and I believe will meet the need of the 
recycling that is taking place in the Moosomin and surrounding 
area. The new depot is a much larger and in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
has a much brighter receiving area as the customers bring their 
cans and their plastic containers in to have them recycled. So I 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

 

believe it will certainly serve the community and area well. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the district opened their new thrift store. 
And this isn’t just another avenue whereby we remove 
recyclable articles out of our landfill systems, and it’s certainly 
a plus for our environment, the way we address the 
environment. 
 
As well, it becomes another avenue whereby individuals with 
abilities that really cause them . . . and they need the aspect of 
reaching out to the community, we give them the avenue 
whereby they can feel worthwhile. And this thrift store, Mr. 
Speaker, as they were reopening it, was something that 
everyone was really proud of. 
 
So this morning, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend a special 
congratulations to the Moosomin ability centre and the 
reopening of the SARCAN depot and the opening of their new 
thrift store. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Harassment Complaint 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 
has still not told Saskatchewan taxpayers how much they paid 
for the investigation of the harassment complaint against the 
Environment minister. To the Premier: how many taxpayers’ 
dollars did the Premier spend to investigate why the minister’s 
personal birthday cards did not get mailed in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. MacKenzie has not yet 
invoiced the cost of her work. When we receive from her the 
cost of her work, we will of course pay that cost and we will 
make that figure known to the opposition and to the public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — It seems awful odd, Mr. Minister, that 
you would — Mr. Speaker — that you would sign a contract 
and not at least get an estimate before doing so — open ended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we asked the Premier whether the 
independent investigator he hired had found the Minister of 
Environment guilty of workplace harassment. The Premier 
refused to answer this question. Instead the Premier said that in 
his judgment there was no harassment. 
 
We would like to know how the Premier came to that 
conclusion. He has no background in this area. He didn’t follow 
the Public Service Commission harassment policy. Mr. 
Speaker, what set of criteria did the Premier use to decide the 
minister was not guilty of harassment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, simply again to review the 
course of events. An incident occurred in the minister’s office. 
We sought the services of Ms. Marilyn MacKenzie, a noted 
Canadian in the field of workplace complaints. We asked Ms. 
MacKenzie to do an assessment of the event. She provided her 

report to me, the full report. She provided to the public a shorter 
statement of her findings based on both the public statement 
made by Ms. MacKenzie and the findings of her report. It was 
my conclusion that there was no harassment here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier is potentially spending thousands of taxpayer’s 
dollars to hire, in his words, an expert in workplace harassment 
to investigate this incident. And yet, at the end of the 
investigation, the Premier himself decided whether harassment 
took place — not the independent investigator. The Premier has 
no background in this area; he won’t say which criteria he used, 
yet somehow he has ruled in favour of his minister and against 
her former employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier hired this outside . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The Premier is paying the expert 
thousands of taxpayers’ dollars, but won’t rely on her judgment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier come clean and release the 
investigator’s findings on whether or not the minister was guilty 
of harassment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to inform the House, so that the 
member doesn’t repeat the mistake, that the member has today 
provided me her resignation from cabinet. 
 
In terms of the question: it’s an interesting turn of events 
because since this event occurred and the investigation was 
reported, the Leader of the Opposition, when he’s here, says no, 
that report should . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry. The 
Leader of the Opposition has consistently said that the report 
should not be made public, understanding the importance of 
confidentiality in workplace complaint; he has said that 
consistently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, the House Leader stands in the House and demands now 
that we make the report public. The fact of the matter is as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: the report, as in any other report 
concerning a workplace complaint, will not be made public. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m glad to hear that the Premier is now announcing that the 
minister has resigned. He could have done that on the first 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He is saying that we are asking for the full report. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re asking for the expert’s conclusion that she recommended 
to the Premier. We’re asking, Mr. Speaker, that the costs be 
released to the public. Those are the questions we’re asking, 
Mr. Speaker. The Premier and the Deputy Premier have had 
ample opportunity . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

members to allow the questions to be put. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They have had 
ample opportunity to present those results. Why have they 
failed to do so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, initially this morning, the 
member has asked me about the cost of this work and I have 
assured he and the opposition and the public that when that cost 
is known, it will be made . . . it will be made public. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, I think I understand why it is that the 
opposition changes their positions, makes some attacks on the 
person who did the investigation. I think I know what’s going 
on here. It’s because, Mr. Speaker, this opposition does not 
want to talk about what’s going on in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They don’t want to talk about the optimism that’s in 
Saskatchewan. They don’t want to talk about 11,000 new jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They don’t want to talk about a credit 
upgrade for this province from Moody’s. So that’s why they 
have questions like this today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Insurance Claimants 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). And now we’re going to find out 
what’s actually going on in the province of Saskatchewan as the 
Premier wants to talk about. 
 
Last night, CTV (Canadian Television Network Limited) 
reported another case of a Saskatchewan no-fault insurance 
victim who was also the subject of video surveillance by SGI; 
only this woman was completely terrorized by the realization 
she was being followed before she discovered it was really SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shannon Babiarz is a single mother of two small 
children. There were rumours in the neighbourhood of a 
suspicious vehicle. On a routine day, Ms. Babiarz discovered 
she was being followed to her daycare, to her doctor’s 
appointment, to her home by a van matching the description of 
the suspicious vehicle. This experience left Ms. Babiarz 
terrified until she learned that it was SGI and then the terror 
turned to anger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is it that SGI’s surveillance policies are 
leaving Saskatchewan insurance claimants terrified to leave 
their own homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
the member will know of course that I’m not able to comment 
on a specific or individual case. 
 

But let me say generally, Mr. Speaker, that it certainly is not the 
intent of SGI, Mr. Speaker, to harass people, Mr. Speaker, to 
indiscriminately do surveillance on people, Mr. Speaker. But, 
Mr. Speaker, it is their intent — it is absolutely their intent, Mr. 
Speaker — to ensure for the . . . for the public and for the 
people who are customers of SGI, Mr. Speaker, that their 
interests are protected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And where there is concern or where there is a belief, Mr. 
Speaker, that fraud has been committed, Mr. Speaker, or where 
misrepresentation has taken place, Mr. Speaker, they, like any 
responsible insurance company, are going to investigate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Shannon Babiarz, who incidentally is sitting in the east gallery 
this morning, was injured in a car accident on November 27, 
1999. She suffered injuries but in particular dislocated her right 
wrist. 
 
After two weeks of rest at home, Mr. Speaker, before beginning 
therapy, she met with her SGI rep and asked if she had 
permission to go to do some Christmas shopping for her two 
children. With SGI’s approval — approval, Mr. Speaker — she 
did so, only to discover three days later she was being followed 
by not one but two investigators and was under video 
surveillance by SGI. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is entrapment. Is this how SGI regularly 
treats their no-fault victims? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this invasion of her privacy has caused Ms. 
Babiarz and her family tremendous grief. Why would SGI give 
permission, only to use that opportunity to spy on Ms. Babiarz? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well when I 
stood up in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The minister will start 
over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well when I 
stood up in the House the other day and quoted from the 
Leader-Post of June 11 where I thought the member said that he 
now believes that investigations should take place where fraud 
was believed to be committed, I think he’s now saying, Mr. 
Speaker, that they should no longer do that again now, Mr. 
Speaker. I wish they would stay on one position. 
 
I think also, Mr. Speaker, he’s not made his position clear as to 
whether or not, when there is a belief that fraud or 
misrepresentation has taken place, as to whether or not those 
individuals should be contacted. 
 
I can’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that that party really believes that 
where there is a belief that fraud or misrepresentation has taken 
place, we should actually phone them in advance, get their 
permission to find out whether or not it’s convenient for them to 
do an investigation. 
 
I think in most cases those individuals would say, please don’t 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

 

do an investigation on me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, isn’t it disgusting that right in 
front, right in front of the victim, right . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Members of the 
Assembly, while we welcome all visitors and guests to the 
Assembly, it’s important that members take special care not to 
involve guests directly into the debate or draw them into the 
debate in any way. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That minister 
would get up and tell the people of Saskatchewan that SGI is 
prepared to tell people it’s okay to buy Christmas gifts for their 
children, and then when they’ve given that permission, they 
take that exact opportunity to spy on those individuals. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is disgusting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the minister 
agree to add this case to the review SGI is currently undergoing 
on Virginia Cook’s case and their surveillance practices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll tell 
you what is disgusting to me, and I know what is disgusting to 
the public of Saskatchewan — that is when that party stands up 
and says when there is a belief that fraud has been committed 
that no investigation should take place, that SGI should just 
willy-nilly pay out claims, Mr. Speaker. That is disgusting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me say again, that 
while I can absolutely not comment on this case, and the 
opposition has the prerogative to bring in cases, I can’t 
comment on those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me say with some sympathy, Mr. Speaker, that it is 
clearly the position of SGI . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I would ask the 
members to come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me say 
that SGI — and I’m sure every insurance company — has 
regret when individuals feel that in some way they’re being 
victimized or terrorized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intent for SGI is to protect the interests, Mr. 
Speaker, of their customers — clearly that’s their intent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Bed Closures This Summer 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Health. After 10 years of gross 
mismanagement of our health care system, the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) has given Saskatchewan by far the largest 
waiting lists in Canada. In the 1999 provincial election the NDP 
promised to cut the waiting list by 25 per cent. But waiting lists 
have doubled over the last three years. And now health districts 
are again, across the province, are announcing that they are 
cutting major . . . summer shortages and hospital bed shortages 
over the summer which will lead inevitably to even longer 
waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Health is simple. 
How many hospital beds is the NDP closing for the summer in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very interesting day. 
I finally get a question from the critic for Health about health, 
and we actually have an issue that is a normal question period 
issue. So I’m very pleased to get . . . be up on my feet to answer 
that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the health districts across the province are 
reviewing their vacation schedules for their very valuable 
workers to make sure that they all can get some rest during the 
summer. They are looking at the kinds of services that can be 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the health district 
management, along with all of the staff, are looking at what 
kinds of services will be provided over the summer. As 
everyone knows there is usually a slowdown over the summer. 
 
My understanding is that there will be more beds open this 
summer than last summer in most areas because of a number of 
the retention and recruitment issues that we’ve dealt with. We 
are continuing to make sure that we deal with the issue of the 
waiting lists and the other kinds of concerns, working with the 
professionals in the field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
were giving the Minister of Health some opportunity to let the 
fires die down that he created about the long-term care fees that 
he created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, with things being as dry as 
they are in Saskatchewan we didn’t think he could stand any 
more heat at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members, order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, now that the 
NDP government is again closing hospital beds for the summer, 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

how many more people are going to be on the long-term 
waiting lists as a result of this action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have very many capable 
people within our health care system who look at the ebbs and 
the flows, who look at the ebbs and the flows of the usage of the 
whole health system. 
 
And so we know that every summer that there will be a 
reduction in the number of procedures, and that’s how the 
planning goes. So what we are going to continue to do is to 
make sure we get more people working here. 
 
Now what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that I very much 
appreciated this chance to answer the question, but I know my 
colleague, the Minister of Highways, has been waiting a whole 
session . . . he has not had a single question. What’s wrong with 
our opposition? There must be some question for that poor 
lonely Minister of Highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health should 
know that as a result of the misguided comments from the 
Minister of Highways about health issues, he doesn’t have 
enough gravel left in his budget to do anything with the 
highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, order. Order, members. Order, 
members. Order. I have to ask some members, specifically the 
member for Regina South, to please cease continuing to engage 
members opposite when the Speaker has asked for order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
understandable that in order to give badly overworked nurses 
some time off that they have to have some vacation. But now 
we’re hearing right across the province that nurses are being 
asked to have shorter vacations, and when they get back, they’re 
being asked to provide more overtime and longer hours in order 
to keep the system together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government promised to hire 500 more health 
care workers and instead, in the last three years we’ve lost over 
1,200 nurses. How in the world is this misguided policy of this 
government going to relieve the workload of our badly needed 
nurses in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this morning on the radio, 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio host Sheila 
Coles asked the question of Ed Sorsdahl, who’s the CEO of the 
Pipestone Health District, and she said to him, do you see any 
hope that things are going to get better long term? Ed Sorsdahl 
says, long term I think it will. There have been a number of 

initiatives that the provincial government has started in 
recruitment, retention, the bursary program, additional nursing 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Those kinds of things. And I think in the 
long run it will get better. 
 
In the short run it will get better as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The new collective agreement for nurses 
here in Saskatchewan makes our wage rates very competitive 
and we believe that will be a factor in attracting some nurses to 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working with the professionals in the 
system to make sure that we provide the care that the people of 
Saskatchewan want and we will continue to do that despite the 
lemon-eating members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost for Policing of G-8 Summit 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Yesterday we raised the concerns of municipalities whose 
police resources are being reduced due to members who are 
going to the G-8 Summit in Kananaskis. Swift Current, in 
particular, is going to be seven officers short during their 
busiest time of the summer which is Frontier Days. So, Mr. 
Speaker, other officers are going to have to be double shifted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that results in significant costs for the 
municipality, and the staff sergeant in charge of the detachment 
has told Swift Current City Council that they will have to 
absorb the increased local staffing costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has confirmed that the salary costs of 
the officers attending the summit are going to be covered by the 
federal government but, Mr. Speaker, are they also going to pay 
the additional costs incurred by municipalities who are going to 
have to pay overtime to the officers left at home? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the way that it works, as the member well knows, is that the 
salary for those — in the case of Swift Current — Swift Current 
officers will be paid by the federal government. 
 
Vacation leave has been cancelled so much of the work will be 
done by other police officers at their normal rate of salary. 
There may be some, there may be some requirement for 
overtime to be paid but, Mr. Speaker, our experience is, in the 
past when this happened with Calgary, that in fact there was a 
net credit to police services because the amount of overtime 
paid was far less than the amount of salary which they were no 
longer responsible for, Mr. Speaker. 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let me ask the member this question. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite constantly, as do we, ask the 
federal government to help Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
Here the federal government is asking Saskatchewan to help 
them protect government leaders from across the world at the 
G-8. Does he not think, Mr. Speaker, that when we ask Canada 
for help we should also respond when they ask us for help? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s go one step further then. Right now the local 
municipalities are asking you for help and your government for 
help so maybe you should give them some help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please, members. Order please, 
members. Order. And I would remind the member that all 
statements should be made through the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Simple . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
make the question really simple for the Minister of Justice. 
 
What we’re talking about here is overtime for the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officers and other officers 
left at home. In the case of Swift Current to cover for Frontier 
Days — the busiest time of year — what they’re asking, what 
we’re asking, if the federal government does not pick up this 
overtime, will you as the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. For purposes of 
the record, would the member restate his question through the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, will that minister and that government backfill the 
dollars that the local municipalities need to pay overtime for the 
members left at home? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, our 
expectation is that the amount of money saved for those salaries 
of officers in Kananaskis will be more than the amount of 
money that might be paid in overtime by the city of Swift 
Current or by the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at the present time there appears to be no challenge to the 
city of Swift Current. They can jump the gun if they want. And 
the member opposite can say the fall is . . . the sky is falling or 
the fall is skying, for that matter. And, Mr. Speaker, if there is a 
challenge we will deal with it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I should also remind the member, as I’m sure 
he knows, that when Swift Current signed its contract with the 
RCMP, it undertook to provide these very kinds of services if 
they were required, Mr. Speaker. This is no surprise to Swift 
Current. It’s happened before, Mr. Speaker, and it didn’t 
involve Swift Current in a financial obligation last time. We 
don’t think it will this time, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the member 

could just wait for a week or two and see what happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF FURTHER ESTIMATE 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’m also before orders of the 
day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I rise to submit further estimates accompanied by a message 
from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would all members please rise for the 
message from the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits the further estimates of 
certain sums required for the service of the province for the 
12 months ending March 31, 2003, and recommends the 
same to the Legislative Assembly. (Signed), Lynda 
Haverstock, Lieutenant Governor, province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Today I am 
tabling a further estimate to increase the Department of Health 
budget for the 2002-03 fiscal year. 
 
Later, during Committee of Finance, a motion will be 
introduced to adjust the budget for Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
These changes are occurring for two reasons. First, this 
government will continue to live within its financial means. 
Second, we listened to what people had to say respecting 
long-term care fees and we are acting accordingly. 
 
Earlier this year, long-term care fees were reviewed and a 
proposal to revise the fees was introduced. The objective was 
continuing to provide quality, affordable health care. 
 
Concerns were raised, Mr. Speaker, that the change in fees 
would cause significant difficulty for some people. We listened 
and we acted accordingly. 
 
On May 10 the Premier announced we were cancelling the 
proposed fee increase for long-term care residents. Living 
within our means requires matching revenue to spending. 
Increased support for long-term care therefore meant making 
other choices — either getting more revenue from another 
source or revising spending in another agency. 
 
The choice was made to revise downward the projected 
spending in Highways and Transportation for 2002-03. This 
still leaves Highways spending well above historical levels. In 
fact it remains at the second highest level in history. And if our 
revenue picture improves, it may well be possible to restore 
Highways funding to its original budget level. 
 
In the interim, today I am tabling a further estimate for the 
2002-03 Department of Health budget. Mr. Speaker, I move, 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

seconded by the Deputy Government House Leader: 
 

That Her Honour’s message and the further estimates be 
referred to the Committee of Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a 
point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the point of order deals 
with the Deputy Premier, the member for Yorkton, deliberately 
misleading the House, and I would like to quote his statement 
from June 12 Hansard. Deputy Premier, and I quote: 
 

Thank you. I want to, Mr. Speaker, table to . . . (this) 
Assembly the work of this government and this Premier 
and this ministry for the past year and a half. 
 

Another paragraph, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

And so today, Mr. Speaker, I want to table a series of 
reports that go back to June of last year right now; where 
this minister has made a presentation to Ottawa on two 
occasions, where I’ve made a presentation to the federal 
ministries on behalf of Canadian farmers. And what the 
Premier has submitted, Mr. Speaker, on A Fair Deal for 
Canadians, and I want to table that this afternoon. 

 
Yesterday I sent a letter, Mr. Speaker, to the Clerk’s office 
requesting those tabled documents, and I received this reply this 
morning. 
 

Regarding your letter of June 13, 2002. I wish to inform 
you that the Minister of Agriculture did not (I repeat, did 
not) table any documents in the House on June 12. 
Therefore I am unable to provide you with the requested 
copies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier clearly said that he was 
tabling the documents right at that time, that afternoon. He 
clearly stated that in his own words, Mr. Speaker, deliberately 
misleading this House in failing to provide those copies and 
tabling them to this House. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, that you rule that he did so, that he 
apologize unequivocally to this House, and that he table those 
documents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I think it is more than 
coincidence as the Opposition House Leader stands today — 
and we’re dealing in a moment with The Status of the Artist Act 
— that he engages in dramatics rather than in parliamentary 
procedure. Because that’s clearly what he’s doing. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — We’ll leave it to others to decide about his 
dramatic ability, but his parliamentary procedure is off the mark 
by a fair mark, Mr. Speaker. And I ask you to rule that. 
 
You will know, Mr. Speaker, that on a point of order there are 
several parts of the rules that apply and I ask you to be 
cognizant of the words of the House Leader of the opposition. 
He brings a point of order . . . Mr. Speaker, it is standard 
procedure in bringing a point of order that it must be brought at 
the earliest possible opportunity. Mr. Speaker, he quotes from a 
Hansard of two days ago. Mr. Speaker, that alone, that alone 
makes his point of order out of order. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, if he wants to, if he wants to make a 
complaint about exercise . . . abuse of his privilege, there is a 
way to do that. It’s a different procedure. It’s got nothing to do 
with point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thirdly, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would 
bother to check, he would know that those reports are in fact 
tabled. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on those grounds, I simply ask that you will 
find that the member, although he may be dramatic, is off the 
mark and clearly his point of order should ought not to be well 
taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I would thank both the member for 
Cannington and the member from Moose Jaw North for raising 
the point of order. I would accept the member’s timing in terms 
of I do believe that this was probably the earliest time that it 
could be brought forward. However I would also advise the 
members that the member . . . the minister, Deputy Premier, had 
voluntarily made his statement that he would provide the 
documentation. There is no rule in the Assembly requiring that 
to happen and there is no basis on which the minister — order, 
please, order — and there is no basis on which the Speaker can 
rule about the tabling of the documents. 
 
I am advised by the Clerk that the documents have been 
submitted and I think that should put the statement to rest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today on behalf of the government to stand and table written 
responses to questions 318, 319, 320, 321, 323, 324, 325, 326, 
327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, and 333. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to convert for debates returnable questions 
no. 322, 334, 335, 336, 337, and 338. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled questions 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

 

318, 319, 320, 321, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 
332, and 333, and requested conversions to motions for debates 
returnable questions 322, 334, 335, 336, 337, and 338. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I stand to just correct that 329 was converted for 
debates returnable — question 329. My apology. 
 
The Speaker: — For the record, question 329 has also been 
converted to motions for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Status of the Artist Act/ 
Loi sur le statut de l’artiste 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m truly pleased 
to rise and speak to Bill No. 73, The Status of the Artist Act 
2002, which provides for the recognition of our professional 
artists and cultural workers as important contributors to our 
social, cultural, and economic life here in this great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is an important first step and provides a platform for 
further discussion of issues important to artists and cultural 
workers. The proposed legislation recognizes the contribution 
of artists and artistic creativity in Saskatchewan life, culture, 
education, economy, and heritage, Mr. Speaker. It affirms the 
principle of fair compensation for artistic workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring attention to the words of the 
late Anne Szumigalski, one of our great Saskatchewan poets 
who said, and I will quote: 
 

Artists should have as much attention from government as 
anyone else . . . they should be on a par with everyone else, 
no more no less . . . parity is really the key to what artists 
need. 

 
Mr. Speaker, through this government’s leadership and 
example, this Bill will set the groundwork for artists’ equity in 
the broader community. This legislation outlines principles that 
affirm freedom of speech and artistic and cultural expression as 
well as the right for artists to be treated fairly by government 
and society. It also affirms the desirability of making artistic 
works available to the public. These principles will guide 
further work on issues important to artists. 
 
The Status of the Artist Act also allows the minister responsible 
to establish advisory committees to research, study, and report 
back to government on more substantive labour and social 
equity issues for artists. The arts sector will be consulted on the 
advisory committee process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, artists have been requesting formal recognition 
since the early ’90s. Specifically I would like to acknowledge 
the work of the board and staff of the Saskatchewan Arts 
Alliance who have been a consistent and thoughtful voice on 
artist equity issues. 
 
Using this Bill as a platform for further dialogue, government 
looks forward to working with the arts and cultural sector. 

Mr. Speaker, we all know how people in the rest of Canada and 
indeed the world have the opportunity to see what 
Saskatchewan is all about through the excellent work being 
done by people of the cultural community. We recognize that 
cultural workers are the ambassadors of what we are as a people 
— our diversity, our distinctive abilities, and our hopes and 
aspirations. 
 
The legislation will put Saskatchewan on the map as the first 
English-speaking province in Canada to enact legislation on the 
status of the artist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and proud to move second reading of 
this Bill No. 73, The Status of the Artist Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to rise today and respond to the second reading of Bill 
No. 73, The Status of the Artist Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity about a year ago or a year 
and a half ago to meet with the Art Alliance in our caucus. We 
had sent out a number of invitations, and a number of groups 
came in, in the arts, culture, and recreation field, to bring us up 
to speed. As a newly elected member, I was not real familiar 
with how all the structure worked. 
 
But this is one of the issues that they brought up, right off the 
bat, is that they wanted to be recognized for what they did as 
artists in this province. And there was no formal procedure in 
place at that time, and it was one of the issues. So it was really 
good to see and I was glad to see that the government is moving 
forward with this legislation as they have been asked since the 
early 1990s, I believe the minister said, for some recognition. 
 
I think any time we move forward with this legislation and it 
deals with concerns of a group, whether it’s the Art Alliance or 
whomever, to put them at a par and to put them at a level . . . on 
a level playing field with the rest of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m glad to hear, as the minister mentioned, that we’d be 
first English-speaking or the second province in Canada, I 
guess, to move forward with legislation of this nature. 
 
It’s certainly good when we can say, on this side of the House, 
that we are the second province moving forward in the 
Dominion with legislation as opposed to the last province 
moving forward. And quite far too often, it seems to be that 
we’re in . . . having to say that we’re the last province. So I 
would applaud the government for moving forward on this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as with every Bill that comes before this House on 
second reading, we adjourn debate until we can study the Bill a 
little bit further. But from our side of the House it doesn’t look 
like, at first blush, that there’d be any reason to be holding this 
up much past that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this juncture I would move to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 61 — The 
Regional Health Services Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
with pleasure that I rise this morning to comment on Bill 61, the 
regional health authorities Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 
significant Bill in the field of health in this current sitting of the 
legislature and I would like to take a little time to comment on 
this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t all that long ago when this government was 
formed that they decided to consolidate the authority of the 
delivery of health care services in this province from the myriad 
of local boards and autonomous agencies in the province that 
looked after nursing homes and hospitals and were very much a 
part of the mosaic of the Saskatchewan communities. And they 
did that by creating 32 district health boards across the province 
and closed a good number of facilities right across this 
province, not the least of which was the Plains Health Centre 
right here in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this initiative was undertaken, the 
government of the day, this current government under a 
previous administration, recognized at least in part that it was 
important that these local district health boards attempt to 
maintain the connection between the community and the 
decision makers that were going to happen on now, not so 
directly a community basis, but on a district basis. 
 
And they said that it was important that this connection be 
maintained. And the way they did that is they made sure that on 
the district level there was going to be board elections. Now the 
sentiment was noble and the principle of having local 
representations who were elected by the people they served was 
admirable. 
 
The government of the day decided that they’d only allow that 
half of the positions would be elected and the other half would 
be appointed by the Minister of Health. And, Mr. Speaker, 
going way back to that decision in 1993, I believe the official 
opposition expressed concerns about the fact that there were not 
fully elected health boards. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s been important to recognize 
that these health boards with their mix of appointed and elected 
members functioned reasonably well. And when you talk to 
people who have served on those boards in the past and, indeed, 
currently continue to serve until this regional authority becomes 
in effect, they would say that, by and large, they were able to 
work out the problems that were created by two groups of board 
members — one elected and one appointed. And there was at 
least some resemblance of connection to the community. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the government then looked at these district 
health boards and they said now we’ve got to build a working 
relationship somehow with these district boards. And in some 

instances, I think the government was disappointed in that these 
district boards worked very hard to create some autonomy for 
themselves and to exercise some local decision making that 
would reflect the priorities and needs of their local 
communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what happened is that very often the 
department was disappointed with decisions that these district 
boards were making. But, Mr. Speaker, when you create an 
environment whereby you empower people, they’re not always 
going to do exactly what you want them to do. That’s natural. 
 
But what happened as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that shortly 
after the structure was created in the initial health care reform, 
the government just simply abrogated its responsibility of 
leadership. And after Louise Simard was no longer the Health 
minister — and you can agree or disagree with the direction that 
was taken by the government under Ms. Simard’s leadership, 
but it’s pretty clear where she wanted to go at least; there was 
indeed a plan, arguable or not, it was a plan — but after she left 
the office of the Minister of Health, it seems as if this 
government, this NDP government simply dropped the ball and 
let the whole situation drift. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it created a really unbalanced 
situation. Because on one hand the government expected district 
health boards to carry out certain initiatives, and on the other 
hand the government was not prepared to provide the necessary 
funding for them to do it. And so what they ended up with a 
situation is conflict between the Department of Health and the 
district boards as to how these initiatives were going to be 
implemented and how they were going to be funded. 
 
(11:15) 
 
The district health boards have no taxation authority so there is 
no option for them to look at other sources of revenue; they 
simply had to accept what the Department of Health was giving 
them. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what happened in many instances, there 
was a conflict between the department and the district boards. 
And to make matters worse, the whole budget process was 
absolutely convoluted and bizarre. Because district boards 
would start their budget year from April 1 to March 31 to the 
following year and they had to submit these budgets for 
approval of the Department of Health. 
 
Well the Department of Health in many instances didn’t 
approve these budgets until 9, 10, or 11 months of the actual 
year had gone by. And so then they said to the districts, well 
now you can’t run the deficit or you’ve got to do something 
about your budget because we don’t like what we see. But 
three-quarters of the year already had passed; three-quarters of 
the expenditures had already been committed. And so it was an 
absolutely unrealistic expectation by the Department of Health 
of these district boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an impossible situation and it actually got 
worse, not better. Under the leadership — or lack of leadership 
— of the former minister of Health, the situation got even more 
bizarre. And in addition to not only presenting and approving 
the budgets in a timely way, the minister of the day, the 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

 

member from Saskatoon Nutana, I believe, would sit there and 
micromanage and second guess all the little detailed decisions 
of the district health boards. 
 
And so now you had a situation where not only was there no 
leadership coming from the Department of Health, there was no 
appropriate budget approval process that looked forward and 
give the district something knowledgeable and meaningful to 
work with. You now had a situation where the minister of 
Health of the day was micromanaging the day-to-day decisions 
of most of these district health boards. And so it created an 
environment of extreme frustration on everybody’s part. 
 
When I travel around the province and talked to district health 
boards and say, what was your experience under the minister 
from . . . of Health, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, they 
said it was an impossible situation because she went from issue 
to issue, detail to detail, and simply overrode and 
micromanaged and second guessed all the decisions of district 
health boards. 
 
And then what she did is she said, now what you’ve to do is 
control your deficits; you’ve got to do it in an environment 
where we’re not approving your budget till three-quarters of it 
is already expended. And then to make matters even more 
convoluted and bizarre, she said to them, you cannot make any 
significant change in the way you deliver health in order to 
balance these budgets. And so these district health boards were 
absolutely caught in an impossible situation. 
 
And what happened? The minister of Health and the 
Department of Health said, well this isn’t very good because 
they’re not doing what they’re told. Well they were put into a 
position where they couldn’t do anything. And all they were 
being asked to do is to be a buffer between the bad decisions 
that were being made by the Department of Health and the 
people of the province that this Department of Health is 
supposed to serve. Mr. Speaker, the situation was absolutely 
bizarre and convoluted. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the great difficulties that we have 
said has occurred in this whole situation, and historically over 
some period of time in this situation, is there was an absolute 
vacuum of leadership coming from this government. So finally, 
finally as they went from crisis to crisis, the interventionist 
Minister of Health, the member from Saskatoon Nutana, got 
things worse and worse and worse. 
 
She micromanaged the decisions of the district health board. 
She tried to overrule the educational decisions that the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association was making about 
their educational requirements for nursing professionals in this 
province, and then she had to back up from that situation. 
Waiting lists have doubled since the government promised in 
1999 to cut them by 25 per cent; we’ve lost over 1,200 nurses in 
the last three years; and then the government is sitting there 
saying we’re supposed to have things improving. 
 
So what do they do? They come out and they end up with one 
report and one study after another and they try to come up with 
a way of fixing the mess they’ve created and somehow blame 
the whole problem on somebody else. And right now, Mr. 
Speaker, the scapegoats are the district health boards. 

The government has said, oh no, this is the dysfunctional 
system but it’s a system they’ve created. They blamed the fact 
that there was no support for elected boards on the fact there 
was a low voter turnout for these elections to district health 
boards. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is very simple. They set the 
elections in the middle of the fall when everybody is busy. They 
set it at a separate time from when municipal governments or 
school board elections are being held. They almost set it up in 
such a way is that the voter turnout would be very low and they 
set it up in a way where you could easily point to it and say, 
obviously people don’t care if they have elected boards or not 
because nobody’s turning out to vote. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you could have upped the turnout, the voter 
turnout, by three or fourfold, by simply making it convenient 
and held at a time when other municipal and education board 
elections were being held. That would have been a very 
pragmatic, simple solution to ensure a higher voter turnout. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you think about how this province’s health 
care system was developed in the province, it didn’t come from 
Regina. It came from the people. It came from communities 
right across this province. The health care system evolved as 
very much of a community ownership, a grassroots, caring 
involvement in the delivering of health services to people in 
their communities. It didn’t originate with the bureaucracy in 
the Department of Health in Regina. It originated with the 
communities right across this province and, to this day, there is 
a great deal of interest and concern and commitment to the 
health system by people in our communities. 
 
The ownership of the health system is not the Department of 
Health, Mr. Speaker. The ownership of the health system in this 
province are the people of this province and the communities 
that they live in. This is a fundamental building block of a 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that are being talked about, not 
only in Saskatchewan but across Canada and North America 
and, I believe, actually internationally and worldwide, is a very 
fundamentally simple concept. It’s a concept that this 
government has finally been willing to understand and to 
implement in their action report, and it’s the concept of primary 
health care teams working in collaborative practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contrary to what people think, this idea didn’t 
originate in the Saskatchewan Department of Health. It’s 
originated across the country and across the world as a way of 
delivering fundamental health services at a community level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fundamental drivers of health care reform and 
the need to adjust and adapt to a changing environment in 
health care is not coming from centralized governments. It’s 
coming from communities and people in communities who 
recognize that the current model of centralized and regionalized 
control is not meeting their needs, that they need to change the 
way health care is delivered in their communities. 
 
And one of the most fundamental concepts of the changing 
delivery model in these communities is the concept of primary 
health care teams where we have health care professionals from 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

many disciplines — doctors and nurses and pharmacists, 
physiotherapists, licensed practical nurses, technologists, 
radiology and lab techs — all of these people working together 
in collaborative purpose to deliver health care at the community 
level. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all the literature you read about primary 
health care reform across the globe says that in order for 
primary health care to work, it has to be and is essential to have 
a connection and an ownership between the primary health care 
team system and the community that they serve. If you had a 
disconnect, the process is simply not going to work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to highlight that 
connection. It’s important to say clearly that all of the literature 
that you read that’s available on the subject of primary health 
care teams stresses the importance of the connection between 
the community that’s being served and the primary health care 
teams that provide that service. It’s absolutely critical to 
success. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I felt it’s important to kind of paint this 
backdrop in terms of looking at Bill 61, these regional health 
authorities, and to see what direction the Government of 
Saskatchewan is taking in light of this overwhelming evidence 
and literature that’s available around the world about primary 
health care reform and the connection of communities to the 
primary health care teams that serve those communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that backdrop with all of that evidence and all 
of that literature available to this minister that currently serves 
and this Department of Health, what is proposed in Bill 61? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in simple language, it’s 180 degrees wrong 
than what all the literature says. What it is, Mr. Speaker, is a 
massive consolidation of power and authority and decision 
making, not into the communities that are being served, but into 
the Department of Health and the Minister of Health. That’s 
what’s happening in this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this legislation was first tabled in the 
legislature, I’ve taken the opportunity — excuse me, Mr. 
Speaker — and taken the responsibility to try to discuss what 
the issues are with district health individuals and regional health 
districts right across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve conducted a fair bit of that discussion and 
there’s more people constantly wanting to have their input. And 
to a person that has commented back to me about this 
legislation, when I asked them what is the overriding concept 
and philosophy in this legislation, people say to a person that 
it’s a massive consolidation of power and authority in the hands 
of the Department of Health and the Minister of Health. That’s 
pretty clear by the way it goes. 
 
We can talk about the details of the clauses and all the rest of it 
when we get to Committee of the Whole. But philosophically, 
in principle, this is what’s going on. It’s an absolute 180 degree 
direction from what all of the literature is saying about primary 
health care reform. It’s absolutely opposite to what the literature 
says is going to be important to engage communities in a 
meaningful way with the primary health care teams that are 
going to be needed to serve those communities. It’s 180 degrees 

around from that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s almost as if this government has said . . . there 
is an elitist attitude among the minister and the Department of 
Health and it’s saying to the communities, thank you very 
much, but we know better than you do what’s good for you. We 
are the people that know what’s going on in health. And there’s 
this massive consolidation of authority and decision making 
away from the communities that are being served and into the 
hands of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is 180 degrees wrong and it’s absolutely 
opposite to where the official opposition would approach this 
topic from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this legislation, instead of maintaining the 50 
per cent elected proportion of the district health boards and at 
least having that number transferred to the regional health 
authorities, 100 per cent of the people that serve on the regional 
health boards are appointed by the Minister of Health. It’s that 
simple. There is no connection to the communities any longer. 
 
There is no indicated legislation. The legislation is absolutely 
silent in terms of even if these board members have a dual 
responsibility. The legislation is clear that it says their 
responsibility is to the Minister of Health and the Department of 
Health. It doesn’t even talk about the dual role that these 
members may have in that they have a joint or a balanced 
responsibility to the Minister of Health and the communities in 
the region that they serve. It’s absolutely silent on that issue, 
Mr. Speaker. And that is philosophically and directionally 
wrong for the future of health care service delivery in this 
province. 
 
What we have now, Mr. Speaker, is we have people who are 
sitting on these regional health boards . . . And let me say right 
from the beginning, Mr. Speaker, these are well-intentioned 
people who desire to do the very best job that they can to serve 
the health system in this province. They are. And I appreciate 
everyone that has served on a district health board, and I 
appreciate the approximately 400 people that put their names 
forward for consideration on the regional health boards. 
 
But what they have to understand is that when they look at this 
legislation, it is clearly a one-way accountability process from 
the regional health authorities to the Department of Health 
through the Minister of Health. And, Mr. Speaker, time and 
time again when I’ve talked to people of what they think about 
this legislation, they say this is going to be a problem. 
 
And I want to say on the record today, we believe it’s going to 
be a problem and we think it’s 180 degrees wrong in terms of a 
philosophical direction about where the health system should go 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what it’s going to take for this 
government and this Department of Health to understand that 
what’s necessary to engage the people of this province in a 
meaningful way in the decisions that are going to be made 
about the health care system in this province is not to take away 
responsibility and authority from them but to empower them, 
Mr. Speaker, at a community level. This is why Saskatchewan 
has a health system at all in this province. It’s because people in 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

 

the communities over the years were empowered to be involved 
with the health care system. 
 
It wasn’t because the minister and a bunch of bureaucrats in 
Regina were telling them, we know what’s best for you, we 
know how you’re going to develop your needs for acute care 
and long-term care and community care. We know what’s best 
for you and we can do a better job of telling you what there’s 
going to be for an emergency measures system. 
 
We know what’s better for you; we can tell you how your 
nursing system should work. We know what’s better for you 
and we’ll tell you where you should have a doctor working in 
private practice on a fee for service or on a salary. 
 
We know what’s best for you and we’ll tell you where you’re 
going to have a community health nurse program or a public 
health nurse program or we’re going to have advanced clinical 
nurses. 
 
We know what’s best and we’re going to tell you what’s best 
for you. So take care, relax, and don’t worry about it. 
 
And do you know what’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker? 
Communities and community people are going to be 
disengaged from the health care system. They’re going to look 
at it as something that is just provided for them from Regina. 
Instead of having community ownership and involvement and 
commitment to the system, it’s now being taken away from 
them by the direction of this Bill 61. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the very least . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Wood River 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to the member from Melfort-Tisdale for allowing me to stand to 
introduce a group of students from the Shaunavon Public 
School. Mr. Speaker, there’s 18 grade 4 students sitting in the 
east gallery, and they’re with their teachers, Heather 
McPherson, Brenda Gartner, Sheila Scansen, and Val Wilkins. 
 
I hope you had a good tour and I’ll be talking to you in a few 
minutes. What we’re doing in the House right now is our 
member from Melfort-Tisdale is debating one of the health care 
Bills, and that’s the point of the House proceedings that we’re 
doing at the moment. 
 
So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming the 
visitors from Shaunavon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 — The Regional Health Services Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and welcome to the students from Shaunavon as well. I 
appreciate that they’re here to watch the proceedings of the 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was saying that philosophically the direction of 
this government and this legislation is creating a massive 
disconnect between the communities that are being served and 
the decision making and the authorities process that is occurring 
through Bill 61. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when the students were being introduced, 
the minister said across the House, well let’s talk about the 
community advisory committees. Well let’s do that indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, and let’s think about this very reasonably and 
rationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined the clear, underlying purpose and 
authority structure and direction of authority for the regional 
health boards, where it’s going to be massively under the 
control and the thumb of the Minister of Health and the 
Department of Health and that these regional health boards are 
going to be in a clear . . . And there’s clause after clause in this 
legislation that talks clearly about this authority direction. 
 
Well the minister says, oh but we’ve provided for community 
input because we have community advisory bodies. Well big 
deal, Mr. Speaker. Here you’ve already got a situation where 
the regional health authority board members have no real 
autonomy and empowerment, and now the minister is going to 
pretend that one tier down the way and another way you’re 
going to have any meaningful input, any meaningful 
involvement by these community advisory boards. Mr. Speaker, 
that is just doubling the nonsense. If there is no authority and 
empowerment at the regional health level, there’s even less at 
the community level because the direction goes in the same way 
— to the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I’ve talked to people about this . . . and the 
minister always says, well we consulted. Well yes they did. 
They had meetings. They proposed what this legislation was 
going to look like. They had meetings at the regional level and 
I’m told by a number of district board levels that no one on the 
district board level was consulted. 
 
But here’s what the regional people even told me, Mr. Speaker. 
They said, we were shown what the legislation was; we were 
invited to comment, which we did. The department listened and 
you know what? They changed nothing. They changed nothing. 
And that’s not consultation, Mr. Speaker, that’s window 
dressing. That’s going around and pretending to people that 
they have a meaningful input so that you can say that they had 
consultation but nothing changed — not a single word or clause 
changed as a result of this so-called consultation process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So let’s make sure we understand when the members opposite 
talk about this meaningful involvement of communities and 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

consultation, it simply in a de facto meaningful way did not 
happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are all kinds of other instances within this 
legislation — clause after clause, page after page — that sets 
out and codifies and clarifies the authority and the control in the 
minister’s hands. The minister has the authority under this 
legislation to fire a board, has . . . the minister has the authority 
to oppose programs, the minister has the authority to withhold 
funding. Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of clauses that are in 
this legislation when I say it’s a massive consolidation of power 
in the hands of the minister. Those are the kinds of clauses that 
are in there. 
 
And you know what? It even says it extends that . . . those 
tentacles of control not only down to the regional and 
community level, it extends the same tentacles of control to the 
affiliates, the affiliate health service providers — the Catholic 
hospital system and the Catholic long-term care delivery system 
and the other denominational delivery system. Those same 
tentacles of authority extend right down to that level, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you have people look at this legislation, the 
consensus is very clear. This is a very clear direction by this 
government. It’s a consolidation of power and decision making 
in the hands of people who think they know better than what 
community leaders believe that they know. They think that they 
have got all of the answers for health care. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? They’re saying that the 
reason they need that authority and control is because the 
district boards did not act responsibly. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
district boards acted in the best fashion they could given the 
vacuum of leadership and given the ridiculous budget process 
and the ridiculous decision-making constraints that were placed 
on it. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an absolute crime that now this 
government is almost accusing these district boards for the 
decisions they made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they complained about the deficits that districts 
had. A lot of the districts worked very hard to live within the 
constraints, the fiscal constraints, set upon them. Many of them 
made very difficult, appropriate decisions in order to keep their 
budgets in line. And, Mr. Speaker, you know what the 
government did? They said, well no problem, we’ll be happy 
with what you’re doing; and those districts that didn’t make 
those hard decisions, we’ll cover the deficit. 
 
So when you talk to the CEOs and the boards of those districts 
that did the work that was required to have a responsible 
budget, they said, why did we do that? Because when we made 
the tough decisions out here in the community level in order to 
meet those challenges by the Department of Health, Department 
of Health just said, we’ll cover everybody’s deficit anyway. So 
why would you care? And, Mr. Speaker, in this last year or two 
I’ve heard time and time again where districts said, why would 
we try so hard to balance the budget when the government 
simply writes it off for those districts that don’t try anyway? 
 
So now we end up with a situation where the message and the 
incentives going out are 180 degrees wrong. They’re 
backwards. We end up with a situation where the government 

tries to blame the districts for their shortcomings of policy. And 
now as a response to this ridiculous situation that the 
government itself created . . . And remember at the end of the 
day, Mr. Speaker, the government approved every single deficit 
budget in every single district. So for them to be passing the 
buck on to district health boards, and now saying this massive 
consolidation of power and authority in the hands of the 
minister is a reaction or a necessary action in order to sort of 
balance the irresponsible districts, is disingenuous at the very 
best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I said that the official opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Party, would approach the need to provide 
regional services in this province from almost 180 degree 
different direction than what this government has said, I would 
like to outline a bit how we would approach this issue instead of 
this massive consolidation of power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve said all along that it makes sense to provide 
services in this province on a regional basis. We’ve supported 
that concept and that principle from the very beginning. Mr. 
Speaker, when it was announced that there was going to be a 
change in the number of health districts and regions, I stood up 
in front of the media and in public and said, we support that 
concept of regional service delivery. Mr. Speaker, that’s simply 
a logical and sensible way to go. 
 
But we also said some fundamental things that are totally 
different than what this government has proposed. We said that, 
first of all, that the people that serve on these regional 
authorities are going to be elected by the people that they serve, 
that these elections are going to be held on a ward based system 
to make sure there’s fairness and adjustments for community 
and population centres within a region. We said, they’re going 
to be elected by the people that they serve. That’s the first point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also said that if these regions are going to 
work we have to think of how primary health care is going to be 
delivered. You need the ownership of the community that I 
talked about, the literature all supports. But when you think 
about primary health care, it’s not just health professionals. It 
also has to deal with the primary indicators of health in a 
population. 
 
It’s very clear that issues of poverty and education and those 
kinds of things are also important to provide healthy outcomes. 
It’s just not just treating disease; it’s also creating an 
environment where people have a healthier lifestyle and have 
healthier opportunities, or more wholesome opportunities to 
improve their health. 
 
And so we said health care cannot be dealt with in isolation. 
The determinants of health — thank you — have to be 
appropriate across the piece, and it involves more than the 
Department of Health. It involves government services on a 
number of levels. It involves the services of Education, of 
Social Services, of Justice, and many other kinds of community 
services. 
 
So we said when you do these regions, wouldn’t it make sense 
if these regions were made coterminous so all of the service 
delivery of the Government of Saskatchewan was done on the 
same boundaries? Far too much energy is expended to try to 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

 

figure out who’s in and who’s out, and who should be at the 
meeting and who shouldn’t, because the boundaries are all over 
the map. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we said we not only believe in regional 
authorities and regional boundaries, we said there should be a 
mechanism for creating whereby government services are 
delivered on a coterminous way across those regions. Fully 
elected boards serving on health and other jurisdictions in a 
coterminous service delivery model. We think that makes sense, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third thing that we said needs to happen is we’ve got to go 
away from this ridiculous ad hoc budget process that’s going on 
where in a de facto way you’re going to end up with a situation 
where boards are having their budgets approved when 
three-quarter of the current year is already passed. 
 
And we said that what’s needed is, for lack of a better word, a 
three-year rolling budget where boards are actually able to 
anticipate, with some degree of accuracy, budget expectations 
three years forward. 
 
And as you get closer to the current year, the accuracy gets 
fine-tuned so that boards know and can expect exactly what 
their funding is going to be so that they can make appropriate 
long-term planning budgetary decisions. Not ones that are made 
after three-quarters of the current year is already expended. So 
we said that that’s important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to have true health care, meaningful 
reform, and improvement, we’ve got to engage our 
communities again in that process. There is a huge disconnect 
happening, and it’s going to get worse under the terms of this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support the idea that we should have these 
regions. But, Mr. Speaker, we cannot support the way this 
government is approaching it because we believe and are 
convinced, as are hundreds of people across the system in this 
province, that this system simply will not work, that this simply 
is the wrong way to go, and this simply is going to provide a 
framework for disaster and consolidation of authority in the 
Department of Health and a bunch of Health bureaucrats that 
are going to disconnect our communities from this essential 
service that we all desire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is gratifying to me to know that people across 
this province are continuing to want to be consulted about this 
issue, who are continuing to call our office and are continuing 
to want to comment on this issue. And I know that there are 
many of my colleagues that want to comment as well because 
this has major concerns and implications for communities right 
across this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that these people 
have the opportunity to reach us and to confirm the concerns 
that I’ve outlined already this morning. Mr. Speaker, and to 
allow them to have the time to that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 62 — The Health 
Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 
apportant des modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur 
la santé be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Bill 62, the consequential 
amendments are really part and parcel of Bill 61. There are 
some technical reasons why it has to be presented as another bit 
of the legislation, so I would like very much to have this 
legislation follow in parallel to Bill 61. So for all of the reasons 
that I’ve outlined in my speech on Bill 61, I would like to 
adjourn debate on this as well. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 57 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
today and participate in the second reading debate on Bill No. 
57 — what most people in the province, or what many people in 
the province are calling the PIPP (personal injury protection 
plan)/tort Bill. Of course the two things — one — the PIPP 
standing for the personal injury protection plan or no-fault 
insurance and the tort, of course, being the tort system of auto 
insurance that many provinces continue with today. 
 
This is truly a very, very important piece of legislation that has 
been introduced by the government this session. It literally 
affects everybody — well almost everybody in the province — 
everybody certainly that drives, everybody that wants to ensure 
a vehicle and drive in the province of Saskatchewan; and also 
motorists that travel through the province, that travel on our 
highways and byways, it affects them as well. So it is a, it is a 
very important piece of legislation. 
 
I think fundamentally what this legislation represents, Mr. 
Speaker, is a recognition on the part of this government that 
change was needed; that the no-fault insurance plan that was 
introduced by the government in 1995 in the province of 
Saskatchewan was failing the province. 
 
The Bill makes that statement in two ways — in two ways. It 
improves no-fault significantly in terms of the benefits that are 
available to motorists. That’s the first thing it does. 
 
So it’s a recognition of the government — even, even those 
members on those benches that believe that no-fault insurance 
is the way to go, they must too also recognize that the no-fault 
version we had in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
wasn’t as good as it could be. 
 
And so this Bill sets out to improve no-fault as it will exist in 
the province of Saskatchewan. But it will also set out to give 
people a choice, to be able to move to the tort system if they so 
choose with their own personal decision that they’re going to 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

have to make. 
 
And we have to ask ourselves, Mr. Speaker, why; why has the 
government changed its mind? The government was, 
throughout the no-fault years and even throughout the review 
year or years, I guess, it kind of . . . the review process got away 
on the former minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan), frankly, a little bit. 
 
But throughout the review of no-fault and the years heading 
into that review, the government was pretty intransigent that 
what they were doing was the right thing to do; that even the 
opposition within their own caucus by as prominent of people 
as the Minister of Finance currently — at the time not a 
minister but currently the Minister of Finance — a very 
prominent member of the NDP caucus, was pretty clear about 
his opposition to no-fault insurance, to NDP-style no-fault 
insurance as it was brought into the province in 1995. So much 
so, Mr. Speaker, that he wrote his own internal proposal to the 
NDP caucus. He drafted a memo. He made an argument, Mr. 
Speaker, against — against — the NDP’s plan to move into 
no-fault insurance. 
 
And of course, that memo has now . . . is now part of the public 
record. It has been leaked. It has been leaked to the media and 
we’ve certainly seen copies of it, and I’m sure you have too, 
Mr. Speaker. And the members that have seen it will know that 
it provides a very detailed, and I think, salient argument against 
the government of the day proceeding with the implementation 
of PIPP or no-fault insurance as it was first constituted and 
developed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It was his position then — and ours now notably, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s ours now — that we could achieve the benefits to the tort 
system we want, the affordability of the tort system that we 
want without depriving people’s ability to sue, their access to 
the courts by moving to no-fault insurance. But the government 
of the day ignored the advice that it was receiving — at least 
from one MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) that we 
know of and maybe others — they ignored that advice and they 
implemented a no-fault system. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, people, people like Ralph Nader 
— who is well-known across this continent and arguably 
around the world for being a consumer advocate — other 
consumer groups, legal groups, and those who fight against 
no-fault insurance identified the no-fault system that they 
introduced in ’95 as the most restrictive, the most draconian, in 
North America, Mr. Speaker. In North America. 
 
They said that the jurisdiction, this province of Saskatchewan 
here, our version of no-fault was so restrictive in terms of 
limiting the rights of people that it was worse than any other 
no-fault system in that regard, in any other jurisdiction in North 
America, because it deprived people even of the right to sue a 
third party for some clear negligent act or omission of an act 
that had caused somebody harm. Very few, if any, other 
no-fault systems go that far. 
 
Their no-fault system, the NDP style of no-fault, Mr. Speaker, 
protected the rights of the criminally negligent in terms of 
vehicular crimes ahead of the rights of the victims, of accident 
victims. 

The same was true, Mr. Speaker, the same was true for 
impaired drivers. If someone was an impaired driver and got 
involved in an accident and caused somebody bodily harm, the 
NDP were more than happy to stand by while the victim was 
deprived, deprived of any right, any access to the courts to gain 
compensation for pain and suffering. They would even protect 
the rights of impaired drivers and those who are criminally 
negligent in some vehicular incident than they were . . . they 
were more worried about their rights than they were about the 
rights of the victim. 
 
They didn’t step in right away though, Mr. Speaker, the 
government didn’t. The government stuck to its party line. It 
said we’re going to give this five years. We’re going to give it 
five years. Never mind how many people’s rights are trampled 
on. Never mind how many people’s fundamental right to some 
compensation for harm done to them by someone involved in a 
criminal act. No matter that. We’re going to stick to this until 
the five-year period has run out — an arbitrary number picked 
by the government of the day. 
 
And then a review was going to take place. We’re going to 
conduct a review, an independent review, they promised. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the review did occur of course in 2000, and there 
were all manner of troubles and problems that the government 
had with that. The minister had been interfering in the review 
process. In fact he had been interfering specifically with the 
chairman, the first chairman of that review process. And the 
chairman had enough of it; the chairman quit. The chairman 
didn’t want any more to do with this government’s supposed 
arm’s length review of the no-fault system, Mr. Speaker. And 
so he quit the process. 
 
But the review continued anyway, Mr. Speaker, and it made 
several recommendations that basically gathered dust, because 
we understand that there was this great internal debate and 
squabble and wrangle within the NDP caucus about whether 
they would stick with no-fault insurance as it was, whether they 
would improve it as the review had recommended or make 
changes as the review had recommended, or whether they 
would scrap it in favour of something that would return us to a 
tort system. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, and we understand, that the 
province waited and victims’ rights were denied for so many 
months because this caucus, this NDP government that in so 
many instances we’ve seen even in the last couple of weeks 
have clearly demonstrated their inability to govern, this same 
caucus couldn’t get their act together. They were wrangling and 
they were arguing and they were fighting over the kind of 
insurance system we should offer. Meanwhile we were stuck 
with a most archaic and draconian no-fault insurance you can 
find anywhere in North America. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker . . . I think, Mr. Speaker, that they knew 
the current — that no-fault system — the current no-fault 
system was wrong. I think they knew it. I think more than the 
Minister of Finance knew it. The Minister of Finance clearly 
knew it well before they even introduced no-fault insurance, but 
I think many MLAs across the way understood fundamentally 
that the no-fault system, even for those MLAs across the way 
that still thought that no-fault was a good idea, I think some of 
them understood that this particular style of no-fault insurance 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

 

was so draconian, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moose Jaw North 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I’m 
listening carefully, which probably puts me in a relatively 
unique position, but I’m listening carefully to the words of the 
hon. member from Swift Current in his debate, and, Mr. 
Speaker, as I listen, it seems to me that he is engaging in 
character attacks on Minister of Finance and others, and that 
that’s highly inappropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have heard him infer in, or some would say 
directly accuse, ministers of acting contrary or misrepresenting 
information that . . . (inaudible) . . . understood, seems to me, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would ask that you would bring the hon. member to order 
and require him to continue debate with the proper level of 
respect and decorum that is expected in this Chamber. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, in response to 
the point of order from the Government Deputy House Leader. 
He was talking earlier about theatrics — we’ve just seen 
another example of the Government Deputy House Leader’s 
theatrics. 
 
The member from Swift Current was quoting from a memo 
from the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, in reference to the 
no-fault and his concerns about it, Mr. Speaker — clearly, a 
document that is available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no point of order here. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for their raising the 
point of order. I have been listening to the debate and I did not 
find that the member was going beyond the usual bounds of 
debate. But nevertheless, the fact that the matter was raised, I’d 
bring that to the member’s attention that things can get sensitive 
and keep that in mind. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I appreciate your 
ruling, Mr. Speaker, and I also understand that the members 
opposite are sensitive because the fact . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask if the member wouldn’t comment 
on the ruling. Just continue with the debate. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I intend to do that. We 
have several more comments to make on this particular Bill, 
Bill 57 as it regards no-fault insurance. 
 
Just prior to getting into those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask leave of this Assembly to introduce some guests that have 
come into the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(12:00) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to introduce to you 
and through you to the members of this Assembly, sitting in the 
opposition gallery today, two constituents of mine, residents of 
the city of Swift Current, long-time community activists or 
people that have been involved in the community of Swift 
Current in any number of capacities; and as well, Mr. Speaker, 
business people, employers in the city of Swift Current. They 
are Wayne and Lynn Regier, and they are perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 
here to watch the debate, or they may be here to take their son 
out for lunch because their son is one of our Pages — Dean 
Regier. 
 
And I just ask all members to welcome them here to the 
Assembly today and to let them know that we’re very much 
enjoying having Dean here in the Assembly. We’re enjoying 
the special treats that he and his colleagues place in our water 
glasses, including goldfish and other things. And just ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Wall: — So what we know, Mr. Speaker, today is that 
there was not complete unanimity within the NDP caucus from 
the beginning of the no-fault process that this was the right 
thing to do. We know that because the then — well the Minister 
for Finance currently, he wasn’t a minister of the Crown at the 
time — but the Minister of Finance was very unequivocal in his 
belief that they could achieve a better insurance system for the 
people of the province without moving to a no-fault system. 
 
We understand that there remained a debate within the 
organization opposite, as there was across the province, 
throughout the five intervening years that we could achieve 
some other, some other system, or at least some substantive 
improvements to no-fault insurance. 
 
And so I noted with interest the minister’s second reading 
speech, Mr. Speaker, where he clearly highlighted how this 
government believed that the existing no-fault system wasn’t 
serving the province. So even with this new choice Bill, that 
allows people to move away and move to the tort system, even 
with that they’ve made some significant improvements to 
no-fault, not the least of which, Mr. Speaker, relates to the 
impaired drivers, as I mentioned. 
 
As the minister noted in his second reading speech, it’s going to 
give an injured person the right to sue an at-fault and convicted 
impaired driver for pain and suffering. And the government is 
to be applauded for that change. 
 
The government is also to be challenged, Mr. Speaker, as to 
why it took seven years for them to make that fundamental 
improvement. Why in the world would it take seven years for a 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

government to realize how unfair it is to deprive a victim of the 
right to access some remedy in the courts after they’ve been 
injured by someone who’s been criminally negligent or an 
impaired driver? 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the minister went on to note that an 
injured person will now have the right to sue for pain and 
suffering in cases where the driver is convicted of using their 
vehicle to deliberately harm the injured person. And that’s a 
good change, Mr. Speaker. We understand the rationale for that 
change, but it again begs the question: why would it take seven 
years — seven years, Mr. Speaker — for the government to 
realize . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone on his feet? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And my 
thanks to the member for Swift Current for giving up the floor 
for a moment so I could make this introduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through you I’d like to introduce to all members 
of the Assembly, 28 students from Lakeview School, that are in 
the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to the students that I’m making this 
introduction on behalf of your member of the legislature, the 
member for Saskatoon Southwest who’s not — Southeast — 
who’s not able to be in the Assembly at the moment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in addition to us having 28 grade 7 and 8 
students with us from Lakeview School, we also have two of 
their teachers, Mayda Zaluski and Louise Gagnière. And we 
also have a chaperone, Mr. Speaker, Jan Russell. 
 
So I’d like to welcome the students. We’re currently discussing 
the amendments to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 
and, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if all members of the Assembly 
could join me in extending a very warm welcome to these 
students, their teachers, and their chaperone. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we on this side 
would certainly want to welcome the students from Saskatoon 
as well. 
 
The change that the minister referred to in his second reading 

speech, these two changes — and certainly there’s more than 
that — but these two changes: one that allows people to sue if 
they’ve been harmed by a drunk driver; the other that they have 
the right now to sue for pain and suffering where the driver is 
convicted of using the vehicle to deliberately harm or injure a 
person, are positive changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But why in the world would it take any government, regardless 
of its stripe . . . why would it take any government seven years 
to recognize how fundamentally wrong that is? Seven years it 
took for them to make the realization. 
 
And I guess some would say, well better late than never. But I 
think that would be cold comfort for the people in those 
intervening seven years that have had their rights denied 
because this government didn’t make the change that they knew 
they should make earlier in the process. I think it would be cold 
comfort to those victims, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also a change in this Bill with respect to 
the no-fault part of the insurance plan that allows . . . it allows 
people the right to sue: 
 

. . . for pain and suffering against certain institutional third 
parties whose negligence contributes to a crash. 

 
And I’m quoting from the minister. And that too is a positive 
change. And that too begs a question. Seven years have passed. 
Why did it take till now to make that change? 
 
I think this is the element of the no-fault program that Mr. 
Nader himself was most shocked at, I believe. That’s my 
recollection. And my recollection is imperfect as you know, Mr. 
Speaker. But that’s my recollection. 
 
That’s what he was most concerned about; that was perhaps 
more draconian, more restrictive than any other no-fault 
jurisdiction in the world. That if some third party, a 
manufacturer perhaps, was blatantly and negligent . . . 
negligently responsible for an accident occurring and harming 
somebody, that there was no remedy in the courts; that that 
person could seek no pain and suffering and go before the court 
and make their case and win or lose, but at least the chance to 
make their case. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this seeks to change that portion of the 
no-fault program. And I guess that’s a positive step, albeit 
seven years too late for many, many people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the . . . SGI and Saskatchewan Justice, the 
minister noted in his speech, are also going to be working with 
. . . working to develop a new appeal system where the injured 
will have some right to access — this is even under the no-fault 
portion of the Bill, Mr. Speaker — will have some access to the 
courts, either some sort of an independent, sort of 
quasi-judicial, panel or Court of Queen’s Bench. And that too 
we think is a reasonable thing. 
 
But more substantively perhaps in this Bill, the government has 
sought to give people a choice. They can either choose the 
improved no-fault insurance, as it will be improved by this 
particular Bill 57, or they can move to a tort system. But, Mr. 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

 

Speaker, it is very important for us to note that the tort system 
they’ll be moving to is also greatly improved in terms of the 
no-fault benefits it offers than the no-fault . . . or than the tort 
system that existed prior to 1995 in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the reason it is improved is that the government has 
adopted the premier option, something that’s referred to as the 
premier option in Saskatchewan. And it’s referred as the 
premier option, Mr. Speaker, because that is the name given it 
by its authors, the Coalition Against No-Fault here in the 
province. 
 
The coalition worked very closely with accountants and with 
the Law Society and with different consulting firms to develop 
an alternative to no-fault insurance that they could credibly 
propose to the government, to the opposition, and to the public, 
and say look, we don’t need no-fault insurance. We don’t need 
it because we can improve the no-fault benefits available in a 
tort system and we can restore people’s rights to the courts. We 
can give them back their legal access to remedy. 
 
That was the case they made with the premier option and the 
work that they did. And they made that presentation to the 
opposition, as they did to the government, and as they did to the 
entire province. And they answered questions, Mr. Speaker, that 
we had of them. And I’m sure they answered questions that 
members opposite had of them about that program and about 
that plan. And they answered questions that the media and the 
public had of them about their plan. 
 
And it must have stood the test, Mr. Speaker. It must have been 
able to stand the light of day because it is that very premier 
option that is going to be the choice given Saskatchewan drivers 
by this government. This government is going to be saying, if 
this Bill is passed, they’re going to be saying look, you can 
choose between a no-fault program that’s improved in terms of 
some benefits and some rights to sue, some rights . . . some new 
access to the courts, and you will be able to also choose a tort 
system that’s improved. That tort system they’re talking about, 
Mr. Speaker, make no mistake, is the premier option. 
 
And I think members of the House will remember that last year 
about this time, as the critic for SGI, I stood in this House and 
asked questions of the minister and we sent out a press release 
and indicated what our position would be — knowing, Mr. 
Speaker, it wouldn’t be enough to simply criticize no-fault, 
knowing that we would have to develop our own plan. 
 
And we too looked at the premier option and we engaged some 
outside advice, Mr. Speaker, and we worked very hard with the 
coalition. And within our own caucus we had a debate and a 
discussion and we announced, Mr. Speaker, about a year ago 
that we would, as government, proceed with the premier option 
or what we were calling the modified premier option. We would 
make some changes. 
 
We wanted to ensure completely that it was as affordable a 
system as possible, that people’s rates would not go up because 
we went this direction. And so we made a change to the premier 
option. 
 
In the premier option, Mr. Speaker, there is a $5,000 deductible 

for pain and suffering. In other words, if someone wants to sue 
for pain and suffering under that system, they’re going to have 
to be prepared to live with a $5,000 deductible, the thought 
being that many of the pain and suffering claims that are made 
are relatively small in nature, under $10,000, but taken in an 
aggregate they account for a huge cost to the auto insurers — 
these small pain and suffering claims. 
 
And so the premier option set out to give a $5,000 deductible 
that people would have to incur before they proceeded or before 
they were able to receive their . . . the receipts of the decision in 
the courts. We wanted to increase that, Mr. Speaker, and we 
increased that deductible to a level that we thought would even 
further ensure the success of the tort system of the premier 
option. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the other change that we made 
was to exempt municipalities from lawsuit unless they were 
grossly negligent. And, Mr. Speaker, we checked into this as 
well. We wanted to make sure we did our homework as best as 
possible with the resources we had. And it was confirmed for us 
that there is a precedent, even in Saskatchewan statute, for 
being able to define this — what grossly negligent might be. 
And so with that comfort, we went ahead and said look, one 
other change we’d make to the premier option is that we would 
exempt municipalities — rural and urban — unless there was an 
indication of gross negligence, and then injured people could 
make their . . . could have their day in court, if that was their 
choice. 
 
And so that’s the position of the Saskatchewan Party. And 
that’s the filter through which we’re looking at this Bill, at Bill 
57. 
 
And it’s interesting to note because you know, what I think this 
Bill represents, it’s . . . this is a government, and certainly a 
minister, that prefers PIPP. The minister’s made no bones about 
it, that he prefers the no-fault insurance program. The president 
of SGI says he thinks no-fault’s better for the province. And I 
don’t know how many people on the benches over there agree 
with that, but clearly the lead minister and the president of the 
company, they like no-fault. 
 
Fair enough. We asked them in committee well, why would you 
recommend that there be a choice system if you feel, if you’re 
convicted — this was to the president, Mr. Speaker — if you 
feel convicted that no-fault is the right way to go, why don’t 
you make your improvements to no-fault? Why would you 
recommend choice? Did you recommend it? He said, well, we 
listed all the alternatives to the government and the government 
chose the alternatives led by the minister. 
 
But the minister said that he also prefers no-fault. So that makes 
us wonder, well why are we now debating a Bill that provides 
choice, that does both? 
 
Was it driven politically, Mr. Speaker? The government was 
taking a lot of heat from the Coalition Against No-Fault, from 
the victims of no-fault, from the families of no-fault. There may 
have been some discord within their caucus. And so they’ve 
come up with this choice system. 
 
And the question a lot of people have, Mr. Speaker — because 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

we will be the first to have it — the question a lot of people 
have, the earnest question they have is, is it going to work? Can 
it work? Can you have your cake and eat it too, with respect to 
auto insurance? 
 
We’re not sure that you can. We’re not sure that you can. The 
Law Society is working on studying this. We’re interested to 
see what they think of the workability of the plan. 
 
(12:15) 
 
I’ve talked to insurance companies that are very concerned 
about this. Is it workable? Is it worth sort of trying to figure out 
. . . to stay in the province and try to figure out? 
 
I mean these are all very, very important questions. Because on 
any public policy initiative, you’d like to be able to give the 
people their cake and let them eat it too. But you know the 
nature of government is choices and you make those choices 
not because you want to sometimes, Mr. Speaker, but because 
you’re the government and you have to. 
 
And that particular debate or discussion needs to happen with 
respect to this Bill, is we have to be sure that this will work — 
that it will be workable for our brokers in this province, that it 
will be workable for SGI itself, that it’ll be workable for other 
insurers in the province of Saskatchewan, that it’ll be workable 
for municipalities. We need to make sure that’s the case. And 
that is what we intend to do in this debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other members of my caucus are . . . of our caucus, my 
colleagues, are going to want to speak to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
And they want to do that during second reading. And then it’s 
going to get to committee and it . . . We just want to serve 
notice to the minister that we will have very many questions 
about this particular Bill and its workability, and how sure we 
will be, and what are some exit strategies. If it isn’t working, 
Mr. Speaker, if it’s letting motorists down, if it’s resulting in 
rate fluctuations, how are we going to deal with that as a 
province. We’re going to need to talk a little bit about that. 
 
We’re going to need to talk about how, have we done enough to 
exempt brokers from liability in this. Let’s recall . . . Let’s 
remember that most of us are going to go to our brokers and 
rely on their advice as to which system to use. 
 
I will be. We have excellent insurance brokers in Swift Current, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to be relying on their advice. And I 
know that they’re pleased that the government, that SGI has 
committed to help provide some training. And I guess I’m 
pleased about that too and we are — as the critic — and we’re 
pleased as an opposition. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that SGI follows up on 
their word because, frankly, they’ve been a little suspect in that 
lately. They’ve been letting people down lately in terms of their 
promises to Saskatchewan people made either through the 
minister there, Mr. Speaker, or through their Crown president. 
And so we are a little worried about that. 
 
We’re a little worried about what will happen with the brokers 
and we want to be conscious of the fact that they have . . . 
they’re . . . they’ve committed to do the best job they can. And 

SGI’s committed to help them do that and we want to hold SGI 
to that. 
 
So these are the kinds of things that we want to talk about in 
second reading debate as well as in committee. But I know that 
many members on this side of the House wish to speak to this 
Bill, and so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my left 
is the president of SGI, Larry Fogg; immediately to my right is 
the assistant vice-president of the motor vehicle division, 
Bernadette McIntyre; and seated directly behind me is Elizabeth 
Flynn, the legislative advisor. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman . . . a few questions 
on this Bill and a few comments and that. It’s quite an 
interesting Bill because it deals with quite a few different 
amendments on there, from ignition lock to dealing with 
dangerous . . . or impaired driving and maintenance orders and 
that. 
 
So I guess the first question I’d deal with is finding it . . . more 
on the maintenance order, how that works. My question to the 
minister, through the Chairman, is what are the parameters 
involved in this? How will a person have their licence revoked 
if they don’t keep up maintenance enforcements? How many 
payments do they have to miss? And how will that person be 
informed — will it be through mail or somehow will it be by 
their licences being revoked, somewhere along that line? If they 
could kind of start going into how that will be affected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Essentially, Mr. Chair, to the member 
there is really no change. We would just receive advice from the 
Department of Justice as to when the licence should be 
suspended and it would be directed though by the Department 
of Justice. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is some Bills 
dealing with Justice on that. Can you tell me how that is going 
to affect SGI? How it’s going to affect drivers if . . . the new 
Bills that will be affecting . . . what rules and regulations that I 
guess they put in place that will affect SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again to the member, I think I 
understood his question. Justice advises us as to when we 
should suspend the licence and they’ll also advise us when we 
should reinstate. And we would just follow under the direction 
of the Department of Justice. There’s essentially no change 
from what currently exists. 
 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

 

I believe that was your question, but if it’s not quite, please 
clarify. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well I knew there was two Justice Bills here. 
Was there maintenance orders before on licences? I guess that’s 
what I’m asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes there was. We’ve been doing that 
for quite a few years already. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, okay, I never handled a case 
before. I always thought that this was all voluntarily . . . or the 
province’s. 
 
How long do they suspend the licence? Is there a set period 
time until they start making payments? Or is there a six month 
or a year it’s automatically suspended? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — No there’s not. It’s totally dependent on 
what the department . . . when the Department of Justice 
advises us to remove the licence and when to reinstate it. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When the 
suspension takes place, is it taken at time of renewal? Or is it 
just if an order comes through, you just suspend it halfway 
through even though that person has paid for his licence for a 
full year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The Department of Justice gives the 
individual usually 21 days notice that they have to make 
payment or their licence will be suspended and then they would 
notify SGI if the payment wasn’t made obviously. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — If that payment wasn’t made, would they be 
refunded the licence if they’d bought it for the full year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes absolutely they would be refunded. 
It would be prorated and they would get the full refund. 
 
Just on your last question to the member, I should clarify this. 
That the person is sent, first of all — this is in reference to your 
last question exactly — the person is, first of all, sent three 
written notices from Justice over a period of 90 days and then if 
the payment is not made, then Justice sends a letter giving the 
individual 21 days notice and if they don’t make the payment 
then, then they notify SGI. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, a 
question to him. Is the letter sent by registered mail or is it just 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Can’t answer that question. That’s 
Justice procedure; you’d have to ask the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How about licences, 
out of province, of people that are working here? Would you 
also be informing them, let’s say, if it was a Manitoba licence, 
if they’re in that program? Does SGI . . . If Justice contacts you 
that somebody that’s living here in Saskatchewan for — and 
working here — for, let’s say, on a six-month period, do you do 
. . . suspend the licence for that? Or is it only if they hold a 
Saskatchewan licence? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It is only if they hold a Saskatchewan 
licence. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — So if their licence was revoked at the 
Saskatchewan licence and, let’s say, they did work six months 
in Manitoba and went there, could they get a Manitoba licence 
and still legally drive back in Saskatchewan on a Manitoba or 
an Alberta or an Ontario licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There is an interprovincial record 
exchange that exists, and if the licence is suspended in this 
province, or if the licence is suspended in other province for 
that matter, every other province would access that exchange 
and they would have knowledge that the licence was suspended 
and they would not give the licence to the individual. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. 
Dealing with another amendment, I think there are some 
amendments here dealing with the administrator and the 
removal of the requirement to hold a hearing when suspended, 
revoking, cancelling, or changing a driver’s licence for medical 
reasons. 
 
Who did you consult when . . . in deciding to make this 
decision? Did you have any third-party discussions with that? 
And also, give me some more background information with that 
part of the clause in the Bill. I don’t fully understand it. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There was actually quite extensive 
consultation in coming forward with this amendment. We 
certainly had consultation with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, the Canadian Medical Association, the Highway 
Traffic Board, law enforcement agencies, who felt that we 
should streamline the process much better than it currently is or 
was, that there were too many hoops to go through to either 
suspend a licence or put conditions on a licence when it was 
appropriate. 
 
But also when somebody had a legitimate case for some special 
circumstances around restriction of a license, that it took just 
too long to get them through the mechanisms that existed and 
that’s why this amendment is being proposed. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What kind of a 
requirement . . . Would you need to hold a hearing? How many 
. . . Is there board members? Are they volunteer or is it an SGI 
official’s look at it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In this amendment, we’re proposing that 
it would go to the Highway Traffic Board and that board, you 
may be aware, is . . . Also makes it more convenient, which 
references back to your last question. They are located, many of 
those individuals — the whole board doesn’t have to congregate 
but — they, they’re located across the province. 
 
Under the . . . under the — well I was going to say the old . . . 
old mechanism — but what . . . what currently exists until this 
amendment is approved, is that essentially the hearings are in 
Saskatoon and Regina under the . . . What we’re proposing 
through the Highway Traffic Board, in fact it would be much 
more accessible for individuals across the province. 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I guess, dealing a little bit with 
this, I had a constituent which we were dealing with a couple of 
months ago that had his licence, class 1 with air, revoked 
because he had a medical condition. He’d passed out once. But 
the doctor, after several tests, couldn’t still find the reason for it. 
 
And I know then he’d appealed it and even the doctor had said, 
you know, we did a battery of tests, we can’t find any logical 
medical reason why he blacked out at that time, it could have 
been just stress at that particular time. And I know he went 
through the appeal process and he still couldn’t get his class 1 
driver’s licence back. 
 
Will this be dealing a little more with it? In a situation like that, 
is there a little more appeal process? Would it streamline that 
kind of process a little easier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think we’re short of paper over at SGI. 
Let me say first of all to the member, if there’s a specific case I 
would encourage you just to refer that because I think we could 
look into that for you. 
 
But let me say generally as well that’s here the process as it 
currently exists for class 5 or class 1. If there’s a seizure, the 
licence would be pulled for three months. Then there would be 
follow-up, medical follow ups, every three months. And if 
there’s nothing . . . if it appears that there’s no problem, if the 
diagnosis is that there doesn’t appear to be any additional 
problems, then they would receive their class 5 back for three 
months . . . after the first three months, that’s right. 
 
But for commercial they wouldn’t get their class . . . they 
wouldn’t get their commercial driver’s licence back for 12 
months. They’d have to be seizure-free for a full 12 months 
before they got their licence back. 
 
But again, if you have a specific case, please refer that to SGI. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. I have. 
We’ve gone through the hoops on it before. It was like . . . dealt 
with this one, probably with your office, probably in January. 
 
So I mean the question on the Bill is . . . and the same thing. 
You’ve given me . . . laid out them same examples on it. But 
he’s been seizure-free and he’d gone through the appeal process 
and the appeal process had still said no. And whatever reasons 
— they really didn’t supply a reason — they just said no. He 
still has to wait his full five years. And I contacted your office 
and you basically had said, well he has the appeal process and if 
that has said no, there’s not much we can do about it. 
 
So what I’m asking on this end of it . . . And I mean, if you 
want we can rehash. I can give the re-stuff on it, the person’s 
name afterwards, and it should refresh your memory because it 
will be in your office on that. 
 
But I guess what I’m asking with this Bill, is there any more 
changes coming with that, that would affect cases like this one 
in general, or are the rules exactly the same as they were last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There’s no changes in this Bill, but we 
did — I don’t know if these are the right words — but we 

relaxed the standards as of June 15, 2001. Now it’s possible . . . 
And again, if you can give me that case, we’ll gladly look at it. 
It may just be — we’re just in our discussion here — it just may 
be that that individual was sort of caught up in the old 
regulations, if you will, so we’d be happy to look at that case 
again. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman . . . and I will. And 
basically he probably was because I know he brought it to me in 
January; I think it was January when we discussed it. But it had 
happened probably two years prior is when the whole situation 
had been going through kind of an ongoing thing. So 
afterwards, I’ll give you the individual’s name and we can kind 
of go over it again. 
 
I think at that end of it, I’m done questions. 
 
The next amendment that I’m looking at is there is . . . the Bill 
also talks about giving the administrator the power to 
downgrade a commercial licence if the operator does not 
provide a medical as required. Can you tell me the rules before 
that and the rules now with this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The change is that under the old system, 
if you will, a commercial driver who had his licence suspended 
lost all of his driving privileges. Under this proposed 
amendment, starting January 1 of ’03, they will be downgraded 
just to a class 5. So they can continue driving but it’ll be 
reduced to class 5 privileges. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Okay, that’s for commercial. How would he 
then go about getting back his commercial? Does he have to 
redo a medical then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The short answer is as soon as they 
submit their medical, it’ll be reinstated. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister. 
Also in reading the explanatory notes, there was a piece in here: 
 

. . . the offence of failing to stop for a peace officer to those 
offences for which an operator may be subject to 
administrative suspension. 

 
Could the minister explain what exactly is being done with this 
change, and what do they mean by administrative suspension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This is, first of all, this is really specific 
to high-speed chases, and it’s about standardization. It’s about 
upgrading or updating, if you will, our legislation to standardize 
it with the federal legislation so that we’re operating 
consistently. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, my 
question to you I guess . . . through you to the minister, I guess. 
Dealing next will be with the interlock program and the whole 
discussion I guess around impaired driving and efforts to lower 
the instances of which this occurs. 
 
What changes are being made here? Is it extended to repeat 
offenders or is this just for first-time offenders — the interlock 
system? 
 



June 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Three things actually. First of all, 
what’s contemplated here is to extend this to repeat offenders. 
And that’s to comply as well again with the changes that the 
federal government made in December of 2001. 
 
Also we’re putting in place, or recommending putting in place, 
repercussions for continued repeat offenders. And lastly, to 
move the appeal process to the Highway Traffic Board. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — What would be the cost of putting in such a 
device and who pays for it? Does SGI or does the person 
putting it in pay for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ll just give you the exact breakdown. 
It is paid for by the individual. The cost is $125 plus GST 
(goods and services tax) — can’t forget that. There would be a 
higher fee charged for power units and luxury vehicles. There’s 
a one-time administration fee of $30, and then $95 plus GST 
again for monthly rental. And then there’s a $25 de-install fee. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a question to 
you is how about PST (provincial sales tax) — is that included 
in it too? Is there a charge for PST? 
 
(12:45) 
 
There also . . . there’s a little bit regarding zero tolerance for 
new drivers — a 90-day immediate roadside suspension. Can 
you go over the proposal on that end of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’ll try this. What we’re really doing 
here is updating this legislation to reflect the changes that have 
taken place as a result of the 90-day suspension. 
 
So we have a process where vehicles can be impounded for a 
whole host of reasons. And not included in this legislation to 
this point in time was the issue of the 90-day administrative 
suspension. We’re bringing that into this legislation to put in 
place the process for impounding a vehicle as it relates to the 
90-day administrative suspension. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — The 90-day administrative suspension, is that 
dealing with just new drivers or is that from anything from 
seizure for johns, high-speed chases, things like that nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The 90-day suspension only applies to 
.08 or refusing to give or provide a breath sample. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ve been rather 
enjoying the last half-hour of questioning because it’s been 
amazing to see this minister being so succinct and brief and to 
the point. And getting a different answer for every question. It’s 
been quite a treat. 
 
I do have sort of three areas I want to deal with a little bit, and 
one is a follow-up to some of the questions that were asked 
earlier. 
 
On the informing an individual that his licence is going to be 
suspended — so the individual may have moved to a different 
location and there is no way to contact him, but let’s say it’s 
still within province — at what point is that licence suspended 
but he hasn’t been informed, or do you not suspend it until you 

know that he has been informed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Before I answer the question, I’d 
encourage the member to also be very brief in his questions as 
well and to ask a different question every time as well — follow 
my lead. 
 
I believe your question is specific to maintenance orders. And 
again, I am going to . . . (inaudible) . . . just to repeat the answer 
I did before, which is that we are directed completely by the 
Department of Justice. So I think that was your question. 
 
But if we receive notification from the Department of Justice 
that a licence should be suspended, we suspend it and reinstate 
it when we get notification from them again. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — How actively do you pursue the individual — 
and I think you mentioned earlier on there are a number of 
letters written when you’re going to withdraw the licence — 
how actively do you pursue the individual on the reinstating? 
Or do you just, say one letter and if you didn’t get it, well then 
you’re without a licence because you haven’t been informed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We send them a letter notifying 
reinstatement. If we get the letter back, then we follow every 
mechanism available to us to try and contact the individual — I 
mean Henderson Directories and all those sorts of things. But it 
is, at the end of the day, it’s the individual’s responsibility to 
provide notification of change of address. 
 
But having said that, we try and do everything we can to find 
out where they’re currently living. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I want to spend some time 
discussing the situation where people are asked to do some 
retesting for their licences. And we’ll start off with basically the 
1A group. Are 1A . . . people holding a 1A licence, are they 
required to do some retesting from time to time? And what are 
the situations that exist that requires that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With respect to 1A licences, no, there’s 
no retesting. I guess if there’s issues of medical concern, that’s 
a bit of a different issue. But no, there’s no requirement for 
retesting on 1A licences. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So SGI would never send a licence to . . . or a 
letter to an individual saying that your 1A licence is going to be 
revoked unless you do some retesting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Those cases, I’m advised, would be 
very exceptional, where retesting would be required. And again 
it would only be related to medical or where the individual has 
had a record of very bad driving, I guess, then there would be 
some instances where they would require retesting. But that 
would not be at all commonplace. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I would suggest that you sort of check what’s 
actually going on because I do know of an instance of a person 
that had virtually a perfect record, without an offence within 
probably the last 10 years, no medical problems, well under half 
a century old, received a letter saying exactly that. I happen to 
be that person, and that’s why I asked that question. 
 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2002 

 

So then what I did — and this, being under half a century, was 
obviously some time ago — I wrote a rather snarky letter to the 
minister and was all reinstated. But I have to admit I was a little 
frustrated with that. Suddenly, with a very good record, I was 
supposed to take my 1A over. 
 
But on an issue that I think is one that’s probably more 
commonplace, and that’s individuals who because of their age 
. . . And I know this is a very sensitive one because the seniors 
in the country — and I’m not quite there yet — the seniors in 
the country get very upset when retesting is something that’s 
sort of discussed. But the question is: if you get a letter from 
family members or let’s say somebody in the community that 
says, this individual is really fairly hazardous in their driving 
situations, how do you assess that and how do you react to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The answer to the question is really not 
age related although the incidents might occur more frequently 
as our drivers get older, but it’s not really age related. 
 
So first of all, we would only accept a written and signed letter 
from somebody indicating that they have a concern about a 
specific individual. We would then contact them and require 
them to have a medical. And then we would assess the medical 
and the process is . . . the review is done by trained nurses 
within . . . who are employees of SGI and then the assessment 
and recommendations would flow from there. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I know this is a very 
sensitive area and that’s why the minister was very careful how 
he answered this one because we don’t want all the seniors in 
the country, including the ones sitting behind you, getting very 
upset with having their licences checked. But I think it is a 
concern that is out there. 
 
And I just want to mention one other instance without a 
question; it’s just sort of a comment on a situation that 
happened where we did have an individual in the community 
that had had something like four serious accidents in a period of 
about two months — each one in excess of 3, $4,000. And that 
was just because of inability to handle a car properly. When 
received some notification from SGI that the licence was going 
to be withdrawn, had jumped in the car with his son, came 
down here, talked to the minister — this was a couple of years 
ago, you weren’t the minister at that time — and had his licence 
reinstated, much to the fear of the whole community. 
 
So I’m saying there seems to be some political involvement in 
some of these situations. And I thought our community found 
that very frustrating that when we knew what the driving 
abilities were, he could come down to Regina, have that licence 
reinstated and went till he had another accident and then finally 
both he and the car quit. And that is the way that story basically 
ended and that was a little bit frustrating. 
 
With that particular comment, Mr. Chairman, we’re ready to see 
the Bill move on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I would ask the minister to report the 

Bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Before I do that, I’d like to thank the opposition members for, I 
think, good questions. And I’d also like to take the opportunity 
to formally thank the officials of SGI for their good advice here. 
 
Mr. Chair, I would move The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Vehicle Administration 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with appreciation from all 
hon. members of the House to our Page, Frederick Khonje, who 
I understand is serving the House for the last day today. And 
best wishes for him as he goes to take on other employment. 
 
I would move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I put the question, I would ask . . . 
invite the member from Swift Current for a statement. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to make 
some comments of interest to the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
opposition, we’d also like to acknowledge the work of Fred 
here in the Assembly and thank him for his service to all of the 
members. 
 
Fred, as you know, is from Swift Current and we very much 
appreciated being able to work with him here in the Assembly. 
And we want to wish him much success in his future 
endeavours, in a new job he’s going to be starting on Monday in 
Saskatoon. 
 
So on behalf of the opposition, we’d just like to thank Fred and 
wish him the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:03. 
 
 


