















































Hansard: April 30, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1059 
 April 30, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about this government’s treatment of the snowmobile industry 
in the province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails; and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown land and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registrations. 

 
There are four petitions here, Mr. Speaker, and they are signed 
by citizens of La Ronge, Air Ronge, Hudson Bay, and Canora. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of the province 
of Saskatchewan who would like to see all 49 recommendations 
that came out of the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse 
and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade come into 
being. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the 
Sex Trade. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Archerwill, Rose Valley, Fosston, Elfros, and Spalding, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition on behalf of many constituents from Canora-Pelly. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the communities of Foam 
Lake, Sheho, Wynyard, Wishart, and Tuffnell. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition signed by citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. And 
this petition is in regards to those who are in long-term care 
homes. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitioners are primarily from the riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar including communities of Elrose and 
Rosetown. And also including Saskatoon and Eston. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this petition to the Assembly. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition for the people who are concerned about the 
long-term care rate increases: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Kelvington, 
Rose Valley, and Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well again 
today on behalf of citizens who continue to express their 
concern about long-term care fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
community of Melfort and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Yorkton, the 
Deputy Premier’s riding, and the village of MacNutt. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. And reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the communities of Yorkton, Springside, and Ebenezer. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed fee 
increases for long-term care services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the community of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition concerning crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance plan and hike farmers’ crop insurance premium 
rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off the 
provincial government’s debt to the federal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from Sceptre, 
Lancer, Prelate, Abbey, and Cabri, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition from citizens concerned about 
long-term care increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from my constituency of Estevan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent loss of 
injury and life and also to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in this area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Francis, 
Estevan, and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about long-term care fees. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ogema and Pangman 
in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens who remain concerned on the issue of long-term care 
fees. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for the 
long-term care services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners on this petition are exclusively 
from the city of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24 acute care, emergency, doctorial 
services available as lab, physiotherapy, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to users from 
the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Craik, Davidson, and 
Aylesbury. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have this afternoon 
a petition brought forward by individuals who are highly 
concerned about the proposed increases for long-term care 
facilities in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, the petition reads 
as follows: 
 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good people 
from Yorkton and Melville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens who are concerned about the 
increased fees in long-term care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today with 
citizens concerned about the deplorable state of Highway No. 
15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners are from the communities of Simpson, 
Meacham, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the increase in 
long-term care fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
long-term home fees. And the petition reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Yorkton, Canora, and Theodore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan that 
are concerned about the annual deductible amount for 
prescription drugs. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of my constituency, from 
Killdeer, Climax, Woodrow, Lafleche, and Limerick. 
 
I so present. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby received as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional papers nos. 17, 18, 
and 31. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I present the second report of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Watrous: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: how much 
money did the provincial government contribute to the 
Prince Albert arena in 1999? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year 
2000 and 2001. 

 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SPMC: what are the names and 
addresses of the buildings and/or properties owned by the 
government for which no grants in lieu of property taxes 
are paid to the local municipality; and for each one, in what 
year was the last grant in lieu payment made? 
 
I have a number of other questions similar to this, Mr. 
Speaker, for different departments. 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many farmers signed 
up for coverage with Saskatchewan Crop Insurance in 
2001? 
 
And I have the same question for year 2002. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, I would like 
to introduce a young man seated in your gallery, Tyler Hoyt. 
 
He’s a grade 8 student here in Regina and every year Tyler gets 
to come to the legislature to spend one afternoon to view 
proceedings. Tyler is accompanied by his father, Vern Hoyt. 
 
So I would just ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through to the members of the 
House today, a close friend and a constituent of mine, Joan 
Upshall, and a friend of hers, Donna Kozak, from the city of 
Regina. I’d ask everyone to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Long-Term Health Care Fees Under Review 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Premier announced that he had at long last seen the unfairness 
underlying his government’s planned restructuring of long-term 
fees in Saskatchewan. And while we are pleased that the 
Premier announced that this policy had been put on hold 
pending a review, we’d have been more pleased had he had 
taken the extra step and removed the planned increase from the 
drawing boards completely. 
 
Because we have no guarantee of what the final outcome of this 
review will be, the Saskatchewan Party believes it important to 
continue to press home the point with the members opposite 
that this policy was and is wrong. For this reason we will 

continue to present the many petitions we have received and 
continue to receive from the people of Saskatchewan on this 
issue. 
 
I want to personally take this opportunity to thank all those 
people in Saskatchewan who have helped us fight this policy to 
this point, through their many letters, phone calls, and petitions. 
Make no mistake about it, the fight is not over. However, 
without all of the people who joined with the official opposition 
— people of every background and political persuasion — in 
trying to get the government to come to its senses, we wouldn’t 
even have made this amount of progress. 
 
Thank you to all of them, and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Snowbirds Launch 2002 Air Show Season 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 
was honoured to be one of the guests of Commander Bruce 
McCuade in 15 Wing Moose Jaw to observe the acceptance 
show for the 32nd season of the Snowbirds. In civilian terms, 
Mr. Speaker, I was privileged to watch the Snowbirds’ dress 
rehearsal for the upcoming air show season. 
 
According to regulation, they are required to conduct an 
acceptance show for the commander of no. 1 Canadian Air 
Division so that he can ensure the aerial display is safe and that 
it maintains the highest standards we have come to expect from 
this most famous of Canadian teams. 
 
If the commander is willing to take the humble opinion of the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) who happens to 
represent the air base, the standards were maintained and 
exceeded. This air show is ready to hit the skies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of how many times I have seen the 
Snowbirds in performance, their precision, their teamwork, 
their skill, and the sheer joy they display in their art is always a 
thrill. I suspect each of us will agree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds belong to Canada but we have a 
special claim. I know all members will join with me in wishing 
the commanding officer, Maj. Stephen Will, and all members of 
the Snowbirds another safe and successful season. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Science Fair 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to recognize a young inventor from my 
constituency, Sheldon Bowman. Sheldon and his invention have 
won a spot at the National Science Fair to be held in Saskatoon 
this May. 
 
Sheldon’s invention, the pushy bale handler, won first place in 
the engineering, computers and math sciences category at the 
regional science fair held recently in Wynyard and was named 
the overall best project of the fair. 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

 

The pushy bale handler is designed to transport bales from 
stacks or windrows to a feeding area. It’s a spring-loaded 
system that doesn’t involve any hydraulics or electric controls 
and can be hooked on to the back of a tractor or a truck. It’s 
simpler and cheaper than any other handlers currently on the 
market. 
 
The idea for this invention came from Sheldon’s everyday 
routine. His family has 50 head of cattle and has to put out 
round bales every couple of days. His system allows bales to be 
moved quickly without getting out of a vehicle. 
 
The size of the handler can be adjusted to the size of the round 
bale. As well, it can be used for square bales. 
 
So I’d like to congratulate Sheldon on his invention and wish 
him the best of luck at the National Science Fair in Saskatoon. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Award to CommunityNet 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to say 
thank you on behalf of the provincial government and all the 
hard-working public servants involved in CommunityNet to say 
thank you to the Saskatchewan Economic Developers 
Association. 
 
SEDA (Saskatchewan Economic Developers Association) is the 
professional association for those who practise community 
economic development in Saskatchewan and they recently 
honoured the Government of Saskatchewan’s CommunityNet 
initiative with a special achievement award. The award 
presented was for outstanding economic development initiative 
2002. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the creation of CommunityNet 
resulted from a lot of hard work and an innovative partnership 
between a number of organizations, including SaskTel, SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network), SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), the 
Information Technology Office, and a number of other groups 
and departments. 
 
It is interesting to contrast this award, Mr. Speaker, and the 
views of economic development professionals with the view of 
members opposite as expressed by the member from Redberry 
Lake in Hansard April 16 this year when he said, and I quote: 
 

. . . this initiative in the CommunityNet is driving private 
business away. 

 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t say anything about that 
last night to the Action Committee on the Rural Economy. This 
government is proud to be going in the right direction to bridge 
the digital divide. We are proud to help develop 
Saskatchewan’s rural economy and, Mr. Speaker, we are proud 
to receive and accept this important economic development 
award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Catholic School for Tomorrow Innovations 
in Technology Award 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 4, at the 
National Catholic Education Association convention in Atlantic 
City, St. Patrick’s school in Swift Current became the first and, 
to date, the only Canadian winner of the Catholic School for 
Tomorrow Innovations in Technology award. 
 
The project that earned the award for St. Pat’s school and their 
partnering Catholic school divisions from across the province, 
Mr. Speaker, has resulted in the development of a Web site 
which is being accessed by Catholic educators around the 
world. 
 
The Web site which has the backing and support of 
Saskatchewan Education, the Catholic trustees, and the 
province’s Catholic Bishops, is designed to provide a clearing 
house of unit plans and professional development opportunities 
for teachers. 
 
And, as Swift Current Separate School Board chairperson, Julie 
Randall said, and I quote: 
 

We are honoured to have been chosen for this award and 
appreciative of the innovative work by teachers and 
administrators from across Saskatchewan. We are also very 
appreciative of the leadership offered by Moose Jaw’s 
Catholic Director of Education, Dr. Helen Horsman . . . 

 
Recently the editor of Today’s Catholic Teacher magazine 
saluted St. Patrick’s school for their selection. She said, and I 
quote: 
 

You can be justifiably proud to be judged among the top 12 
in innovation application of technology. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
saluting St. Pat’s school, the principal, Del Wagner, all of his 
staff, and all of the partners from across Saskatchewan who 
have made this project a reality, and brought home this 
prestigious honour to Swift Current and to the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Artist of the Year 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, for years the 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College fine arts program has 
provided a solid educational and creative environment that has 
been a springboard to the careers of many of our province’s 
emerging First Nations artists. 
 
Each year, the college recognizes a graduating student for their 
accomplishments and designates an artist of the year. The 
Legislative Building now plays a role in the celebration of these 
achievements, not only to the artist of the year, but all the 
students and staff at SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College). 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Cumberland Gallery in the Legislative 
Building was created to provide a venue to support established 
and emerging artists. At the opening of the gallery in April of 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

2001, His Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales, stopped and 
admired the work of the late Sanford Fisher, whose work is 
well-known. 
 
Well I guess you could say that things have come full circle, 
Mr. Speaker, because the Cumberland Gallery just recently 
honoured Dan Fisher, the son of Sanford Fisher, as artist of the 
year. 
 
On behalf of the House I would like to congratulate Dan Fisher, 
and invite all members of the House to take some time in the 
near future to stop by the Cumberland Gallery. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fire in Bladworth 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to talk about a great community effort to fight a fire 
which occurred in my hometown of Bladworth on last Friday 
afternoon. The fire apparently occurred when a burning barrel 
touched off some dry grass nearby and quickly spread. 
 
The Davidson fire brigade was called and were there very 
quickly, although by now an old, abandoned house was on fire. 
The danger was that, with the high winds and dry conditions, 
the entire community of Bladworth was in danger of catching 
fire. 
 
I myself arrived back home as the firefighting efforts continued, 
and joined in. I was very proud of the many friends and 
neighbours of mine who had quickly come out and were 
assisting the fire brigade in their desperate effort to stop the fire 
from spreading to nearby houses. 
 
They came out with anything they could find in the way of 
shovels and all manners of tools and equipment. For several 
hours, they worked hard to contain the blaze, and in the end, 
they and the fire brigade were successful. 
 
The whole community was certainly shaken up by this near 
disastrous fire. I appreciate the neighbours’ efforts very much 
and honour them for their commitment to their community. A 
strong tip to the hat to Fire Chief Rick Woodman and his 
10-member squad of volunteer firefighters from Davidson. 
 
Mr. Woodman said that it took from between 1 p.m. and 6:30 
p.m. to safely contain the fire and ensure that the high winds did 
not cause the flames to relight. The fire chief added his 
appreciation to the community members who came out to help 
them fight this dangerous fire. 
 
He also mentioned a local man with a Caterpillar dozer tractor 
came in to bulldoze down some trees around the fire area as an 
added safety precaution. 
 
I would like to ask all members in the Assembly to join me in 
thanking the residents of Bladworth and the Davidson fire 
brigade for their heroic efforts during last Friday’s fire. The 
strength of the community showed through as it always has in 
my hometown of Bladworth. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Fund for Victims of Crime 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On budget day the 
government announced that they were going to raise surcharges 
on court fines. Purpose? To raise money for the Victims’ Fund. 
What the NDP (New Democratic Party) didn’t tell us, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they drained $750,000, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
three-quarter of a million dollars out of the Victims’ Fund to 
help them pretend that they were actually going to balance that 
fudge-it budget. 
 
Crime victims in this province, Mr. Speaker, have been robbed 
twice — twice — once by the thief and once by this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government drain 
three-quarters of a million dollars out of the Victims’ Fund, and 
why didn’t they tell anyone they were going to do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know 
the valuable work that the Victims’ Fund does, that it takes a 
surcharge from those who commit crimes and are fined and 
uses it for useful purposes — to protect victims, to enhance 
victims, and to provide supports across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will know that that fund, that that 
fund is increased this year and that it will generate the resources 
needed, more resources needed to protect victims to the best of 
our ability and indeed, Mr. Speaker, those who work with 
victims on a regular basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a very 
poor answer. The funding, the funding for those helps that he 
was talking about was provided for traditionally out of the 
general fund. They know that. 
 
Funding for this program was already in place in last year’s 
budget, in the previous year’s budget without raiding the 
Victims’ Fund, without raiding it. That means the Victims’ 
Fund will have three quarters of a million dollars less this year 
to spend on the compensation of victims in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP raided the Victims’ Fund to pay for 
existing programs in a desperate attempt to give our wee 
Premier a wee surplus in his budget. Why is the NDP taking 
money away from the victims of crime? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just ask the 
member when referring to any other member in the legislature, 
they should refer to the member by the proper title or by the 
constituency. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should just 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

 

straighten the member out a little bit. He will know that the 
Victims’ Fund is not designed to compensate victims so much 
as to provide services and supports for them as they deal with 
the trauma of being victimized, Mr. Speaker. And he will know, 
Mr. Speaker, that we still have to find more money for this fund 
this year and that indeed there will be a half a million dollars 
more for victims, Mr. Speaker, and that this will continue into 
the future. 
 
We’re committed to helping victims, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
committed to dealing with crime in this province. And of course 
the member should be reminded that his commitment to justice 
in the last election was zero, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve added, we’ve added, Mr. Speaker, 25, 26 per cent more 
money for police. Mr. Speaker, we are committed to safety and 
security in this province, unlike the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Victims’ Fund, 
Mr. Speaker, consists of surcharges and court fines. Section 
6(3) of The Victims of Crime Act says that all money raised 
through these surcharges, and I quote, “. . . shall be deposited in 
the fund and not the general revenue fund.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister appears to be violating his own Act 
— his own Act, Mr. Speaker. The minister raided the Victims’ 
Fund to pay for existing department programs even though the 
Act says very specifically the Victims’ Fund money is not to go 
to the general revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain this. Why is the minister 
violating his own Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The money that goes to victims, to the 
Victims’ Fund, goes to prevent family violence, crime 
prevention programs, Aboriginal victims services programs, 
Mr. Speaker — 280,000 for crime prevention, 365,000 for 
family violence initiatives, 105,000 for Aboriginal victims 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker. Which of these, Mr. Speaker, does the 
member opposite not support? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We support all of 
those programs. That’s why we want the money left back in that 
program. This government, Mr. Speaker, fudged the budget. 
This government took money and took it away from wildlife, 
from habitat. Now they’ve taken it away from victims. 
 
Will the minister stand in his place today and make a 
commitment to return that three-quarters of a million dollars to 
the Victims’ Fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, what I can do is remind 

the member that in 2002-2003, fully three-quarters of a million 
dollars will be available for these initiatives to help victims 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I ask the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to give some 
thought to what they would do regarding safety and security 
and victims in this province, Mr. Speaker. Because we know 
from their platform in the last election, they would have done 
nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Plans for Saskatchewan’s Economic Growth 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday, the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) committee released its report. And they said a 
number of things the Saskatchewan Party has been saying for a 
long, long time. 
 
In short, ACRE said we need to grow Saskatchewan. They said 
to stop the flow of people out of our province and increase the 
number of people moving into our province. They said, we need 
to grow the population of rural Saskatchewan by 200,000 
people in the next 20 years. And they said, we need a 
government that creates a climate for growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Instead of, Mr. Speaker, instead of picking 
winners and losers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the opposite of what the NDP has 
been doing for the last 10 years. And that’s why the NDP has 
driven out so many people out of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit the NDP’s economic 
approach has been a failure and that it’s time to follow ACRE’s 
recommendations and grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I sat 
through the same evening and the same presentation by the 
same people. And you know what I heard, Mr. Speaker? I heard 
that our problem is not only the economic circumstances and 
that we need to change and we need to move forward and that 
we need to diversify. What I also heard was that we need to 
have a positive attitude about this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And what I heard, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we need to recognize our successes, the fact that we’ve had 
economic growth eight years in a row. 
 
2001 was a difficult circumstance for us, but the Saskatchewan 
Party consistently hides their head in the sand when it comes to 
good news. A little piece of bad news — we had a tough year 
last year and nobody will deny it — and the world is falling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say the people of Saskatchewan know they’ve 
got a strong economic base for growth in the future and they’re 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

going to take advantage of it, in spite of what the Saskatchewan 
Party says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister seems to be a bit confused about what is really going 
on in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s take a look at the NDP record. Last year, the NDP killed 
12,000 jobs. They drove over 10,000 people to other provinces. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they were the only government in Canada to 
have negative economic growth. 
 
Today, the RBC Financial Group released its provincial outlook 
and they are predicting more of the same. They say 
Saskatchewan will trail the rest of the country in economic 
growth; Saskatchewan will trail the rest of the country in job 
growth. And they say, and I quote: 
 

. . . a declining labour force is not a good sign for the 
future, suggesting that the . . . net outflow of working-age 
individuals to other provinces is intensifying. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what the NDP is doing isn’t working. When is the 
NDP going to admit its economic policies are failing and come 
up with a plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
Saskatchewan Party that this government is committed to 
economic growth of this province. It’s committed to 
diversifying what we do as a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
evidenced by the fact that, eight years in a row, we had growth 
in GDP (gross domestic product). 
 
Now members opposite from the Saskatchewan Party say we 
have different views. And you bet you we have different views. 
Because they refuse to understand that 2001 was the driest year 
we’ve had since the 1930s, that our income from agriculture 
decreased by 60 per cent, that our income from all sources in 
this province since 1996, from agriculture, has decreased from 
12 per cent to 1 per cent. We’ve got different views in terms of 
what our difficulties are. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the difference is we have a view of 
optimism for the future. The people of Saskatchewan will build 
this economy, and they’re not going to listen to the negative 
nabobs from that side because they go nowhere. It’s straight 
politics. We’re here to build this economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister needs to get his numbers straight. He keeps saying that 
Saskatchewan led the country in economic growth over the past 
eight years. That’s just not true. The fact is, Saskatchewan was 
seventh in economic growth over the last eight years. And over 

the last four years, Saskatchewan has been dead last, Mr. 
Speaker — dead last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the article in The Globe and 
Mail dated today, and the paragraph reads this way: 
 

. . . oil developments will continue to do well . . . pushing 
Newfoundland to the top of the list in terms of economic 
growth among the provinces, Royal Bank said Tuesday. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the prediction for Newfoundland. Now the 
Royal Bank prediction for Saskatchewan is three factors that are 
going to continue to make Saskatchewan dead last: they say 
slow economic growth, slow job growth, and more people 
leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the government going to get the message? 
Why does the NDP have no plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a 
plan. The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party in Saskatoon last 
fall got up and announced the three platform plan. One of it was 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, no, no. No, no, sir. Sir, 
you did. And you know what the first . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite will laugh and I tell you they should laugh because 
none of it’s been sustainable. He got up and committed to 
600-and-some million dollars in tax reductions. Not one word 
about where that Leader of the Opposition will find it from, the 
Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
He then talked about cutting the civil servants the same way 
they’re doing in BC (British Columbia), but he doesn’t want to 
talk about that, Mr. Speaker, because civil servants in this 
province rejected it, rejected his plan; as the people in BC 
rejected his plan. Then how’s he going to finance it, Mr. 
Speaker? He’s going to sell Crown assets. 
 
Well which Crown assets, Mr. Speaker? He doesn’t want to talk 
about it. Now if he wants to shake his head and say that’s not 
what he said, he can do that. But it’s in writing, people know it, 
and they don’t buy into your plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time — I think 
it’s time to turn back to the ACRE report. The very government 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Let’s take a look at what the ACRE report 
says — the government’s own report. 
 
And I quote: 
 

. . . the “status quo” is not an option. We cannot keep doing 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

 

what we have been doing if we are truly serious about 
reversing the decline. 
 
The role of government is not to pick winners but to set 
proper economic and business climate and remove 
roadblocks so that Saskatchewan entrepreneurs and 
communities can take advantage of the opportunities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. And we need to start by 
removing the biggest roadblock — that NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, when is the NDP going to 
realize what they’re doing isn’t working? Why do they have no 
plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Let’s talk about the plan because 
they won’t talk about their plan. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, one 
day one person said, you know, integrity isn’t a 90 per cent 
thing, it’s not a 95 per cent thing — you’ve either got it or you 
don’t. 
 
Now I want to know . . . Last fall he stood up and he said he’s 
going to reduce taxes, he’s going to cut the cost of government 
by firing civil servants, and he’s going to cut the Crowns to the 
core. Where is that plan? Where is the integrity? Why doesn’t 
he stand up and defend what he said he’s going to do to grow 
the Saskatchewan economy? 
 
His platform right now is one-liner: in 10 years we’re going to 
create 100,000 people; we’re going to grow this population by 
100,000 people. He hasn’t been able to articulate one way that 
he’s going to do it. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, our record is clear —eight years of 
consecutive GDP growth. We had a tough year in 2001 — we 
admit it. And I want to know if the Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Party is going to support us when he sees the numbers turn 
around in 2002 and ’03. 
 

Gaming Agreement with First Nations 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of 
Gaming. I asked this question yesterday but did not get an 
answer. The new agreement states a process will be developed 
over the next three years that would provide First Nations with 
full jurisdiction to all forms of gaming on First Nations land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what that process will 
involve. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I had explained it 
to the member opposite that our 25-year agreement signed with 
our friends and our partners, First Nations of this great province 
of ours, in good faith and in confidence in one another and 
mutual trust. 
 
She’s talking about jurisdiction on reserves. We will be 
working with our First Nations partners to go to federal . . . to 
the federal government to talk about the potential in the future 

for First Nations to develop their economies, to create jobs, 
more employment opportunities. But there’s a process to 
follow. 
 
That commitment was made to our partners back in 1993-94 
and it continues to remain in place. And we will keep our word 
to First Nations. I’m not so sure the members opposite would. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain 
specifically what full jurisdiction to all forms of gaming on 
First Nations land means. Does full jurisdiction mean that new 
casino development could go ahead on an urban reserve without 
the approval of the community? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I was under the impression 
that the member opposite did have a copy of the agreement. If 
not, I’ll be happy to read into the record what part of that 
agreement says. It says, and I quote: 
 

The parties continue to be committed to work together to 
develop and (to) present to the Government of Canada 
proposals which would allow First Nations full jurisdiction 
in relation to all forms of gaming on reserves, either 
through amendments to the Criminal Code of Canada or 
new federal legislation. The agreement will set out a 
process to jointly (jointly — that means together and in 
partnership, to present) . . . these proposals (in the best 
interest of both parties involved). 

 
What’s simpler? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The answer still is not clear. Is the agreement 
between the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) 
and the government, or is the community involved? I would 
hope that the minister would answer after I ask the next 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also a question about what giving First 
Nations full jurisdiction of all gaming on First Nations land 
means in terms of revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: would this mean that the 
provincial government would not have any share in the 
proceeds of gaming on reserves? 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, we are working with the First 
Nations to go to the federal government to discuss these 
proposals. When we discuss those proposals that First Nations 
want to advance to the federal government, it will be 
determined by the federal . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Criminal 
Code applies here right across Canada and to all peoples here, 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
If in fact the federal government chooses to make changes to 
the Criminal Code to recognize what First Nations people are 
asking for, we will be doing it together, Mr. Speaker, in a 
partnership. Collectively we’ll make those proposals in the best 
interests of future economic development for First Nations 
people and to grow the economy of this great province of ours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very alarming that this 
government has signed a 25-year agreement and they cannot 
stand in the House today and tell the people of Saskatchewan 
whether this agreement would allow the people of 
Saskatchewan to share in the revenues of First Nations gaming 
on reserves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again we have to be 
very, very curious why there’s an attack on a 25-year agreement 
with First Nations community in this province of ours. I 
question the motives of the members opposite. 
 
I just want to remind again what the Leader of the Opposition 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing is working 
with First Nations people in this province to create job 
opportunities for them, to ensure that collectively as a 
partnership — perhaps they don’t understand the meaning of 
the word partnership — and I don’t understand why they’ve 
suddenly changed their minds. What the Leader of the 
Opposition stood before the First Nations Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, and said: 
 

Gaming will certainly play an important role in successful 
future First Nations economic development. That’s what 
we’re working towards. 

 
Have you changed your mind, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the member from 
Melville, the minister of Industry and Gaming, that all of his 
remarks — all of his remarks — should be addressed through 
the Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, on April 25 . . . Mr. Speaker, on 
April 25, the day the gaming agreement was signed, CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio reported that 
according to Chief Perry Bellegarde, full jurisdiction meant that 
First Nations would receive all revenue from on-reserve gaming 
ventures. He said, and I quote: 
 

At that point it’s our full jurisdiction and we set up our 
systems the way we want to do it. Because what other 
business — it’s a business — we’re sharing the profits, 
where else does that happen? 

 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree with Chief Bellegarde that 

a full jurisdiction agreement on reserve would mean the end of 
revenue sharing between First Nations and the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, we signed a 25-year 
agreement. The process that we’ve agreed to assist First Nations 
people with is going to the federal government on the issue of 
jurisdiction on First Nations land. 
 
Now I still . . . obviously it’s still not understood. This is a 
partnership. And both parties, both First Nations and 
representatives of the government, will be at the table with the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mean, do they not appreciate and understand that we will, as 
First Nations, be looking after the best interests of First Nations 
and the people of this province? There’s a question of trust that 
keeps entering into my mind when I hear those kind of 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, full jurisdiction is not clearly and 
specifically designed in the new gaming agreement and the 
minister has failed to tell the people of Saskatchewan what full 
jurisdiction means. Yet the government is committing $250,000 
annually to the FSIN for the next five years to enable them to 
move toward full jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government committing these funds 
and does the NDP believe it is in the best interests of all people 
of Saskatchewan to give up all of the revenue from on-reserve 
gaming? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, whatever the decision is by 
the federal government with respect to jurisdiction will be 
decided by the federal government. This is an opportunity for 
First Nations and government to go to the federal government 
to determine what the jurisdiction issue is all about. 
 
The members opposite are already speculating because 
obviously I don’t think they want to see that happen. They don’t 
want to see any economic development for First Nations 
people. They are not interested in First Nations people. 
 
I would like to ask the members opposite, perhaps the Leader of 
the Opposition: what would they do? Would they refuse to be in 
a partnership with First Nations people to help them develop 
and create job opportunities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, what plan does the NDP have to 
consult with the people of Saskatchewan to see whether the 
public supports giving First Nations full jurisdiction to on 
gaming reserves — full jurisdiction that could see the 
government give away the right to regulate expansion of 
gambling and give away the right to regulate revenue sharing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, what plan does he, as the minister, 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

 

have to consult the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I heard across the way 
a little earlier the reference to the ACRE committee, who 
suggested that it’s very important that we work with the First 
Nations community in this province. I think that’s agreed. 
 
I’m a little disappointed that the speculations and the 
pre-empting of what people who are . . . build our Criminal 
Code, the members opposite pre-empting what may or may not 
be written into a decision with respect to the First Nations 
jurisdiction on reserves right across Canada. 
 
That means a significant change to the Criminal Code of 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, so it will be addressed when the time 
comes, and I wish they wouldn’t speculate about more doom 
and gloom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Northern Justice Symposium 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to bring the attention of members of the House to the 
great success of the Northern Justice Symposium held last 
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday in Prince Albert. 
 
And I want to congratulate the Saskatchewan Association of 
Northern Communities, more commonly known as New North, 
for organizing this well-attended, lively, and exciting 
conference that focused on the role of communities in building 
safe and healthy northern communities. 
 
The conference was funded through the National Crime 
Prevention Centre and organized with the assistance of the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and the Aboriginal 
and northern justice initiatives branch of the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Two hundred plus northerners attended this conference and 
learned of promising new community-based crime prevention 
initiatives. The symposium provided an opportunity for 
northern communities to build networks and linkages so that 
these initiatives can be realized. 
 
Let us make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, the rates of offending and 
resultant experience of serious social harm continue to be one 
of the North’s major challenges. What’s encouraging is the 
absolute determination of the communities of the North to take 
effective steps to stop the cycle of offending and victimization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to working with 
people in northern communities, forming partnerships, and 
finding solutions together. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to join with 

me in congratulating New North on the recent successes of the 
Northern Justice Symposium. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s, I think, a good 
meeting that took place in northern Saskatchewan. I would like 
to thank the minister, first of all, for giving me a copy of his 
statement. 
 
Building safe and healthy northern communities is probably one 
of the key things that we’re concerned about anyplace in the 
world, that our places that we live are safe and that they’re 
healthy. And so the topic that was at that symposium, Mr. 
Speaker, is obviously one of the most worthwhile topics that we 
can have anyplace in Canada, in Saskatchewan, and in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s also good, Mr. Speaker, to see that there were 200 
people out. This wasn’t just a little group that came together 
and a few bureaucrats — a good turnout — 200 people talking 
about the initiatives that are out there and basically, 
community-based crime prevention initiatives. 
 
And I think we all know that when the community, Mr. 
Speaker, gets involved with crime prevention, it has a whole lot 
more effect very often than just expecting some of our law 
enforcement officers to be in charge and everyone else just 
stands around and watches. So to the extent that they’re trying 
in the future, the symposium, to build networks and linkages to 
create the community network, I think, is a very positive sort of 
a thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said that his government was 
committed to working with northerners to find the solution. I 
can assure you, Mr. Speaker, all parts of this province are 
together with the government on this one to find solutions to the 
problems that were indicated by the symposium, and we 
support the directions and hope that it turns out well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Paramedics Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 38, The 
Paramedics Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’d like to convert 
for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 143 has been converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
this afternoon to stand and table a response on behalf of the 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

Government of Saskatchewan to written question 144. 
 
The Speaker: — Response 144 has been tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Training and Health Care Initiatives for Residents 
of Northern Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will be moving the 
following motion after my remarks: 
 

That this Assembly advance the programs announced in the 
Throne Speech geared to providing training and promoting 
better health for citizens of northern Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to make my commentary in regards to 
how we work and partner with people of northern 
Saskatchewan in making sure that we have a better health 
system that is under their control and also how they work 
together, you know, for the betterment of the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now my comments will focus in on our health strategy vis à 
vis, of course, the training component that is listed there and 
also other aspects relating to health, meaning our capacity 
building, particularly in regards to health facilities. 
 
(14:30) 
 
I will start out with the aspect of health facilities because it’s 
always a very, very, very important notion. I know that one has 
to look at it in historical terms. Sometimes we look at facilities, 
how far apart they are, and so on. 
 
And when I was in opposition, I used to do a lot of debating on 
this issue. And I knew that while the Tories were in power, they 
made many promises about northern health facilities. And I 
remember we had money back in 1982 to build a health facility 
in the North, but that was taken away by the Devine 
government when they come into power. 
 
And actually, their people said that we will build a facility in 
the North, you know, for the election on their second term, you 
know, when I ran during that election. And it’s very, very clear 
that everybody was waiting for this health facility back in 1986 
when the Devine PCs (Progressive Conservative) came into 
power because their message was exactly the same as the Sask 
Party. They would provide this and that. They would cut taxes. 
They would do all of these things, but also get a health facility 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the first year came by and everybody was waiting for the 
budget. Zero came on. There was absolutely nothing in the 
budget by the Tories. Second year comes by and again zero for 
the people of the North. 
 
And when we look at the next budget, on those total nine years 
they were in office, not one penny came to northern 
Saskatchewan, basically because they had to fulfill their 
right-wing expectations in the South and do a lot of unnecessary 
expenditures and also not deal with the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. They tried to sound good prior to the election, 

but they never did absolutely anything during that period. 
 
Now the . . . an old Tory, the member from Rosthern, talks 
there. He talks about the ’80s when he was a member of the old 
Tory party. And a lot of them were the members of the old 
Tories. Now they . . . they worry now because I’m speaking the 
truth about what happened. Those guys gave us zero. 
 
There is a Saskatchewan Party freeze on health today. The 
Saskatchewan Party talks about freezing health care and the 
Tories did zero in regards to northern Saskatchewan facilities. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. Order, please. Now I invite the member 
from Cumberland to make his statement. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes. The statement was in regards to the 
positive aspects of health facility support for northerners. And I 
hit a nerve, because sometimes the truth hurts quite a bit. 
 
You know a lot of them are old Tories and they will talk a good 
line before the election but they will never deliver in regards to 
what happens in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now when we were running, of course we said that we would 
work with the people in the North in the health facilities. When 
we come into power we went in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And of course the member from North Battleford said 
something. He’s been voting with the Saskatchewan Party right 
from the very beginning against the budget which helps the 
North. Mr. Speaker, he voted against The Métis Act as well, 
Mr. Speaker. Now that member may talk over there but he still 
votes with the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I’m talking about the facilities, the La 
Ronge health facility went up when the NDP government came 
in. With the coalition government we moved on and we even 
made some further improvements. And we put in roughly over 
$30 million in regards to health facilities in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — We had health facilities in La Ronge and the 
people from the Athabasca region said we need a health facility 
in the Athabasca region. Mr. Speaker, we responded. And for 
the first time we . . . the people in the North not only had a 
health facility, they would have their own health district up in 
the North . . . northern area called Athabasca Health Authority. 
 
And we also did the same thing when we did the other health 
districts. We created northern control in health for the first time 
in history because we were known as the government who 
would put the power of decision making in the hands of 
northerners and we did the Athabasca Health Authority along 
with Mamawetan Churchill on the east side and the central side 
and the Keewatin Yatthé Health District. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we also built another centre at a cost $11.2 
million in La Loche. 
 
And I must say that, Mr. Speaker, when we ask the member 
from North Battleford in regards to federal dollars, you know, 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

 

there is 14 cents on the dollar that the federal government puts 
in on health, and in regards to that we are looking for 50 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on La Loche, we put in $11.2 million as 
our health support system. And that is a tremendous record in 
our regard. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Would the member from North 
Battleford please state his point of order? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Speaker has had to 
remind this Assembly on several occasions recently that it is 
important to keep our debate on a civil and dignified tone that 
does credit to the members and this province. 
 
And I would suggest that when the hon. member for 
Cumberland starts saying that I am one with the Saskatchewan 
Party and in agreement with them and one of them, he is 
dragging the level of the debate of this Assembly to new lows. 
And it ought to be ruled out of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip on 
the point of order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — . . . respond to the point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point that needs to be talked about here is this 
is a debate. There may be a difference of opinion, but within 
this debate the individuals will have an opportunity to express 
their opinion. The member was expressing his opinion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I thank you for the point 
of order and thank you for responding to the point of order. 
 
I would just remind the member for Cumberland to not cast 
aspersion on other members or draw the members in debate in 
an unparliamentary way. 
 
Mr. Goulet: —Basically what I was putting forth is the record 
in regards to the budget, Mr. Speaker. We have a health budget. 
We support the health budget. And all I was showing was that 
the member of Battlefords did not vote against the budget. He 
voted against the northern Saskatchewan budget. 
 
We’ve got extra money going to La Loche, $11.2 million, and 
we got new money for . . . from the federal government on the 
La Loche facility. But we were able to get some money from 
the feds on the Stony Rapids one. We were able to put in over 
$12 million on that Stony Rapids facility, of which over $8 
million was provincial and just over $3 million was from the 
federal government. So we were happy to get the federal dollars 
on that part. 
 
But my point was that on the case of La Loche, all that money 
that was there, that 11.2 million, 1.2 million was from a local 
and $10 million was from the provincial government. 
 

So what I . . . what I’m saying here, Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve 
had, in addition to the training programs, we’ve done very good 
support in regards to the facilities side. And I might add that on 
the budget was also the next phase from La Ronge, Stony 
Rapids, La Loche. Now we will have Ile-a-la-Crosse and the St. 
Joseph’s Hospital. 
 
And I know that it’s very, very important for the member of 
Athabasca, and it’s not only his constituency but it is his own 
town in regards to the St. Joseph’s Hospital and we were 
pleased to announce that on the budget of $600,000. 
 
So I think that it’s very, very important to look at the overall 
aspect as well of health districts. 
 
I know that the members from across cringe when we talk about 
the issue of northern control, or First Nations control, or Métis 
control, and they have a very, very difficult time with that. And 
when we’re talking about northern control this has been a very, 
very important aspect. Our own people are in the boards. They 
make the decisions in regards to policy; they make decisions in 
regards to program development. They are an important part of 
the health formation, health development, in the history of the 
North. 
 
And I might say that in that regard not only have they partnered 
together, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have done partnerships 
between the three provincial health districts but also with the 
tribal council authorities. The tribal council signed a 
memorandum of understanding with the three health districts 
where they will partner on major issues, whether it is diabetes 
or other aspects of the development in regards to health services 
in northern Saskatchewan. So it’s a real plus, you know, for a 
lot of people on the partnerships that they have established in 
regards to northern development and northern control. 
 
There are other aspects that have been there for . . . and I will 
list a few in regards to what’s been happening. 
 
In addition to the provincial plan, after the commission report, 
we had a northern health strategy. And a northern health 
strategy while it composes of many things also includes the 
primary health care team approach which is very similar 
throughout the province, but it will have a northern component. 
We have Cree and Dene speakers in the North, and they will 
have the cultural aspect of the people up there as well as in 
regards to northern conditions — the reality of dealing with the 
various issues there on primary health care. 
 
And also we have a northern and Aboriginal health care 
provision which I have talked about, in regards to the 
partnership. We have emergency medical care. We have 
diabetes education program. We put in 166,000 in regards to 
that training program. 
 
I might add that, on the training we have looked as well on the 
emergency medical technicians. Northlands has a program in 
Buffalo Narrows and also Beauval. We also have a northern 
health services access program, a northern nursing education 
program. A lot of the people recognize that it’s not only a 
matter of control for the people of the North, they want to get 
the professional workers from the North working right into the 
health hospitals. 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Government House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, ask for leave 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and my apologies to the member from Cumberland for 
the interjection. 
 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Legislative Assembly a group of 63 students from Prince 
Albert. Now these students are from Ecole King George 
Community School. Their MLA, the member from Prince 
Albert Carlton and the Speaker, is not able to be here to 
introduce them and has asked me to introduce them to you on 
his behalf. 
 
So I would want to say to all of the students, welcome to the 
legislature. I hope that you enjoy your tour and enjoy your time 
here in Regina. 
 
And I want to, as well, just close by saying welcome to Mrs. T. 
McShane, Mrs. J. Matice, and Madame C. Elliott. And so 
welcome to all of you and have a great time down here and a 
safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Training and Health Care Initiatives for 
Residents of Northern Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my last commentary of 
course related to the health facilities as well as to the 
importance of northern control on the health boards and the 
partnerships they’ve established with the tribal councils as well 
as on the training. Because on the health professional side, 
people want to get into that whole area of becoming nurses, 
LPNs (licensed practical nurse), as well as doctors. 
 
I know that we have a famous Janvier guy from La Loche who 
was . . . Jack Janvier, who has become a medical doctor. And it 
was a very, very tremendous sense of pride, you know, for us to 
be able to have a person, you know, from La Loche, you know, 
going through the rigorous examinations and going through the 
whole process and becoming, you know, a medical doctor. And 
so we’re very, very proud of that. 
 
And also from Ile-a-la-Crosse we have Colin McColl who was 
there, whose mother is actually from Cumberland House, from 
my hometown, and she’s an aunt of mine. And he was also one 
that grew up in Ile-a-la-Crosse and actually I think knows the 
member from Athabasca quite well and we stay in touch, you 
know, quite a bit. 
 
So we’re proud of these people. And in many cases, we’re 
moving ahead on the training plan as well. 

(14:45) 
 
We’re also helping out the staff on recruitment and retention. 
We had a special retention program for quite a few years now 
on trying to get our doctors to stay up in the North and also our 
health professionals. 
 
We build, for example, facilities. It’s hard to get rental facilities, 
in particular to the communities going up to Stony and La 
Loche, so we . . . and Ile-a-la-Crosse, so we build the centres, 
residences, you know, for our health staff as they move up 
North in what’s part of the recruitment and retention strategy. 
There’s also other aspects of the recruitment and retention 
strategy that’s there, that’s been there for a few years and that 
continues, and it’s an important component. 
 
I remember just a little while ago that the health board was 
talking about getting special workers from the Philippines and 
setting them up in La Loche so that they could open their 
facility on a more 24-hour basis. And it was a very, very 
important aspect. Therefore, not only looking at the issue in 
relation to the workforce, of the training of the workforce right 
within the North, but getting workers up, even from the 
international sense. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the aspect of housing is an important strategy, 
the facilities, the training, and it is very, very important that as 
we move forward, the support continues to be very, very strong, 
you know, in regards to the people in the North. 
 
So, again, I will move my motion and which will be seconded 
by the member from Regina Wascana Plains again: 
 

That this Assembly advance programs announced in the 
Throne Speech geared to providing training and promoting 
better health for citizens of northern Saskatchewan. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
certainly a pleasure for me to be able to rise today and support 
the motion by my colleague from Cumberland in seconding the 
motion that calls on this Assembly to advance the programs 
announced in the Throne Speech geared to providing training 
and promoting better health for citizens of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some would ask why a member that represents a constituency 
in southern Saskatchewan — and a rural/urban constituency at 
that — would be wanting to readily stand here and support the 
motion. And it’s very clear from the heritage and the history of 
this government and our party that we stand firmly behind the 
saying that says that what we wish for ourselves, we would 
desire for all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I’m proud to be able to say that, as a government member, 
we are working to clearly develop the partnership as the 
member of Cumberland has talked about in addressing the 
issues that are important to northern Saskatchewan and northern 
communities and families. And it’s very important for us to 
understand what needs to be done, in particular some of the 
areas that are mentioned in this motion. 
 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

 

But when we’re talking about the health of communities and the 
training, there is . . . there are many approaches that we are 
using to address these issues. And our member from 
Cumberland has talked about a very important one in health. 
 
Last week I did talk at some length about the building to 
independence strategy and the three-pronged approach to 
having people who are able to access training dollars to be able 
to have employment supplements and to have programs that 
support families and particularly members of northern 
communities who want to further their education or become 
active members in the economy. So there are initiatives such as 
housing as well. 
 
And certainly today we’ve talked about our plan for economic 
development and growth in this province and the Partnership 
for Prosperity outlines many, many ways the Department of 
Economic Development has rallied communities and support 
for the plans that will help this province move ahead. 
 
And for the northern communities much of that is working with 
the corporate sector on training opportunities and jobs for 
people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Throne Speech that I wanted to highlight today outlined the 
building to independence program that has reduced social 
assistance caseloads to the lowest level in 10 years by 
increasing participation in the labour force. Building 
independence will be expanded during this year to give more 
families the opportunity for greater participation in the 
economy. 
 
In the area of housing, through the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, my government provides affordable, quality 
housing to more than 67,000 low-income residents of the 
province. And with the renewed support of the Government of 
Canada, a new five-year housing initiative is underway to 
construct 1,000 additional housing units in urban and northern 
areas and that will begin this year as well. 
 
One of the government’s highest priorities of course is the 
provision of health care. A renewed, sustainable, publicly 
administered health care system that is accessible to all. And in 
the northern areas we’re looking at how that approach is 
developed. 
 
The two health districts, Keewatin Yatthé and Mamawetan 
Churchill River health districts form the one authority — the 
Athabasca Health Authority— have seen much movement in 
the last year with the La Ronge construction of the new hospital 
that’s underway and the hospital in Stony Rapids. The hospital 
for Ile-a-la-Crosse was recently announced and the northern 
health districts have received $27 million over the last three 
budget years. 
 
That’s a long . . . (inaudible) . . . the housing projects that we’ve 
talked about and on the side of infrastructure that’s so important 
to healthy communities when we talk about sewer and water 
projects as well. There’s many more dollars that have been put 
forward by this government to have more installation and 
security of water supply, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the area of health the Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health 

Care is a vehicle that this government plans to use to illustrate 
its commitment to work in partnership with northern health 
districts. 
 
In the plan the government and northern communities play 
equal roles in determining the course of action. This strategy 
continues to build on the government’s overall policy of being 
inclusive and consensus builders. Now we’ve heard that in all 
of the policy areas that we work in — partnerships, consensus 
building and, of course, overriding everything is the desire to be 
inclusive in all that we do. 
 
In the strategy the northern stakeholders will make presentation 
about northern health issues to the Commission on the Future of 
Health Care in Canada in June, 2002. 
 
So to the basics of this health plan, the individual and 
community ownership of health, is very important to us. 
Respecting the autonomy of individual health districts and the 
First Nations health authorities is primary. We’re going to build 
on the strengths and create new ones from the framework for a 
health care delivery system for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As the Minister of Justice even announced just today that there 
is the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Communities — 
the New North — who are organizing. And they’re organized 
conferences such as the Northern Justice Symposium. Again the 
partnerships that develop and the need to be inclusive in all of 
the things that we are going to do to provide quality of life for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So the northern health strategy will be no different. It will 
reflect the intent and the direction and the priorities of the 
Action Plan for Saskatchewan Health Care and it’s encouraged 
by the reporting of Fyke who said it’s very important for us to 
further the goals of the action plan by developing the northern 
health strategy. 
 
A very important part of that is to have a holistic approach that 
considers all facets of health care delivery in the North, 
including the budget to go with it, the need for partnering and 
the breaking down of jurisdictional barriers. To that end on 
February 5 of this year, northern stakeholders presented a 
proposed budget to the provincial and federal representatives. 
 
Their proposals were met by both levels of government and are 
being reviewed and discussed. And the member from 
Cumberland says that the federal government is very interested 
in furthering the primary health services initiative that will be 
serving as a framework for the northern health strategy. 
 
The North has incorporated components of the primary health 
care model in their deliberations, and that includes nurses and 
their expanding roles, and in a few minutes I’ll talk about the 
nursing initiative that we have for more spaces for nurses, and 
particularly the northern health nursing strategy. 
 
There’s isolated communities that need to be a focal point for 
health services, and how they will be delivered in areas where 
there’s a vast number of miles where there’s little inhabitant, 
but there are communities that become isolated and we need to, 
again, be very mindful of inclusiveness in developing the health 
plan for all. 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

And the information networks of health providers that are 
coming together and working together will be very important as 
they go forward. 
 
Some of the major initiatives that I’ve noted that are very 
positive developments for northern Saskatchewan . . . I’ve 
mentioned one is the La Loche Health Centre capital project. 
It’ll be completed about November. The grand opening of the 
facility was scheduled for November of last year. And also the 
provincial contribution of $10,013,000 for construction and 
project-related costs, with the local contribution of $1,221,000 
for land, landscaping, furnishing and equipment. Some major 
budget contributions to providing health facilities in the North. 
 
Another issue that has been identified, and everyone is coming 
together and working on, is the diabetes education program. 
The district has partnered with First Nations in the development 
of the northern diabetes education program. The district has 
also indicated a need for additional funding in this area, given 
the increasing the incidences of diabetes in the North, and also 
wanting to take a pro-active approach to the issue of diabetes, 
and the causes. And also the prevention and protection of 
people. 
 
The two health districts through the co-management process 
submitted a joint proposal for the prevention of diabetes and 
received $166,000 over the last three years. And there are 
many, many more health initiatives. 
 
I just want to close in highlighting in education the area in our 
Throne Speech that says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s commitment to post-secondary education 
will also be maintained. Well over 50,000 Saskatchewan 
students will participate in classes and training programs 
this year 

 
including: 
 

on . . . job training programs, and . . . Saskatchewan 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission 
programs will continue to be key. 

 
Of particular significance is the growing number of First 
Nations and Métis students who participate in provincial 
education and training opportunities. The northern health 
sciences access program and the northern nursing education 
program are initiatives that are valuable to increase the number 
of northerners trained as health professionals in our province. 
And there’s a very impressive list of the capital approvals in the 
North, not to mention the $280,000 in provincial funding for 
training programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s also the new 
training program to create firefighters and so on. This goes on 
and on. 
 
And so it’s very important for me to let everyone understand 
that I support the initiative and the motion that was presented by 
our member from Cumberland. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure this afternoon to get up and say a few words on 
the motion brought forward by the member from Cumberland in 
regards to the lack of initiatives that the provincial government 
has towards northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Certainly we’ve heard . . . and this would be, I believe, the 11th 
Throne Speech of this government or maybe the 12th Throne 
Speech this government has brought forward. And certainly, 
every year there’s been rhetoric after rhetoric after rhetoric. And 
today then now, the member from Cumberland has gotten up 
and says that this Assembly should advance — advance, Mr. 
Speaker — the programs announced in the Throne Speech. 
 
Well first off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was no new programs 
announced in the Throne Speech. There was nothing in the 
Throne Speech whether you were from western Saskatchewan 
or you were from eastern Saskatchewan or whether from 
southern Saskatchewan. And most specifically, there was 
nothing in the Throne Speech for residents of northern 
Saskatchewan. In fact, all we had in this speech was more 
political rhetoric — more political rhetoric. 
 
And what happened is that now this member from Cumberland 
is getting up and saying that we should congratulate and 
advance the policies of rhetoric. Well what good is the rhetoric 
going to do to the people of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
What the people of northern Saskatchewan are demanding, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are jobs. Was there anything in the budget 
speech or the Throne Speech to indicate jobs for northern 
Saskatchewan? There was nothing — there was nothing again, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
All we saw in this Throne Speech was a repeat, repeat, repeat 
for the last 12 throne speeches from this government. When is 
this government going to get it right and realize that the people 
of northern Saskatchewan actually do have the initiative to 
create the opportunities that are necessary for job creation in 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — The Throne Speech was also very clear, very 
clear that it was visionless. We could understand that. The 
members opposite don’t seem to be able to understand that and 
that this tired and out-of-touch government has absolutely no 
idea where they’re going with . . . to help the people of northern 
Saskatchewan to be able to create the prosperity that is 
necessary in order for the people of northern Saskatchewan to 
become full participants in the 21st century. 
 
Now one of the promises, rhetorical promises that we’ve heard 
about, is certainly and was first mentioned by the previous 
premier, Roy Romanow, at . . . In the 1999 election, that 
premier at that time promised 10,000 new jobs in northern 
Saskatchewan — 10,000 new jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
did their record indicate has happened since that point in time? 
 
Well from this side of the House, of course, we stepped back, 
did the research. What happened in that period of time? Did 10 
. . . were 10,000 jobs created? Well actually what we found out 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

 

is that there was not 10,000 created . . . there wasn’t even 
10,000 jobs created in all of Saskatchewan. There wasn’t even 
10,000 jobs created in all of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, since this government came into power, they’ve lost 
12,000 jobs, lost 10,000 people. So how are they supposed to be 
able to create 10,000 new jobs in northern Saskatchewan when 
they couldn’t even create 10,000 jobs in all of Saskatchewan, in 
fact, lost 12,000 jobs? Of those 12,000 jobs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, how many of those jobs were lost in northern 
Saskatchewan? I think that’s the point the needs to be discussed 
at this point. 
 
The member from Cumberland got up and said we need to 
advance the Throne Speech and encourage the government to 
advance its policies in the Throne Speech to help northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But we don’t want this government helping northern 
Saskatchewan any more than they already have. Because what 
they’ve done for northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is lost 5,000 jobs. Five thousand jobs were lost in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. How is this supposed to be 
a help to northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Well on this side of the House we get it. They did not help 
northern Saskatchewan. In fact the people of northern 
Saskatchewan have actually come up with a term, they’ve come 
up with a term, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that clearly outlines how 
little help that they’ve gotten from this NDP government. That 
term, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is legislated poverty. 
 
They believe very clearly in their minds in northern 
Saskatchewan that this government has a clear program of 
legislative poverty so that the people of northern Saskatchewan 
cannot enjoy the economic benefits that should be attainable in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Cumberland, the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains, has talked about health 
initiatives in northern Saskatchewan. Well maybe what they 
should have done is take a trip into northern Saskatchewan — 
that’s what they should have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and 
they would have been able to have a clear understanding of the 
health issues of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the members on this side of the House have done that. We 
have gone to northern Saskatchewan en masse — en masse, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — to help us understand the issues that are 
facing the people of northern Saskatchewan. And one of those 
issues is health care, is health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Members on this side of the House have toured the health 
facilities. We’ve toured the hospitals in northern Saskatchewan, 
and we were appalled — appalled, Mr. Deputy Speaker — at 
what we found when it comes to health initiatives in northern 
Saskatchewan by this NDP government. 
 
We have gone into health facilities. We have gone into 
hospitals. And we have observed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
first-hand, the lack of response by this NDP government to the 
health care issues of northern Saskatchewan. 
 

We have been in health care facilities where they have actually 
had equipment brought in for them from southern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that required repairs — 
used equipment that actually required repairs — so that when 
the equipment showed up, medical equipment showed up in 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what was 
required was the first thing is that they had to send it away to be 
fixed so that they could even use it. 
 
So what kind of an initiative is that where money is being 
expensed by this NDP government on health care in this 
province and what is required is they can’t even use the 
equipment in northern Saskatchewan because it’s not even 
usable? 
 
So the residents of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are running out of enthusiasm for supporting this 
government in any future endeavours. In fact what we know is 
that this government, through one of their so-called, so-called 
initiatives, is they’ve created a committee in the North called 
new north development corporation. 
 
This new north development corporation is made up of the 35 
northern communities, leaders from those northern 
communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And these leaders from 
northern Saskatchewan took their responsibility seriously. They 
took this responsibility very seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They thought that the government was actually very concerned 
about the lack of initiatives that were going on in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so then what they decided to do is that, if these northern 
leaders were going to be involved in a committee, let’s actually 
do something that will help promote, help promote, help 
promote the initiatives and the opportunities that could be 
taking place in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And so they’ve done that. They’ve formed subcommittees and 
what these subcommittees did was examine the opportunities 
that could take place in northern Saskatchewan. The 
subcommittees reported to the larger committee what could take 
place in northern Saskatchewan. The larger committee sent a 
delegation down to Regina. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again, again the people of northern 
Saskatchewan have come across what they have traditionally 
come across in . . . when they meet with the officials and the 
government ministers from this NDP government, is a stone 
wall. 
 
Here was a group of individuals, a group of individuals 
concerned about their communities in northern Saskatchewan, 
concerned about the people of northern Saskatchewan and the 
lack of opportunities that has made . . . that has been made 
available to them. 
 
So when they took on this initiative with all the care and 
concern that northern residents have for themselves and each 
other and brought those concerns to Regina, they brought them 
to Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker, met this government at a round 
table — they called it a round table, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
where they could sit down and clearly, clearly enunciate the 
problems in northern Saskatchewan and the initiatives, the 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

initiatives that they would like to see take place that would 
benefit the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But again it was a no go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government 
was only talking about rhetoric. They did not mean that they 
wanted to help the people of Saskatchewan. They just wanted 
the people of Saskatchewan to actually think maybe they might 
be doing something. 
 
And so when we looked at the, at the motion by the member 
from Cumberland, we thought it was a little short-sighted. So 
what we decided to do is we have a motion here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the following be added after northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This would be moved by myself and the . . . seconded by the 
member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood: 
 

That the following be added after “Northern 
Saskatchewan”: 

 
and urges the provincial government to adopt a concrete 
strategy to improve the economy of northern communities 
and to improve the lives of northern residents instead of 
repeating the empty rhetoric we have heard from this 
government for over a decade when it comes to northern 
issues. 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand before this House today to speak about 
northern issues. 
 
And as my colleague mentioned before, about knowing the 
issues of northern Saskatchewan, you have to go up there and 
talk to the people up there to realize exactly . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the member. Order. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Once again, it’s a pleasure to second the motion put forth by the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers in regarding northern 
affairs and the health of northern people up in the North. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers attended meetings up in northern 
Saskatchewan and I also attended them. And living up there and 
having the problems that northern Saskatchewan people have, 
only people up in the North realize that the people in the South 
don’t understand the problems that we have in the North. 
 
In fact even the government opposite, the NDP government, 
doesn’t understand the problems of the North especially when it 
comes to health care. 
 
I was amused, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the comments from the 
member from Cumberland. And the member from Cumberland 
stood up in his place and talked about the old PC government 
and he referred to us on this side as Conservatives. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know and everybody knows, we 
are not the old PC government. We have members in our House 
that are Liberals. But every time the member from Cumberland 

stands in the House, he always reverts back to the PC members. 
He spends more time talking about the government of the ’80s 
than he does about the year 2000. He should be talking about 
what’s in the year 2000 and what his people need in this 
province to go forward, especially in health care. But he 
continues to revert back to the past. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the waters under the bridge have 
flown down the river a long way, and it’s time that member 
stopped thinking about the past and get on with the future. 
Because the people of the province of Saskatchewan and in the 
North need his voice to address the problems of the North, and 
he’s not doing it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when he refers to the PC government of 
the ’80s and he talks about all the good things that the ’90s did 
under the NDP rule, well let me refer back to a thing that was in 
the paper, the Regina Leader-Post, and it’s the Kitsaki 
Management Corporation, and it’s under the leadership of Chief 
Harry Cook and Ray McKay. And I would just to make a 
comment out of it. And it says: 
 

Within the past 20 years . . . 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going back 20 years. Now that’s the 
same time as the member from Cumberland is talking about the 
PC government. 
 

(And) Within the past 20 years, the Lac La Ronge First 
Nation has built an impressive corporation with 
multi-million dollar operations that employs hundreds of 
people in the community. 

 
It also goes on to say: 
 

The (member) . . . accomplished this feat by creating 
Kitsaki Management Corporation. The corporation’s 
philosophy is simple: partner with successful businesses, 
and have interests in (various) . . . of businesses. That way 
. . . one sector’s profits are down, (the) other sectors . . . 
make up the difference. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what I wanted to say was, it started 20 years 
ago. That’s what got the Lac La Ronge area going in a positive 
direction. It had nothing to do with the NDP under thumb rule 
that they’ve been putting forth in the North for many, many 
years. 
 
I would like to talk about the health districts now. And in the 
ventures that myself, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 
and other members, including our leader, the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, we ventured up north. We went into the 
Athabasca area; we also went into the Cumberland area. And 
when we were in the Athabasca area and talking to people up 
there, we had a brief meeting with the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of the health district. 
 
And you know what’s frustrating with the members up there, 
especially the CEO at that time? Was the fact that two years ago 
all districts had a deficit budget, every health district had a 
deficit budget. But you know something? In Athabasca region 
under this CEO, they did not have a deficit budget. They had 
. . . they had a balanced budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

 

And you know something, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They are 
frustrated because you know something, at the end of the year 
when all these deficit budgets in the health region were let 
known, the people from the North in the Athabasca region 
suffered. Do you know why? Because our NDP government 
balanced off all the deficits in the health budget. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Well what about the poor people from Athabasca? They cut and 
they cut and they cut services to make sure they run a balanced 
budget. And yet the NDP government stood here and paid off 
all the other deficits in that budget. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that CEO of that health district was just fuming. 
 
It’s no wonder when you go to the North and you talk to the 
people of the North, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and we’ve been 
there, as the member from Saskatchewan Rivers said we have, 
and talked to them — when they start talking about regions in 
Saskatchewan, there are three: there’s urban, there’s rural, and 
there’s northern. And the people from the South don’t 
understand what’s happening in the North. 
 
And yet the members from Cumberland and Athabasca very 
seldom get up in this House and say what they need as far as 
getting the province of Saskatchewan growing and 
incorporating the people of the North. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the health regions that’s up there, as the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers said, you wouldn’t believe 
what the people up there live with. It’s incredible. And these 
members opposite do not understand what’s going on up there. 
They haven’t got a clue. 
 
I would also like to refer back to the documentation that was 
put forth by the Kitsaki Management Corporation under the 
leadership of Chief Harry Cook. And I would wish that the 
members opposite would understand where Chief Harry Cook 
is coming from. He’s a remarkable man, he’s an excellent 
leader, and he would do wonders to help promote the North, but 
the people on that side under the NDP rule seem to think that 
they have to have the control of the North. 
 
Well the reason that the La Ronge area is going positively 
forward, Mr. Speaker, is due to these two people: Chief Harry 
Cook and Ray McKay. They have abandoned the NDP rule 
about ownership and said the heck with it, we don’t need them, 
we want the government to stay out of our face. Let us go 
forward. And that is what they’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I looked 
through the Throne Speech to see where the member from 
Cumberland was coming up with his idea about promoting 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan. And I looked 
through the Throne Speech and I found where it said 
Saskatchewan is a leader, a national leader, in providing 
training geared to Aboriginal students — often delivered 
through Aboriginal and northern training institutions. 
 
The northern health science access program and the northern 
nursing education program are incentives that will be valuable 

to increase the number of northerners training as health 
professionals in this province. 
 
Well you know something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a 
positive. But that’s the same thing that was in last year’s budget 
and the year before budget. It’s the same rehash over and over 
and over. When is the NDP government, instead of promising 
things, going to start doing things, Mr. Speaker? 
 
That’s what the northern people of Saskatchewan want. They 
want the NDP government to start doing in the North what 
they’re asking them. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to say that 
I’ve been to the North. I understand some of the problems; I 
don’t understand all of them. But I know that the people up in 
northern Saskatchewan need this government to start going 
forward with the proposals that’s going to help the northern 
people, not only in health care but all other care situations in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am pleased to second the motion put forth by the member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
would like to take great pleasure today, stand up today to say 
one thing to the opposition critics: you’re fired. 
 
The bottom line here, Mr. Speaker, is every time . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. As the member knows, 
all comments are to the . . . Order. Order. All members, all 
members know that comments are to the Chair and through the 
Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would point 
out, Mr. Chair, that they’re fired, Mr. Speaker, as northern 
affairs critic. 
 
Because every time they stand up here and pretend to care for 
the North and cry these crocodile tears, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
point out what their leader said about northern Saskatchewan, 
about Northern Affairs, and the role that the northern 
governments play when it comes to the design of health and of 
training for this great province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What does he say? And I quote, Mr. Speaker, from an article 
that the La Ronge Northerner . . . And the quote is: 
 

The Sask Party reps were also questioned about whether 
the Department of Northern Affairs would still exist if they 
formed government and about how their views on trimming 
the civil service are going to go over with government 
employees. The answer? Likely not. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I say again that they’re fired. And every time they 
get up, once every 1,000 days and pretend to cry these crocodile 
tears for northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, I would say to them 
that you’re not fooling northern Saskatchewan people. You 
insult their intelligence when you get up and you talk about 
what role that they play and how you care so much about 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They have never cared, 
and they will never care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they make reference to one of the most exciting 
employment and training institutions in northern Saskatchewan 
and that is the Kitsaki Development Corporation. 
 
And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? When they’re in power, 
their provincial cousins the Tories, Mr. Speaker, their rate of 
making sure Northerners were trained and Northerners were 
working at the mining sites, 50 per cent of Northerners, when 
they’re in power, were working at some of these northern mines 
then, Mr. Speaker. And plus, Mr. Speaker, $20 million in 
contracts for northern Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now what happened, Mr. Speaker, what happened was when 
the Northern Affairs portfolio was designed and the member 
from Cumberland House came along and we said it is time for 
economic and social justice for the people of the North, we will 
train northern Saskatchewan people. What happened, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Chair? It went from $20 million in contracts for 
northern Saskatchewan people to 200 million, Mr. Speaker. 
And we went from 500 employees in northern Saskatchewan to 
1,000 employees, Mr. Speaker. Now that is economic and social 
justice. 
 
And what do they say? Northern Affairs likely will be cut. So 
now they stand up here and they criticize what economic and 
what employment opportunities and training opportunities exist 
for the North, much less health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, $30 million in three years 
and that’s a lot of commitment in northern Saskatchewan. And 
what did they put in, Mr. Speaker? A big fat zero, Mr. Speaker. 
The PC government of the ’80s, the twin cousins to the Sask 
Party, have not and will never commit to northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We stood here and we opened La Loche’s. hospital, Mr. 
Speaker. We are going to open Stony Rapids’ hospital. La 
Ronge has their hospital. Ile-a-la-Crosse is slated next. Other 
communities — Beauval, Buffalo Narrows — they’re all slated 
to be served, finally, when it comes to health services and 
health facilities, Mr. Speaker. And it’s on this side of the House 
that we’re putting our money where our mouth is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that it took a great amount 
of effort, it took a great amount of effort. And unfortunately, the 
Minister of Health and I could not attend La Loche’s grand 
opening. We were here in the Assembly listening to some of the 
reports about Fyke, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Fyke report, we were both members of that committee and 
we’re sitting here, fighting for more health services for northern 
Saskatchewan so we couldn’t even go attend La Loche’s grand 
opening because we were here fighting for more services for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to publicly thank, Mr. Speaker, the member who 
was once the minister of Health, the member from Saskatoon 
Mount Royal, the member from Yorkton and, most important, 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Eastview. And these 
three ministers served as the Minister of Health and they 

forwarded many northern health issues. And they’re the ones, 
Mr. Speaker — not those members opposite — they’re the ones 
that made a difference in making sure that the North got their 
fair share of some of the hospital construction that is necessary 
to make sure health care was on top of the list. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, we have the current member, the 
current Minister of Health, he’s doing a tremendous amount of 
work to champion northern causes, Mr. Speaker. And those 
guys want to shut down Northern Affairs; they’re crying 
crocodile tears. I’ll tell you the Nile is not just a river in Egypt, 
it is actually a state of mind. 
 
And that member gets up from Saskatchewan Rivers . . . I say 
to him, you’re fired. And the member gets up from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, you’re fired too because your leader 
said there’s no more . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, Order. All members direct 
comments to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, they’re fired because their 
leader said no more Northern Affairs. The North has not and 
will never register on the Saskatchewan Party, the former Tory 
Party — they are cousins, they are bonded by blood and that’s 
who they support, Mr. Speaker, and that’s who they are. 
 
There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, the North has specific 
challenges. There’s diabetes, there’s much injury, there’s many 
preventative measures that are necessary in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the North needs to be 
served. It needs to be served. And what we don’t need is silly, 
petty politics being played by the members opposite, crying 
crocodile tears when they never have and they never will care 
about the North. And the people will not be fooled, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fyke Commission got up and very clearly . . . 
the Fyke commissioner got up and said, we support, we support 
the three-board system in northern Saskatchewan. And we 
support a four-hospital system in northern Saskatchewan. And 
we support greater service and better access to northern people. 
 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, got up and they said yes, we 
will follow through with those commitments. And yes, we will 
make sure the North is being represented and treated fairly. And 
yes, we will see construction happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what’s really amazing to me, Mr. Speaker, is those 
members get up and they say, oh, the North’s not being served. 
Well I would say to you, every time that you stand up and you 
say the North’s not being served or you criticize the North, 
maybe you talk to your leader, and tell their leader to decide 
whether Northern Affairs is an important aspect of government 
or it is not. And whether northern Saskatchewan counts, or it 
doesn’t, Mr. Chair. Very important. 
 
They should put their money where their mouth is. There’s 
great profits being made — greater profits will be made, Mr. 
Speaker. And I will say to the Popsicle party across the way, 
last election they said oh, we’re going to freeze health care; 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

 

we’re going to freeze education; no more training; no more 
spending on health care. And as our former premier said, zap, 
you’re frozen. 
 
Our Premier today stands up and says the North will be served. 
The North will be served, and the North shall receive benefits. 
Mr. Speaker, that party across the way . . . every time they stand 
up crying crocodile tears, the North has one thing to say to you: 
is you’re not fooling us; you will never fool us . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. All comments to the 
Chair and through the Chair. No referring directly to members 
in the opposition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s very 
important to point out that on this side of the House we have a 
consistent message. 
 
In the last 10 years we have made great progress. We are 
standing side by side with our First Nations supporters, we are 
standing side by side with many Métis community leaders, 
we’re standing side by side by many of the professionals. And 
we’re going to work together to make sure that there’s health 
delivery, Mr. Speaker, to every corner of this province. And on 
this side of the Assembly, our Saskatchewan includes northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out absolutely everybody — from the air 
ambulance services to the nurses to the doctors that serve 
northern Saskatchewan people — I commend them because 
they had the vision and they had the care for their fellow man to 
travel to the North to provide that much-needed service. There’s 
great training going on, Mr. Speaker, to get more of the 
Aboriginal people in the North involved with the health care 
field, and that work will be ongoing. 
 
And what do we hear from those guys, Mr. Speaker? Crocodile 
tears and zap, you’re frozen. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
the North don’t buy Saskatchewan Rivers member’s argument; 
nor do they buy Shellbrook and Spiritwood. Because they’re all 
taken care of — they come from one of the richest areas in the 
province — yet they stand up, they pretend to care, and the 
North will not have anything to do about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, furthermore we look at some of the arguments that 
they bring forward. We have 25-year leases with the 
Weyerhaeuser company; we have multi-year leases with a 
number of other companies in this province. We got agreements 
with casinos, exhibition associations. 
 
And what does that party do, Mr. Speaker? They get up and 
they criticize the First Nations agreement. Now we are going to 
ask the Saskatchewan Party, make up your mind; stop riding the 
fence; show some leadership. Get your act together with your 
leader to get a clear, consistent message to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I will say to you is, don’t go north; you’re wasting 
your time. They know there’s only one party that cares and only 
one party that’s going to build, and that’s this NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I stand today in proud support of the motion from the 

member from Cumberland House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with a great deal of 
amusement that I stand here and have just finished listening to 
the rant from the member from Athabasca. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recall just a couple of years 
back when that member stood with the Liberals on this side of 
the House and absolutely, absolutely condemned the NDP 
government for their shabby treatment of the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that member from Athabasca 
put forward his absolute disdain for this NDP government on 
their negligence in dealing with issues in the North such as poor 
roads, child poverty, social housing, poor hospitals, and also 
condemned this government — his own NDP government — 
for perpetuating the welfare system in the North that kept 
people in dependency, kept them down there in poverty row, 
and did not give them an opportunity to enhance themselves or 
their lives. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the same holds true for today. There is a 
hospital being remodelled, built at La Loche. There are a couple 
of initiatives — no doubt about it — and we applaud that. But 
let’s face it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by and large the North is still 
in terrible, terrible condition, and this government of this day, 
this NDP government, has a long, long way to go in order to 
honour and respect the people of the North. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to bring forward just another 
time, one of the things that’s happening right now today. If we 
want to look at what the NDP government is doing to enhance 
training in the North or to pay no attention to training in the 
North, I think they have to look at one more time, at the 
Minister of Agriculture. And I think that the members opposite 
should be talking to the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
I think they should be asking him about what training 
opportunities there are for First Nations people in this province 
under the commonwealth migrant workers program. Because 
that Minister of Agriculture today has an opportunity to be 
bringing the FSIN people to the table to talk about including 
them in training opportunities for the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is known that the federal 
government, the provincial government, and the FSIN were 
supposed to be at the table to negotiate training opportunities 
for all people in this province, including First Nations people. It 
is also well known that the first meeting went by and the 
Minister of Agriculture did not call First Nations people to the 
table to discuss their opportunities here for training. 
 
It is also known by myself and a couple of other people in the 
First Nations community that they tried to arrange a meeting 
with that minister on April 6 and that minister cancelled the 
meeting. And that is what has happened. And he said that he 
was going to have the meeting further on. Well we’re at the end 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

of April — it’s April 30 today — and to my knowledge and 
from the information I’ve been getting that meeting has not 
been yet set up. 
 
So, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, I challenge you to go ahead 
with that and to show your dedication and your sincere respect 
for First Nations people who are desperately in need of training. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to 
mention this article from the April 5 edition of The Star 
Phoenix in Saskatoon. It was written by Mr. Doug Cuthand. 
And the headline associated with this article, “Budget ignores 
special needs of Sask. Natives.” And here’s some of the 
excerpts from this article, Mr. Speaker, Aboriginal communities 
in Saskatchewan currently have “the highest rate of tuberculosis 
in the country.” 
 

In Saskatchewan, 87 per cent of all TB cases are aboriginal, 
compared to 60 per cent of those in Manitoba and 28 per 
cent of the cases in Alberta. 

 
And he goes on to talk about his concern for the high infection 
rate. But he says: 
 

But . . . (Saskatchewan’s) statistics . . . reflect . . . (that) 
poverty, unemployment and poor housing which afflict 
many First Nations and Métis communities (is a major 
problem). 

 
He also says that he’s very disappointed in the provincial 
government. He says, “we need some special programming if 
we are to attack” that issue that is very “unique” to our 
province. 
 
But what did we get in this budget from the provincial NDP 
government? The government response was, no help for that; 
there is no special government programming. 
 
Mr. Cuthand says: 
 

And we have institutions such the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College, the Gabriel Dumont Institute and the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies which are 
looking for partnerships with government. But the 
government response was zero. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are some actual facts that have 
taken place just recently. I don’t think we need to look back into 
the ’80s and I don’t think we need to take a bunch of rhetoric 
about promises that never come true. We need to look at what is 
happening today and the government . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Sorry, the member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There’s now a 10-minute period for 
questions and comments. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
question for the member from Cumberland, that it was 
mentioned on more than one occasion on the other side of the 

House that employment in northern Saskatchewan has increased 
under the Department of Northern Affairs. And I’d like the 
member from Cumberland to help understand how employment 
has risen by explaining to us the unemployment rate in the 
northern village of La Loche. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, the member over there talks about 
unemployment rates. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was devastating 
under the right-wing Grant Devine government. 
 
When we went in, Mr. Speaker, in answer to that question, we 
moved the mining employment rate from approximately 20 per 
cent, approximately rising about 500 workers to approximately 
1,000 workers, Mr. Speaker — 1,000 workers — 85 per cent of 
which were Aboriginal people. 
 
Now when there were Tories, they did not like the program on 
affirmative action lease agreements. They were against it. This 
side of the government supports that lease agreement. On 
forestry, for the first time in history, we have lease agreements 
with First Nations people — with the five Métis communities 
up on the west side, with the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, with 
also Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation. You would never, ever, ever 
see that with the Tories. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the answer that I give to that 
member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. My question is to the member for Humboldt. She 
spoke today about partnerships with Aboriginal groups. I’m still 
not completely sure that I understand their party’s position or 
her caucus’s position in terms of the partnership in Indian 
gaming and I would appreciate it if she could highlight whether 
or not she supports such. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to that member, I have mentioned before in this House 
that the members opposite are absolute masters at diverting 
from the issue at hand. And this day it is not going to work. 
 
We are not talking about gaming today. We were talking about 
training and we were talking about health issues — training and 
health issues. 
 
This side of the House has put forward clearly what our views 
are on training. What we have put forward today is our views 
on whether the NDP has been responsibly addressing health 
issues pertaining to First Nations people and particularly in the 
North. 
 
So the member is just itching to get up there again. I believe in 
partnership. We have made that statement very clearly. But we 
believe in responsible partnerships and we believe that before 
that happens there should be a great deal of in-depth research 
and knowledge before those things happen. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
the three so-called rants that were brought forth by the members 
from the NDP party — and certainly there was just a lot of 
rhetoric — they talked a lot about the . . . what has happened in 
northern Saskatchewan since the NDP has taken power in this 
province. They have talked about what the Department of 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

 

Northern Affairs has accomplished in northern Saskatchewan 
since its inception in 1997. And certainly what we heard also 
was the health initiatives, the health initiatives, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that have taken place in this province in northern 
Saskatchewan since this NDP government has come to power. 
 
And certainly the member from Regina Wascana Plains talked 
about the diabetes in northern Saskatchewan. So I would like to 
hear from the member from Regina Wascana Plains of some 
further elucidation on the diabetes initiatives in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — All right. Well thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and I thank the members opposite for the question. But 
when we’re talking about what we’re saying in this House, they 
don’t want to be reminded of the past that so many of their 
members represent in the areas of what was done in the ’80s. 
And they want to talk about the programs and services that were 
going to be handled to date. 
 
And so for northern Saskatchewan it’s very important that we 
decide to put forward in our Throne Speech, in our budget, 
many, many good initiatives. They don’t want to discuss those 
initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’ve talked about building 
independence, I’ve talked about employment strategies for the 
North and health care for the North. And I’m very proud that all 
our members sit down and discuss those strategies and have 
been able to put them forward today. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to ask a 
supplemental question to the member from Humboldt. 
 
I think she’s trying to duck the question. She’s trying to duck 
the question. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question on 
gaming is part of the economic development strategy. 
 
I mentioned a couple of weeks ago, we built the community hall 
from SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) dollars in 
my constituency. So therefore it’s part of northern development. 
 
Why is it that that member ducks this question? Why is it that 
she talks about trying to get away from dependency? SIGA 
itself provides 1,200 jobs, 70 per cent Aboriginal people. It is 
part of pride in this province; it’s part of moving against 
dependency. 
 
Now that member says she’s against dependency, but all of 
their members were against SIGA. Why are they still against 
SIGA? What is their real position? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’d just remind 
the House that this is a 10-minute question and comment 
period, so it is fair to make comments relating to the motion but 
it is not fair to ask questions directly to members unless that 
member has raised it in the speech. Now the member can reply 
if he or she wishes, but they’re not compelled to. So that’s my 
ruling to the member for Cumberland. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I didn’t have the opportunity to become involved in the 
debate but I was listening with interest to the member from 
Regina Wascana and her concerns about diabetes. And yet, 

when the question was asked, it seemed that the member didn’t 
have any real thoughts on this issue. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think that when we’re looking at health care in 
northern Saskatchewan, it’s a huge issue. It’s something that 
everyone should care about deeply. 
 
And when we have a member that wasn’t . . . couldn’t answer 
the question on diabetes when the . . . when the next thought 
was . . . continuing on her thought process on diabetes. I really 
would like the member now to stand and tell us what she thinks 
her government is doing and will do for the many people in 
northern Saskatchewan who are suffering from the . . . from a 
condition, from diabetes, that is just something that is wrecking 
lives all over this province. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As in all of 
the programs I talked about, we’re developing the northern 
health strategy in partnership with the districts. And in 
partnership with them, there’s a co-management process in 
place that I talked about earlier. And they submitted a joint 
proposal for the prevention of diabetes and they received 
$166,000 over the next three years for demonstration sites to 
develop their proposal called, working toward a brighter 
tomorrow. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was saying that when we’re 
talking about all of the things we’ve done — this was 
mentioned earlier in my speech — the member opposite 
obviously didn’t really tune in when we were saying that, in 
partnership with others, when a proposal comes forward, we’d 
be glad to address it. 
 
It’s very, very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well through 
the education processes, to talk with children and to put forward 
prevention and promotion strategies on healthy diets, healthy 
initiatives towards the prevention of diabetes. And we’re also 
going there. So there are many . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member from Regina South. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood who spoke at 
some length about the role that his party had in terms of 
developing the North, the vision that they had. I find it 
interesting that, you know, this approach that he has and yet . . . 
when I hear nothing from their party and there’s nothing in their 
platform that they talk about. 
 
I would appreciate it very much if he could stand up today and 
tell us what his leader will do for northern Saskatchewan. What 
will his leader do in terms of protecting Aboriginal people? 
What will they do exactly in terms of the Indian gaming 
agreement? What are they going to do for northern health care? 
What are they going to do that is in their platform for 
Aboriginal people and people in northern Saskatchewan today? 
That’s what I ask the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood, an 
hon. member, to stand and tell us today. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’ll tell you exactly what our platform’s going to be . . . 
 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The 75-minute debate 
and 10-minute question/comment period has expired. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Sunnyside Nursing Home 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move Bill 
302, The Sunnyside Nursing Home Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And before 
I move the motion, I would like to make a few remarks about 
the Bill before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, SARM, is an organization known for its 
leadership in providing services to its 297 member 
municipalities and its dedication to preserving rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARM has a long history of successfully 
providing a number of services to its member municipalities, 
including a trading department for the provision of office and 
other supplies to municipalities; a petroleum product buyers 
group that allows municipalities to bulk purchase fuel at 
reduced prices; legal services and insurance services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SARM has recently requested authority to expand 
the services it provides to its member municipalities by offering 
a self-insured property insurance program. This program will 
provide property insurance coverage for property owned by 
SARM and by its member municipalities. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
service that will be offered only to SARM members. 
 
A self-insured property insurance program will complement the 
present insurance programs now offered by SARM. The 
property insurance program will operate in the same manner as 
SARM’s present liability insurance program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the proposed amendments to SARM’s Act, 
member municipalities will be able to voluntarily purchase 
property insurance through SARM, and these municipalities 
will be able to take advantage of the risk experience of rural 
municipalities rather than paying premiums based on national 
or international risk experiences. 
 
Rural municipalities want a property insurance program that is 
specifically designed for the needs of rural municipalities. With 
open market products, Mr. Speaker, RMs (rural municipality) 
are unable to do this and they feel the premiums they’re paying 
far exceed the costs for their claims. For example, Mr. Speaker, 
for the years 1997 to 2000 there were approximately 40 

property insurance claims annually, with a loss-to-premium 
ratio of approximately 33 per cent. 
 
Since SARM’s property insurance program will be designed 
especially for municipal needs and the risk of large claims will 
be relatively low, RMs feel the potential premium savings will 
be significant. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as with liability insurance program, 
SARM will create a reserve fund for the property insurance 
program that would be used to pay claims against the program. 
This fund, Mr. Speaker, will be backed by the financial 
resources of each and every municipality enrolled in the 
program. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that SARM has been able 
to successfully self-insure for liability purposes and we feel the 
association will be able to successfully run a property insurance 
program for its members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year this legislature made changes to The 
Rural Municipality Act, 1989 to provide municipalities with the 
authority to create municipal districts if they so desired. 
Municipal districts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can be made up of 
rural or urban municipalities but the character of the district will 
remain rural. 
 
This Bill proposes further amendments to SARM’s Act that will 
permit municipal districts to become a member of SARM and 
participate in its programs and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the amendments proposed by this Bill 
are in the best interests of all rural municipalities and should be 
supported by all members of the Assembly. 
 
Therefore with that in mind, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move 
Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002, be now read a second 
time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 7 — Fees For Long-Term Care 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker . . . or, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in this Assembly and 
move a motion to speak to . . . a motion regarding long-term 
care fees in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’m sure that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as you read the 
motion, many members — especially government members — 
might suggest that really it is a motion that is maybe 
inappropriate after yesterday’s comments. But I think, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you will find that there are still a number of 
concerns that are being raised in regards to long-term care fees 
and the fee structure, and especially the way the government 
has come forward and how open and accountable that they have 
been with the public of Saskatchewan. 
 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the government brought forward its 
budget a number of weeks ago and they talked about increasing 
the fees for long-term care patients in the province of 
Saskatchewan, at the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they led the 
people of Saskatchewan to believe that it was just a very few 
individuals — very few, if you will, what you would term 
wealthy individuals in the province of Saskatchewan — who 
would actually face the brunt of this fee increase, and that the 
majority of people would basically see no increases whatsoever. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we’ve seen over the past 
number of weeks, that simply wasn’t true. It simply wasn’t 
forthright with the public of Saskatchewan. And as we dug . . . 
dug deeper into the whole concept of the fee increases — and in 
fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even spoke to the Department of 
Health and had a breakdown of what these fee increases would, 
would mean to the public of Saskatchewan — it wasn’t 122 
seniors that the government was talking about that would be 
directly or mainly affected by these increases. But indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, some two-thirds of long-term care patients in the 
province of Saskatchewan were going to be affected by the 
increases. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government over the past few 
weeks has talked about caring for the poor, about the poverty 
level and the poverty lines in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And one has to ask themselves, well what . . . who does the 
government consider as being poor or falling within the realm 
of the poverty levels and are barely scraping by? Is it someone 
making $10,000 a year? Are they poor? I would suggest, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, based on the costs most people face, we would 
all consider that that person or individual or family is facing 
having a very low income and struggling to survive. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you looked at the criteria of this 
rate increase, even . . . you would have to say that actually we 
bumped up the level of what we could . . . would consider the 
poverty line to somewhere in the $20,000 range. And even then 
anyone just slightly above that would still fall into a bracket of 
being considered poor because based on the rate increases, the 
structured rate increases would take effect as soon as your 
monthly income went over $1,000 a month. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my colleagues and I have, over the 
past number of years, have had family members call our offices 
— even at the old fee structure — and ask, what are we going to 
do, there’s nothing left in my parents’ or my mother’s account? 
By the time you take out the old age security and the 
supplements, there’s nothing left there. In fact, we as family 
members have to pick up some of the costs. 
 
Because when we talk about costs of taking care of residents in 
seniors centres, Mr. Deputy . . . or Mr. Speaker, we’re not just 
talking about the costs that are incurred by the . . . that 
individual taking up that bed and the care that’s given to them, 
providing for them, looking after their daily needs, providing 
the food, the shelter. We’re talking, Mr. Speaker, as well, of just 
ongoing personal needs that come out of the pockets of these 
individuals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, through the years, time and time and time 
again, family members have found that their parents have had 
. . . not had any resources — especially some of the more senior 

residents of our province. Many, many of these individuals who 
in some cases actually moved to Canada, came as immigrants to 
this country, worked diligently and worked hard to raise a 
family, and didn’t have the second source of income that we 
have . . . we see most families, most couples today finding 
themselves, where both individuals are working and so there’s 
two sources of income. 
 
They were . . . they had that single source of income. Some of 
them were small-business people; others were raised on farms 
and really didn’t have the opportunity to build up any kind of a 
savings account, and worked very hard because they believed in 
this province, to build this province, and to build for their future 
with the idea that if push come to shove and they actually 
needed this care and the services that they worked hard for, that 
they would be there for them and that they wouldn’t have every 
dollar taken out of their pocket by a health system that they had 
worked so hard to build. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, as we saw in the past and as we’re seeing 
today, the government in its changes to the fee structures 
actually went and started digging deeper and deeper into the 
pockets of our seniors. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we applauded the Premier yesterday when 
the Premier got up in this Assembly and addressed the question 
that was posed by the Leader of the Opposition, and the Premier 
basically said that he was going to put everything on hold. He 
thought it was appropriate to put everything on hold because 
they began to consult with people, they began to consult with 
individuals across this province. 
 
They just nicely started receiving letters in their offices and 
phone calls to their offices from individuals and seniors across 
this province, and family members who found themselves being 
put in a real bind as a result of this initiative by this 
government. 
 
And so the Premier basically said: 
 

“What I’ve heard very clearly from the public is these 
changes have brought about at least a perception (and I find 
that interesting, he says, a perception) — and in some cases 
a reality — of significant change at (to those with) more 
modest incomes . . .” 

 
And I’m quoting from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix of Monday or 
Tuesday the 30th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a perception? I don’t think that the family 
members and the seniors who sat down and started looking a lot 
more closely at their incomes and what the fee increases were 
going to mean to them, I don’t think they were just saying this 
is a . . . we perceive this is what is going to happen. 
 
The facts are, as they looked over the chart, as they plugged in 
their monthly income, they could see exactly what was going to 
happen. It wasn’t a perception any more, it was a reality. And I 
find it interesting the Premier would talk about this, that some 
preconceived notion that we’re going to be actually stealing 
from the seniors to provide for their care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know what has happened over the last 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

month. We know that over the last month as individuals, as 
family members — and I’ve had family members call because 
of the concern of the costs that were spiralling for a relative — 
they called my office, and my colleagues have had calls, and 
we’ve had letters to our offices. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, just recently I think it was the 
Minister of Health suggested that we should send the letters 
over to him because he hadn’t seen any of the letters — when a 
lot of the letters we were receiving, Mr. Speaker, were actually 
coming . . . we were cc’d (carbon copy) copies of letters that 
went to the Premier or letters that went to the Minister of 
Health. 
 
And these weren’t letters that just went in the last few days or 
didn’t just arrive on the Premier’s desk on Saturday or Sunday 
of this past weekend, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been there for a 
while because we’ve had the letters in our possession for a 
while. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And what does that say, Mr. Speaker? It tells you that the public 
of Saskatchewan, whether they’re young or old or possibly 
individuals who unfortunately due to health related problems 
find themselves in a care centre, can understand when the 
government starts digging into their pockets and asking for 
more when all along they thought that this government cared 
about them; that this government was going to provide for them 
and meet their needs; that medicare and the NDP, wrapping 
itself in the flag of medicare, meant that they would be looked 
after when they needed assistance. 
 
Through their productive years they provided to the coffers of 
this province to provide health care to those in need. And when 
they came to a position of finding themselves in need they 
expected that that same courtesy would be given to them — that 
they would be provided for; that they wouldn’t be asked at the 
end of the day, oh I’m sorry, it’s costing us a little more and our 
budget is a little tight and we’re not exactly sure where we’re 
going to find the money so we’re going to have to come to you 
because seniors in this province have too much money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that very callous and I believe over the past 
month we’ve seen for a good period of time there were a lot of 
calluses that were building up on the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, on the Health minister and on the Premier as they just 
seemed to shrug off the fact that this is just a minute issue; 
nobody really cares. 
 
But as of yesterday or as of this weekend and as of . . . from the 
Premier’s comments, it’s quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that there 
were a lot of people in this province that care; a lot of people 
that came to my colleagues and I. And we weren’t just 
dreaming up a story; we were bringing first-hand, first related 
incidents of the hardships that would be created for individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier indicated that this policy 
would be on hold and the government would likely outline a 
new fee schedule policy within 10 to 14 days . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . My colleague says 7 to 10 but I’m reading 
from The StarPhoenix. And possibly that maybe the reports 
weren’t . . . didn’t catch the Premier’s comments. But they did 

catch somebody else’s comments in regard to the debate here 
and the callousness of individuals . . . is the Premier’s 
comments, it says in The StarPhoenix, were: 
 

. . . were in stark contrast to the steadfast defence of the 
policy that began on budget day, when the government 
claimed only 127 seniors would face the maximum charge 
of $3,875 a month . . . 
 

And I quote from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix: 
 

Even as recently as Friday, Highways Minister Mark 
Wartman bellowed from his seat during question period: “I 
am not ashamed. It’s the right thing to do.” 

 
Is that what this government believed — that it’s the right thing 
to do? To take from . . . And the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle says the same thing. He . . . (inaudible) . . . he 
obviously believes it. And it’s quite obvious that most of the 
members across that . . . on that side of the Assembly believe 
the same thing. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, it’s very appropriate that this 
motion come forward. Because, Mr. Speaker, while this . . . the 
changes are put on hold, Mr. Speaker, one has to ask, what will 
the review come forward with? What will the Saskatchewan . . . 
the people of Saskatchewan be presented with when it . . . when 
the review is complete? 
 
Will the review indicate, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of the day 
the government has reviewed this policy and they found, well 
90 per cent of a person’s income was a little excessive, so we’re 
going to move it back to 85 per cent? Or — no, we’ll move it 
back to 80 per cent, and that’ll put . . . rather than $166 a month 
in a person’s pocket, it may mean $300 a month in a person’s 
pocket. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that will be the case . . . And we reserve 
judgment because right now, today we really don’t know what 
policy the government’s going to come up with. But I think 
based on where the government has been in the past and some 
of the promises that the government has made in the past on 
other issues, we want . . . Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
follow, very interestingly, we will follow this policy. We will 
follow very closely the review the government is coming 
forward with and we will be interested in finding out at the end 
of the day what the government has arrived at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and when we talk about policy and the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I find it 
appalling that the member from Regina Qu’Appelle would find 
seniors in this province as being so phony in their idea of 
challenging a government policy and really bringing . . . calling 
this government to task when it hits them in their pocketbook 
after they’ve worked so diligently all of their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from The StarPhoenix there is a quote here and I 
want to just read: 
 

Any plans for nursing-home increase should be scrapped 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

 

altogether (and this is the Leader of the Opposition) . . . 
because they are already too high compared with most 
other provinces. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about these rates, the 
government would like to brag about the fact that they are one 
of the best in the province when it comes to providing health 
care and providing access to services. But if indeed these 
budgeting . . . these increases in seniors’ care fees would have 
gone ahead, the new budget would see Saskatchewan residents’ 
fees the third highest in Canada behind Nova Scotia and New 
Brunswick. And when you compare this to other provinces, the 
current maximum monthly charge in Manitoba is $1,800; and in 
Alberta, 978. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what will the review show us? Will 
the government finally realize the problems they have created? 
Will they really repent of the wrong that they have committed? 
Will, as they review this policy structure, will they take into 
consideration the needs of the seniors across this province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday . . . and coming back to The 
StarPhoenix article, it says, a quote from The StarPhoenix 
article of April 30: 
 

“Clearly, Mr. Stevenson’s case drew more focused 
attention to those who are part of long-term care who are 
not at the end of life,” Calvert said of the Regina computer 
programmer who would have had to pay nearly all of his 
working income as a result of the proposed fee schedule. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t just long-term care residents and what 
most of us would think of as the elderly. Mr. Speaker, 
unfortunately there are individuals who due to physical needs 
beyond their control and health problems that they face have 
also . . . need to rely on the services of long-term care facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when an individual who’s really created a 
life . . . a livelihood for themselves and been involved in the 
public sector and worked for 22 years finds that because they 
need the services of long-term care, at the end of the day all 
they have left in their pocket is $166, you can see why the 
public of Saskatchewan were really crying out and decrying this 
callous move by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you talk about . . . Yesterday we had the privilege 
of listening to the ACRE committee — this committee that the 
government put together hoping that within four years they 
could come up with some ideas about how we can revitalize 
Saskatchewan, and specifically, more specifically, rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure if the government was expecting a 
report as quickly as it had arrived. I have a feeling that when the 
government talked, put this commission in place, this ACRE 
committee in place, and talked about a four-year review and 
talking to people across this province, talking to groups and 
agencies that they were hoping that while this was taking place 
they would have time to actually move forward with an election 
and they wouldn’t have to address the issue of rural 
depopulation and the loss of jobs. 
 

Ms. Speaker, as we listened to the ACRE committee last night 
and when we look at this motion before us and long-term health 
care fees, the committee said, and I’m quoting from their 
document. When it talks about revitalizing the rural committee: 
 

Lack of health care service and uncertainty about access to 
health care services such as primary health care, home care, 
emergency services, are a major concern for rural 
Saskatchewan residents. People need to know what health 
services they can be assured of receiving within their rural 
communities. 

 
And they commented, the government has: 
 

Development can only happen with the assurance that 
adequate health and emergency services are in place within 
rural communities. 

 
They also talked about, they also mention, Mr. Speaker, the 
need for financing, the need for equity, the need for companies 
who would look at establishing rural Saskatchewan — finding 
the equity in order to build their business. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that the province of 
Saskatchewan has many rural residents who do have . . . have 
provided for themselves and have built up good savings 
accounts. But, Mr. Speaker, at the same time, these residents, 
I’m sure, would just as soon invest in their community and 
invest in business opportunities so that young people can move 
to the communities and become taxpayers and help grow their 
communities rather than find their savings whittled away as the 
government increases the fees on their heavy-care services. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t just a matter, it wasn’t just a matter 
of taking from individuals who are living in our care homes and 
our senior homes. It was a matter of taking from the population 
of this province because of the opportunity for those savings 
accounts that are out there to actually invest in job opportunities 
and job creation and economic activity in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we continue this debate. 
Because I believe we can’t just let, let it die based on the 
comments that the Premier made yesterday about the fact that it 
will be put on hold. Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s important that 
the government listen very carefully and not just review these 
changes. And while the Premier’s indicated that things are on 
hold, hoping that it would kind of die off and then in another 7 
to 10 days or 14 days or who knows, maybe a month from now, 
come up with a new policy and find that it really hasn’t changed 
that much. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want and I hope . . . I trust that 
the Premier was really sincere and really acknowledged that . . . 
and recognized the hurt that he was creating for individuals and 
for families, and that his instructions to his committee will be to 
take a serious look at these increases and let’s . . . ask 
themselves, is this . . . is this important. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, what you will find is that, even today, 
there will be many seniors who will be contacting their MLAs 
on the government side of the House, will be contacting the 
Premier’s office and the Minister of Health’s office, and 
basically saying to the Premier, Mr. Premier, we want to thank 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

you for having pulled back, for having stopped in your tracks 
and for take . . . reviewing this policy because it is a negative 
policy and it is the wrong thing to do. It’s an attack on seniors. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think as well, one of the reasons the 
government has really, really gulped on this one is because a lot 
of their long-term, hard-core support comes from that seniors 
group, and it comes from individuals who have, as I indicated 
earlier, worked very diligently, worked very hard all their lives 
and built for their future only to find that the government they 
believed in was going to pull their savings accounts right out of 
their hands because of the fact that, unfortunately, they may 
need the services of a heavy care facility. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we debate the issue. It’s 
important that we keep the issue at the forefront so that people 
will demand of this government a clear and honest and 
straightforward policy that doesn’t penalize the seniors because 
they have provided for a rainy day by providing a savings 
account. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the government 
members realize that the people, the seniors of this province, 
built this province in the past and they would like to have a part 
in building the province in the future; and they don’t want the 
resources that they have set aside just being absorbed by a 
government. Because this government has been unable, unable 
to balance its books, unable to manage the resources in this 
province and, as we’ve seen in this budget, starts to attack areas 
of the good money managing, whether it’s by seniors, whether 
it’s by the Wildlife Development Fund, or whether it’s the other 
funds in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that have 
been put aside to help people in need. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion is very appropriate. And it’s important 
for us to, as I’ve indicated, to continue to raise the profile on the 
motion. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that, as we’ve 
been talking this afternoon, that this government realized that 
they did make a mistake and they don’t just . . . and they don’t 
just place . . . We don’t want the Premier and his ministers to 
play lip service. We want the Premier and his ministers to 
recognize the mistake they have made, the fallacy of their 
move, and actually to move, move . . . step back, Mr. Speaker, 
and recognize and allow our seniors to live their final days with 
dignity rather than having that dignity taken away as they watch 
their savings account disappear through exorbitant fee 
increases. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by 
the member from Estevan: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government and, in 
particular, the Minister of Health, the Minister of Finance, 
and the Premier for not being totally forthcoming with the 
people of Saskatchewan regarding the true impact of the 
new fee structure for long-term care in Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased this 
afternoon to enter into debate on the issue of long-term health 

care fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that listens to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We heard yesterday the Premier of 
Saskatchewan stand up and say to the people of Saskatchewan 
and the people in this Assembly that the government had 
listened to what the people had said. 
 
And the government was going to put on hold its policy, take a 
step back, look at the impact, and come forward with a new 
position. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a government that listens, a government that 
listens, Mr. Speaker, is a government that cares about the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk 
about this government and its listening. 
 
This government went on the road last summer in a bus, visited 
community after community throughout the province, listening 
to the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
during that tour, the Premier and members of the government 
talked to more than 6,000 people on their tour, Mr. Speaker. 
And during that tour, Mr. Speaker, they listened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite . . . I can barely hear myself 
speak, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad you were able 
to deal with the noise in the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Speaker would prefer if 
there weren’t any comments regarding any rulings. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
government that listens to the people of Saskatchewan. It works 
very hard at listening to the people of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday, yesterday the Premier stood up, put on hold 
a policy that the people of Saskatchewan had concerns about. 
 
And what did he say, Mr. Speaker? He said very clearly it’s the 
role of government to solve problems not create problems. And 
when we hear a concern raised by the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work to address it. 
 
But he also went on to say, Mr. Speaker — and I think people 
need to understand this — that budgets are about making 
choices. And choices are not always easy. Our financial 
situation in the province requires us to make difficult choices. 
It’s easy to be in opposition and promise all things to all people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite continually promise 
all things to all people. But as a government you have to make 
those difficult choices. But when, but when one of those 
choices creates a difficulty, Mr. Speaker, a government that 
listens is willing to review that policy put forward, Mr. Speaker. 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

 

And that’s what this government’s doing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are upset because 
they had an issue that they thought was of concern to the people 
of Saskatchewan. And it was. No doubt it was a concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan. But this government listened and this 
government’s going to deal with that concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite are upset because they like to get an 
issue that they can go on and raise fear about, and doom and 
gloom about the province. They like to fearmonger, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well this is about the future. And this is about an issue that was 
a concern to the people of Saskatchewan and this government’s 
reviewing that position. And this government will bring forward 
a new position, Mr. Speaker, in the days ahead. And we’re 
going to consult with additional groups — seniors groups — 
before we bring forward that position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We heard yesterday the Premier say that he spent last week in 
various communities around the province talking to people 
about the issue. We heard him talk about how he talked to 
seniors about the issue. And through those discussions and 
through those concerns raised, Mr. Speaker, he brought forward 
the position of the government that we’re willing to, as any 
good government should, Mr. Speaker, be willing to reconsider, 
to review, and look at any policy position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we went around the province last summer, 
and we’re every day around rural Saskatchewan and throughout 
our constituencies in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sorry but it’s just . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I’d ask the members to 
allow the member who has the floor to be able to heard. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very, very pleased 
with the opportunity to speak this afternoon about the good 
things that this government does, Mr. Speaker. And the most 
important thing it does, Mr. Speaker, is listen — listen. That’s 
what this government does. 
 
Now the members opposite, they don’t like to listen. It’s 
obvious, Mr. Speaker. They like to create fear. They’re too busy 
yelling, Mr. Speaker. Too busy talking about things that they’re 
trying to create anxiety and fear over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we take the 
concerns of seniors very, very seriously. And I can tell you that 
on this side of the House the well-being of seniors is a top 
priority, Mr. Speaker. And that if seniors are concerned about 
this policy, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to review this policy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in their motion, the members opposite cast 
aspersion upon the Premier, the Minister of Health, and the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Well I want to say something, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of 
Saskatchewan is a very caring, compassionate, kind individual, 
who will never, never, ever do something with the intent to hurt 
an individual in any way. 
 

And when we have a problem to deal with it takes a brave 
Premier to stand up and say, Mr. Speaker, that if there are 
concerns about this issue we’re going to review it. Because the 
members opposite, they’re not really concerned about 
reviewing the issue. They’re concerned about politics only, Mr. 
Speaker, just cheap posturing and cheap politics. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, on this side of the 
House we are truly concerned about seniors. So we are going to 
take a few days to go out and consult with seniors groups to 
hear what their concerns are regarding long-term care fees; to 
talk to them about what their needs are in this system. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to take time to talk to individuals like Ken 
Stevenson who brought forward a very, very important concern. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, I spoke with Ken Stevenson. I 
went through his particular situation with him, spent some time 
dealing with his needs. His needs outside his home in the 
nursing home, Mr. Speaker; his needs at work, his special needs 
of transportation, his needs for recreation and other things — 
that he is a viable adult in our community trying to live a life 
after a very devastating accident. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I spent time talking to that individual. Did 
the members opposite? No, they saw it as a political 
opportunity. It’s important to understand the circumstances, not 
take advantage of political opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite keep talking about 
they want an answer. Well they’re going to get an answer in the 
days ahead, Mr. Speaker, but they’re going to get an answer 
that is meaningful to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they keep talking about 
calling an election. They’re supposed to be in the House, I think 
at this point, listening. But we listened. I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, 
that not everybody listens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we had members of the opposition continue 
to raise the issue of long-term care fees. And they keep saying 
that they haven’t got a decisive answer. I think that it was made 
very clear yesterday when the Premier stood in this House and 
said that this policy is on hold and he will review this policy 
and in the next few days bring forward a recommendation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member for Cumberland, 
why is he on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Leave to introduce some special guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce, out 
of your gallery, nine grade 12 students from Minahik 
Waskahigan School. Now our members of course say the word 
Ta wow. And this school is from Pinehouse and we have of 
course their teacher Gloria Belcourt and also with them is Bella 
Pederson. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

And I’ve asked them to say we are very proud of them to be 
there, Mr. Speaker, and also to be very proud if they passed 
their grade 12 at the end. 
 
And I think it’s very, very important, Mr. Speaker, to have a 
special welcome to the students and the teachers and also . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Pederson from Pinehouse. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 7 — Fees for Long-term Care 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to continue my 
speech and talking about what the members opposite position 
was on health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their platform in 1999 they said they were 
going to freeze health care. Freeze the health care budget. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, they went on in little, minute letters there in 
saying that it would go up by the rate of inflation. They went in 
little, minute letters and said it would go up by the rate of 
inflation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to explain to the people of Saskatchewan what that 
would mean in practical terms. Because in practical terms, Mr. 
Speaker, in practical terms this budget this year went up 5.8 per 
cent or $129 million. Far in excess — far in excess — of the 
amount of money that the miniscule little increase would have 
meant that they would have put forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to tell you that today we put $2.34 
billion into health care, Mr. Speaker. That’s more than $3.4 
billion more since 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could they . . . they claim they can do 
everything. They’re going to deliver everything, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re going to cut taxes, they’re going to give everybody 
every benefit, Mr. Speaker, and you know what, Mr. Speaker, it 
just doesn’t add up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now . . . Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 
yelling across the House. Well, Mr. Speaker, the reality is 
they’re promising all things to all people. They’re promising 
about how they can deliver things to health care, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re saying that they wouldn’t do anything with long-term 
care fees yet, Mr. Speaker. We’ve put far, far more money into 
the Health budget than the members opposite would have. And 
it’s about making tough choices. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have made a commitment. The Premier 
of Saskatchewan stood in this House and made a commitment 
to the seniors of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan 
on long-term care, they’ll put this policy on hold and to review 
it. The man is a man of great integrity. His word is his honour. 
 
I’d ask the members opposite not to continue to play games 
saying, we’re going to do something. The Premier said he’ll 
review it. Let the review occur. 

Now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Premier is a man of great 
integrity. If he says it’s on hold and he’s going to review it, it’s 
on hold, Mr. Speaker. And it will be reviewed. 
 
And in the coming days, in the coming days the government 
will bring forward a new, a new position. And what’s that 
position today, Mr. Speaker? That position’s under review. We 
clearly want to understand this issue . . . all the intricacies of 
this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we thank those seniors, as a government we thank those 
seniors and people who brought forward concerns. We’re not 
upset, we’re not angry, Mr. Speaker. Those were legitimate 
concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. And a government that 
listens, Mr. Speaker, a government that listens will react to the 
people’s needs. And that’s what this Premier has done. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . The members opposite continue to make 
noise, Mr. Speaker. There, they quieted down. Thank you. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are going to put forward a new position 
on health care. But it’s not going to be a position . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members, I would ask you to 
refrain from the loud discussions that are taking place from 
across the floor in order that we can hear the member who is 
speaking. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 
reviewing the long-term care fee policy. And we will bring 
forward a new policy in the days ahead. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I need to reiterate to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the seniors of Saskatchewan that the 
opposition, the opposition says very plainly that they will 
increase the Health budget only by the cost of inflation. That 
was their position. And, Mr. Speaker, we far, far exceeded that. 
 
Now how do they square that circle, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 
going to deliver all health services? They’re not going to be 
increasing any fees or anything in health care at all, and deliver 
it within that budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s not possible to do — 
they’re empty words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the members opposite, they continue to talk about how 
they’re going to do this and how they’re going to do that. And 
they’re going to deliver everything that’s . . . (inaudible) . . . 
today and they’re going to add more to everything else. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, that adds up to about $3.4 billion more than we 
have, Mr. Speaker. So how can they do that? But yet they’re out 
there telling everybody they can do everything. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, this is the government . . . (inaudible) . . . 
And this government and its Premier, its cabinet, and its 
members of the caucus are out continually listening to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And we’re going to continue to listen. 
 
And our listening has delivered results, Mr. Speaker. And it will 
continue to deliver results for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
it will on the long-term care fee issue as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk repeatedly about 
their concerns about health care and education and all the 



April 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

 

issues, Mr. Speaker. But what are they doing? They’re simply 
playing petty politics, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have to make 
any decisions; they don’t have to make choices. They’re 
playing petty politics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we saw a very similar practice in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 
Promising all things to all people, and the only way to deliver 
that is go in debt in a very serious way, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we can’t do that. We have to bring forward viable 
options to the people of Saskatchewan on a continual basis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to let other hon. members have the 
opportunity to speak on this issue, but I’d like to make an 
amendment, Mr. Speaker, and the amendment is such, Mr. 
Speaker. I amend Mr. Toth’s motion: 
 

By removing all words after “Assembly” and replace with 
the following: 
 
commend the government for listening to the concerns of 
Saskatchewan people by conducting a review of the 
proposal for increasing long-term care fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I submit, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to speak to this motion and to this amendment. I 
think the original motion hit me as kind of a tragic irony when 
talking about being forthcoming. You know, as a new member, 
as we went through all the question periods and all of those 
kinds of things, I was stuck by the level of misinformation, the 
petty politics, the emotional fervour that was raised in this 
House. 
 
And so I think this government takes a lot of pride in listening 
to people — that’s why I ran. I think this government listens 
carefully — makes sure that people have accurate information. 
 
And today, in the member’s remarks, the member from 
Moosomin, I just want to quote a little bit what he said. Right 
off the bat, he was talking about what we were talking about 
over here. And he said the government was saying things like, 
and I quote: 
 

The . . . (government) would not . . . (or) the majority 
would not see any increases. 

 
He said, I quote: 
 

The majority would not see any increases. 
 
Now, I thought to myself, that’s not right. I’ve heard the 
Minister of Health say several times that about a third would 
see no increases. So I just flipped back in Hansard. On April 
22, this is what the Minister said: 
 

The basic payment for long-term care is . . . (and it) deals 
with people who receive the old age security plus the 
senior’s supplement. And that is the bottom line. Those 
people, about 3,000, there’s no change at all that takes 

place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s about a third; that’s not a majority. So 
who’s forthcoming? Who’s telling the truth in this House? 
 
So I’m really worried about that. I think this is a problem about 
being forthcoming. 
 
And then, here is another one. Here’s another example about 
who’s forthcoming. This one really, I think, went below the belt 
here. On April 26, the member from Thunder Creek in his 
question said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have another letter from a person concerned 
about the long-term care fee hike. It’s an e-mail from Mr. 
Cliff Belter who asks and I quote: 

 
What happens to a couple (that makes) making $3,300 
per month in pensions with one person in a care facility. 
 

. . . he goes on to say: 
 

What happens is that the payment to the health Board is 
828 plus 90 per cent . . . for a total of 2,903. (This) . . . (is 
the) information on rates . . . taken from the Sask Health 
site. 
 

He says: 
 

My question is how does this one not in the facility 
survive on $397 per month and what will your party do 
about it if you are the next Government? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the last question for Mr. Belter by 
assuring him that the Saskatchewan Party will cancel this 
unfair tax on long-term care fee for the residents. 

 
Now that’s fair for the member from Thunder Creek to say what 
his position is. But I think it’s incumbent on us as MLAs to be 
helpful to this person and say, get the accurate information 
because this is inaccurate. Who is forthcoming with accurate 
information from the Department of Health? And all the way 
through this, and I did not hear at all or had any kind of 
indication from the members from the opposition when they 
received these letters — and it’s fair to come to the House and 
read the letters — but we had no indication at all that they were 
forthcoming with any help or giving them any indication where 
they could get accurate information if they themselves did not 
have that. 
 
We never heard them talk about this Saskatchewan Health drug 
plan and extended benefits income assessment unit. Never 
talked about the toll-free number. Day after day we would talk 
about that. So the question is, when we listen, how do we 
balance out or how do we strain through this information or 
misinformation? And this is a problem; this is a problem. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, many people have asked me, so how’s it 
going in the House? You know, as a grade 8 teacher, I would 
often say what we often do and, Mr. Speaker, you can relate to 
this — we kind of practise that line of Jerry Seinfeld where you 
practise tranquillity now, tranquillity now. 
 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2002 

 

But I’m amazed in this House how people can go from calm to 
moral outrage in five seconds flat and then back to calm. And I 
saw a little bit of that last Tuesday night, the moral outrage. 
And I think this is a challenge. And the member from Regina 
Dewdney over here talked about the challenges we have. And 
we have to listen very carefully about the issues that face the 
people in this province. There will be tough choices made. And 
so we all have to work through this together. And I think this is 
important, that we all listen carefully and we are all helpful. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think there is challenges for us all here. And 
we all have to be forthcoming. And sometimes, sometimes, we 
all have to be a little bit more ethical. And I think that 
sometimes when you withhold information, not being 
forthcoming, there’s an ethical question here. And we all have 
to be ethical and we have to give accurate, complete 
information. Accuracy is really important. 
 
And at the end of the day, I think all members in this House 
agree that seniors face challenges. And every day they want to 
make sure that they are not a problem for anybody else. And 
they’ve saved money for their old age and they want to pay 
their own way. And we don’t want to put them in a stressful 
situation feeling that they are at risk. So we all need to be 
helpful. We all need to be helpful. And the first thing is being 
listening, giving accurate information, making sure it’s 
accurate. But the big thing is being helpful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn the debate on this motion. 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:44. 
 


