















































Hansard: July 02, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2401 
 July 2, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the government’s transfer of the surplus of the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund to the General Revenue Fund. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to refund the $1.6 million intended for the 
Saskatchewan Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and 
discontinue its present policy of using this money for other 
government purpose. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by approximately 50 citizens of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
shortcomings of the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Tisdale, Star City, and Rose Valley, and 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
by citizens concerned with the condition of Highway No. 58. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action to make necessary repairs to Highway 58 
in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
The signatures on this petition are from the communities of 
Shamrock, Chaplin, and Saskatoon. 
 
I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable and 
dangerous condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Chaplin, Central Butte, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reductions of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres. The prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctorial services available as well as lab services, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to the 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition from constituents that are concerned about the changes 
to the crop insurance program. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plans to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by young 
farmers in my constituency that are concerned about the crop 
insurance program. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all young 
farmers from my town of Spiritwood. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 11, 18, 132, 157, 165, and 169. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 77 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much was paid out by 
the Government of Saskatchewan for AIDA/CFIP in the 
year 2000-2001; how much was paid out in Saskatchewan 
by the federal government for AIDA/CFIP in 2000-2001? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I should also give 
notice that I shall on day no. 77 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much was paid out by 
the Government of Saskatchewan for AIDA/CFIP in 
2001-2002; how much was paid out in Saskatchewan by 
the federal government for AIDA/CFIP in 2001-2002? 
 

And I shall ask on day no. 77, the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: what was the total paid out 
by the Government of Saskatchewan under C-SAP I; what 
was the total paid out by the federal government in 
Saskatchewan under C-SAP I? 

 
And one additional question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much did the 
provincial government pay out through C-SAP II; and how 
much did the federal government pay out in Saskatchewan 
under C-SAP II? 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

Firefighting Efforts Contain Crutwell Fire 
Near Prince Albert 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those 
of us who live in the Prince Albert area had the opportunity to 
witness nature at its very worst during a close encounter we 
hope never to experience again. Although nature did show us its 
ugly side, Mr. Speaker, we also had as a community at large the 
opportunity to witness how a community can rise together to 
protect their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course I am speaking of the devastation 
wreaked upon the Nisbet Forest by the Crutwell fire. Mr. 
Speaker, during the mid-morning of Friday, June 28 a dry 
thunderstorm rolled through the Prince Albert region. This 
storm ignited two fires — one north and one south of the 
Highway 3 and 55 corridor west of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this huge fire in central Saskatchewan quickly 
threatened to destroy scores of homes close to and inside the 
city of Prince Albert. 
 
Now we get to the good part, Mr. Speaker. Led by the quick 
response of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), three volunteer fire co-ops joined in with SERM 
professional forest firefighters to inhibit the progress of the 
Crutwell fires into the housing areas abutting the Nisbet Forest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we need to remind ourselves of the 
professionalism of SERM’s forest firefighters and also those 
three volunteer firefighters near Prince Albert who gave up a 
July 1 long weekend to assist SERM. 
 
These three volunteer co-ops are the Buckland and District Fire 
Co-op, the Lakeland and District Fire Co-op, and the West 
Central Fire Co-op. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking all four 
firefighting groups for their quick action in bringing under 
control the Crutwell fire. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to join with the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers in commending the people who worked over the long 
weekend on the Crutwell fire. The volunteer fire departments 
have been mentioned. The 250 SERM employees have been 
mentioned by the member. But I want to as well speak to the 
Wahpeton Dakota First Nation who were engaged in the 
struggle to fight this fire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fire has covered something in the 
neighbourhood of 9,000 hectares of forest west of Prince Albert 
and had moved within 11 kilometres of the city. Certainly we 
were all concerned. Several villages had to be evacuated. And I 
want to today commend the people who operated the 6 
helicopters, the 4 air tankers, the 22 water trucks, the 18 
caterpillars, and who manned the 500 fire hoses. 
 
What I think is important, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 
someone upstairs who allowed a little rain to happen in our 
area, which allowed the fire to be now 85 per cent contained. 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

 

I want to, in closing, Mr. Speaker, commend Mayor Cody and 
his staff — tremendous co-operation was between SERM and 
the city. And I want to commend as well two individuals from 
SERM — Murdoch Carriere and Curtis Lee who organized and 
coordinated the firefighting efforts. It’s because of them that we 
have safe communities and that there wasn’t a lot of personal 
property loss. The forest can be replaced and will be replaced 
by mother nature. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grand Opening of New Canora Credit Union Building 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last Wednesday, June 26, the minister for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and I had the 
pleasure to be on hand for the grand opening of the new Canora 
Credit Union building in Canora. This is a new facility that will 
allow the Canora Credit Union to better serve its members for 
years to come. 
 
According to general manager, Dave Masters, the $2.5 million 
building will not only allow them to continue the delivery of 
traditional services like lending and deposit services but will 
allow them to expand upon emerging services like financial 
planning, estate and trust services, and brokerage services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canora Credit Union began in 1959 with an 
initial deposit of nearly $11,000 from 161 investors. Since then 
it has expanded with branches in Wadena, Kuroki, Preeceville, 
and Sturgis. Today Canora Credit Union Limited boasts assets 
of more than $130 million. 
 
Special recognition should be given to architect, Heney Klypak 
of Saskatoon, and general contractor, Logan Stevens of 
Yorkton, and all of the subcontractors who participated in 
constructing such a beautiful facility. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
board, general manager, staff, and membership of the Canora 
Credit Union on the grand opening of their new building. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Water System for Martensville 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it was my great pleasure on 
Friday last to join the people of Martensville on the very happy 
occasion of the sod-turning for their new water reservoir, 
pumping station, and pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that the province is joining 
in partnership with the town of Martensville and the federal 
government through the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program to develop this new water system. This is one of many 
projects under the infrastructure program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Martensville has seen amazing 
growth and progress since its incorporation as a village in 1966. 
In just over 30 years its population now nears the level required 
for city status. That’s amazing progress for Martensville, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
This investment of $800,000 by provincial and federal 
governments over the next two years will help to provide the 
infrastructure necessary to attract new industry, new families, 
and new business investments in one of Saskatchewan’s fastest 
growing communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the infrastructure program stresses improvements 
to water and waste water systems, solid waste management, 
recycling, and energy efficient projects. It’s a good example of 
partnership between the province, the federal government, and 
municipalities like Martensville; and I know all members will 
want to join me in congratulating Mayor Jim Stone, the council, 
and the people of Martensville on the progress being made in 
that community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Drought Disaster Areas in Northwest Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to again 
bring attention to the legislature of a continuing disastrous 
situation in the northwest Saskatchewan due to the extreme 
drought, now both in the livestock sector — including grazing, 
feeding, and water supply — as well as the current crop 
conditions. Crop deterioration has complicated an extremely 
uneven germination and many grain producers are now trying to 
come to grips with a complete crop failure. Expenses to date 
will be just written off. 
 
Heartland Livestock Services in Lloydminster has indicated that 
four to six times the usual number of cattle are now on offer as 
producers and ranchers are trying to deal with a complete lack 
of feed and grazing capacity. Watering the remaining livestock 
has become a huge problem. About a dozen rural municipalities 
in the Northwest have officially declared themselves drought 
disaster areas and are looking for any advice or guidance or any 
assistance that can be directed their way. 
 
Now is the time for this government to offer any assistance that 
it can to these farmers and ranchers as they face the worst 
drought and crop failure conditions in living memory. The 
problems and consequences cannot be ignored any longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Partnership Between Thom Collegiate and SaskEnergy 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to draw the 
attention of the Assembly to a six-year partnership that’s just a 
remarkable partnership between the students and teachers at 
Thom Collegiate and the employees and staff at SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy and Thom have entered into a 
business education partnership in 1984. It was to facilitate the 
education of students in technology, in business, in the arts and 
humanities, in environmental studies, in environmental studies, 
and . . . Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the agreement was to 
facilitate the education of students in technology and business, 
in the arts and humanities, in environmental studies, and in 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

sciences. In turn, students would participate in certain 
SaskEnergy community programs and, on occasion, provide 
facilities for some events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what has happened is the students and the staff at 
SaskEnergy have been building off of each other’s energy and 
making Thom, and making SaskEnergy, making Regina, and 
making our province a better place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a great co-operative program in education and 
in community spirit. And I want to conclude by congratulating 
Thom, SaskEnergy, and everyone involved in this great six-year 
partnership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Assistance for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. As we heard earlier 
from the member from Lloydminster, the severe drought 
continues to affect many areas in northern Saskatchewan. 
Conditions are bone dry, particularly around Lloydminster, 
Prince Albert, and Melfort. 
 
The crops are burning; the pastures never even turned green this 
spring. The little feed that was available is almost entirely gone. 
Mr. Speaker, what specific measures is the government taking 
to assist the farmers and cattle producers in drought-stricken 
areas of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the member’s question, because it’s one that is most 
serious in the northwest side of the province. And I say to the 
member opposite that there are a number of things that we 
implemented this year to try and deal with the drought that we 
anticipated might occur in Saskatchewan. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, we implemented the new forage crop 
insurance program, which we have today, Mr. Speaker, better 
than 3 million acres that are insured in Saskatchewan. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, we also have the water sources 
development fund that we expanded in this province, put 
additional money in last year for this year. And I now have the 
federal government matching that up by an additional $1.1 
million. 
 
We got a further extension, Mr. Speaker, on the tax deferral 
program to allow for the drought-induced sale of breeding stock 
to be administered for an additional two more years, Mr. 
Speaker. So that if producers find themselves in a situation 
where they need to sell some of their livestock off, the deferral 
program will work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are some of the things that we’ve done through the 
course of this year. I have a longer list, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll go 
on in time . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the minister, I 
know, is well aware that these programs are not addressing the 
need. They are terribly inadequate. And about a month ago, the 
Saskatchewan Party called on the province to commit $10 
million to well drilling, to dugout digging, and to the purchase 
of pumping equipment. 
 
The NDP (New Democratic Party) rejected the idea. In fact the 
minister said that helping the cattle producers of this province 
was a dumb idea. 
 
And then he sort of had a change of heart and he said that he 
would speak to the federal government about a water program 
for cattle producers, but we haven’t heard a thing since. Mr. 
Speaker, the drought is still very severe in some areas of this 
province and the NDP is still doing nothing. 
 
What is the government going to do to deal with the severe 
drought in many areas? Will they support the Saskatchewan 
Party’s proposal which will address the need right now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I should say to the member opposite that 
this government has, over the last year and a half, Mr. Speaker, 
has done a tremendous amount for agriculture in this province 
and have built on the work of agriculture strategy for this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite that just recently in my 
conversations with the Minister of Agriculture federally, there 
is a commitment by the federal government to put some 
additional dollars in for water of which, Mr. Speaker, we will 
announce in the next day or two a strategy in terms of 
enhancing the water supply in this province, Mr. Speaker. And 
the minister of Sask Water will be announcing that. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite, it wasn’t this member 
on this side of the House that said that we shouldn’t be 
supporting cattle producers and supporting agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. And it was not this member of the House who said that 
it was a dumb, dumb idea. 
 
It was, Mr. Speaker, the media who had in fact had read the 
quote from the member from Watrous and they said that it was 
that member, Mr. Speaker — it was a dumb, dumb idea, not on 
this side of the House but on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP likes to talk about 
helping the farmers in the province. But their record is a 
disaster. They know that in just this year alone they cut the 
budget by $50 million, they cut the crop insurance coverage, 
they jacked up the premiums. They cancelled the property tax 
rebate and they refuse to help the cattle producers who are short 
of both feed and water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this spring many cattle producers, particularly in 
the Northwest, need to haul cattle and water but they couldn’t 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

 

because many highways have road bans in place and the 
government refused to issue special permits. 
 
For instance, Highway 4 from Rosthern to Meadow Lake, one 
of the driest areas of the province, had a road ban until June 30. 
And we heard from producers who were fined for hauling cattle 
on that road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP really does care about the cattle 
producers, if they really do want to see that industry grow in the 
province, why won’t they at least issue special permits for the 
cattle hauling? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — In this province, Mr. Speaker, I meet with 
the farm producers and the farm organizations about every five 
or six weeks, Mr. Speaker. I meet with them and we have a 
conversation. In fact I just met with them before I went to 
Halifax on the recent rounds of discussions on agriculture. I’ll 
be meeting with them again in the next 10 days or so. 
 
And livestock producers said to us unequivocally, Mr. Speaker, 
we should not be providing financial assistance for the hauling 
of livestock or the hauling of feed. That’s the position, Mr. 
Speaker, today. That’s the position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I hear the members opposite chirping, Mr. Speaker. I hear 
the members opposite chirping, Mr. Speaker, about road bans in 
Saskatchewan. And the members over there should know that 
road bans are determined, Mr. Speaker, by the municipalities. 
They’re not determined by the provincial government. 
 
The decision about road closures, road bans, road weights, Mr. 
Speaker, are determined by municipalities, Mr. Speaker, and the 
member opposite should know that, you would think. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Disaster Assistance Program 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago tomorrow, the community of 
Vanguard and surrounding area was hit by a devastating storm 
that dropped 375 millimetres of rain. The area suffered extreme 
flooding which damaged roads, buildings, crops, and fields. The 
downpour also left the community with contaminated drinking 
water, and an incredible amount of work to repair the damage. 
 
Damage estimates have now reached over $5 million yet 
unbelievably there are still people in the area who have not been 
paid for their claims from the provincial disaster assistance 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain why some people in 
Vanguard have had to wait over two years to be paid by the 
PDAP (provincial disaster assistance program)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There are really a number of issues here that affect the ability to 
pay out individual claims. I want to assure the House though, 

that we have had a person working full-time on this since the 
flood, and indeed we added another person in September. 
 
There are a number of different issues. I can advise the House 
very quickly that some of this involves the ability of getting a 
. . . the availability of getting contractors. Some of it’s had to do 
with needing to wait to evaluate structural damage of basement 
walls. For particular reasons around the erosions and dike 
claims, there have been some issues with getting a large 
contractor. 
 
There’s a relatively small number of claims, Mr. Speaker, that 
are still waiting to be paid out but this program is moving 
forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday evening a severe 
wind and hail storm cut a devastating path across southwestern 
Saskatchewan. Crops were completely destroyed by the wind 
and hail. In RM (rural municipality) No. 75, for example, one 
farmer lost every building and tree on his property except his 
house. 
 
Extensive property damage occurred almost everywhere the 
storm was felt and affected many RMs. Some people have 
insurance that will cover the damages to property, and crop 
insurance will take care of some crop damage. But the NDP’s 
cut of spot loss hail coverage will negatively affect many 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, initial damage reports from this storm are just 
coming in. If RMs affected by this storm request help from the 
provincial disaster assistance program, will the Premier assure 
them that help will be there now, not two years from now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
certainly advised the House in the past that insurable items, 
insurable properties are not covered under PDAP. They are to 
be covered under the insurance programs. It’s up to the people 
who own the property to take out the appropriate insurance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assistance to Municipalities for Firefighting 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the Premier accompanied me to Nipawin following the 
devastating fire that destroyed an industry in the community 
and threatened lives and property throughout the entire 
community and surrounding RMs, the Premier indicated that 
the situation would definitely qualify for provincial assistance 
to cover the damage. The town itself has already spent over 
$50,000 for external costs. And they’re tabulating apparently 
their own costs at this point. 
 
They still haven’t got the bill from SERM for the water 
bombers, but they do expect the total costs of fighting the blaze 
will top $100,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is happening with the Premier’s commitment 



2406 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

to help Nipawin with disaster assistance? How much money can 
the community expect to receive and when can they expect to 
hear from the province on their assistance package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to be joined 
by the member when I toured the situation of the fire in 
Nipawin, and meeting with the mayor and council members and 
community leaders. I indicated, I indicated to them, Mr. 
Speaker, that we would work with them in terms of the cost of 
bringing in the provincial forest fighting resources to bear on 
that fire. We’ve established a committee; we’re working with 
the community of Nipawin. 
 
I think the member will understand that our people in the 
fighting of forest fires these days have been . . . had a full load 
on their plates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do want to, however, Mr. Speaker, on this point, remind the 
member opposite and remind the party opposite what they were 
saying in this House about a year ago, about a year ago. They 
were talking about the budget at that time. They said at that 
time that this budget is, quote: 
 

. . . a slap in the face to Saskatchewan people. 
 

That’s what they said. And quote, incredibly they said: 
 

. . . the NDP has added 550 new government employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that 550 were 88 people dedicated to the 
fighting of forest fires in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What do they say today? What do they 
say in the House today? Did they get up and complain today? 
No, Mr. Speaker. And what do they say to the people of Prince 
Albert about their comments a year ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the issue here is that these 
communities are now themselves facing huge bills for 
firefighting. The town of Nipawin is not the only community. 
The RMs of Mervin and Loon Lake are each facing bills of 
almost $3 million each for fighting the blaze in the Turtle Lake 
area. 
 
In late May, before the Turtle Lake fire began, SARM, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, was already 
requesting that the provincial government waive any charges to 
RMs for the use of water bombers, helicopters, and firefighting 
crews. So far all they’ve heard is that the province has set up a 
committee, another committee to try and find out how the cost 
should be handled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain who is on this committee, 
when the committee is expected to reach a decision, and what 
process will it use to arrive at that decision; and when 
municipalities in Saskatchewan can expect an answer from the 
NDP on whether or not they will receive assistance? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m confident the New Democratic Party 
would have something to say if the member wants to check the 
party headquarters downtown. I’ll tell him what the 
Government of Saskatchewan is doing. I’ll tell him what the 
Government of Saskatchewan is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working with communities. Surely to 
goodness the member recognizes that our fire management team 
has something on their plate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have committed to 
work with communities. We’ve established the process to do so. 
I think even members opposite in the most partisanship would 
understand that this agency of government has a full load on its 
plate these days. 
 
Now I want that leader or that member to stand up today and 
declare their policy on the hiring of public servants to fight 
forest fires. Let the member from Rosthern stand up — the 
member from Rosthern has a great deal to say from his seat — 
let the member of Rosthern stand up and criticize today the 
hiring that we did last year of those involved in fighting forest 
fires in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you, you’ll hear nothing about it from them, Mr. 
Speaker. You’ll hear nothing about it from them. You’ll hear 
nothing about it from them in regards to the highways of the 
province. Not a question, Mr. Speaker, in this entire session to 
the Minister of Highways. Not a question this year, Mr. 
Speaker, about the hiring of forest fighting personnel in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely 
unbelievable to think that because the Premier is suggesting his 
entire . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
unbelievable to think that because the Premier is suggesting his 
entire government is in a state of terminal inertia that that’s an 
excuse to be able to allow municipalities to be crushed under 
the cost of firefighting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one RM indicates that if they themselves have to 
assume responsibility for all of the firefighting costs, they might 
as well lock the doors and hand over the keys. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier promise disaster assistance 
for Nipawin if he wasn’t prepared to offer it on the spot for 
other municipalities facing the devastation of fire and the 
enormous costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there’s one party in this 
House that wishes they were involved with inertia — it’s the 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

 

Saskatchewan Party — as opposed to going straight downhill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will say again that we are 
working with communities. We are working with RMs in this 
extremely important . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members on both sides of the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are involved in some 
very, very difficult days as we deal with the fires that are 
threatening communities, have been threatening communities, 
and likely will threaten communities and property and lives 
across the province. I want to, as Premier of the province, join 
my colleague from Prince Albert in congratulating all of those 
men and women who today are in the field working, some of 
them with the provincial government, some of them with RMs, 
doing exceptional, exceptional work in very difficult 
circumstances. 
 
And as I indicated in the member’s presence where he 
congratulated me for doing so, as I indicated to the people of 
Nipawin, I indicate to the people of communities across 
Saskatchewan: we will work with those communities, we will 
find solutions, and together we will take on the fires that are 
threatening our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier’s announcement in Nipawin was described as 
follows in The Nipawin Journal on June 13, and I quote: 
 

The hesitation in Calvert’s voice was obvious the day he 
made the announcement in Nipawin. 

 
And I quote further: 
 

But with several other Saskatchewan communities dealing 
with the fall out from fires, Calvert may have to be 
prepared to help them out as well. 

 
Mr. Speaker, with the total number of fires up 209 from last 
year, there can be no more hesitation from this Premier. People 
need to know what they can expect — what they can expect in 
terms of assistance from this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What a transformation, Mr. Speaker. A 
year ago, that member, his leader, the Finance critic, 
complained on a daily basis that we were adding new resources 
to the fighting of forest fires in this province. On a daily basis. 
Now we’re not hearing that this . . . this afternoon. 
 
I look forward to the comments that I’m sure the Leader of the 
Opposition will make later this afternoon. Will he be criticizing 
this government as he did a year ago for adding new resources 
to the fighting of forest fires in the province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let there be no hesitation about this. We will work 

with the communities of Saskatchewan, as I indicated in 
Nipawin, as we have indicated through the minister. We will 
work together to deal with the fires as they present today and 
the cost as they will present tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Performance of New Democratic Party Government 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
since the Premier seems to be so confident, perhaps he should 
then visit the Lieutenant Governor and call the election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — He seems to be a little reluctant to do 
that, though. Perhaps he has seen the latest polling. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. I gather he hasn’t shared the 
polling with the rest of caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Thursday we witnessed another characteristic 
display from the former Environment minister. The former 
minister refuses to take responsibility for her own problems. 
Instead she blames the media; she blames the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s review the facts. The media didn’t get the 
minister kicked out of cabinet. The opposition didn’t get the 
minister kicked out of cabinet. The minister got kicked out of 
cabinet because she wouldn’t keep her mouth shut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier agree with his NDP member 
blaming the media? Does he support that member’s threat to 
sue the media? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, while the member opposite 
concerns himself with events of Friday past, I want to remind 
him of another event of Friday past. That’s when hundreds of 
people gathered here in the Regina Centre of the Arts to 
celebrate, to celebrate those who have made their home in this 
city, those who have returned to this city, those who are making 
their home in this province, those who have returned to this 
province. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, what goes on here, what goes on 
here. They’ll use absolutely anything to divert attention in this 
province from the good news that’s happening all across this 
province. That’s what they’ll do. They’ll try to do anything in 
this context, in this House in question period to divert from the 
accomplishments of this session of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about the press. Well, I took a 
look at some press on the weekend. Here’s a little headline from 
the Saskatoon StarPhoenix: “Job opportunities abound” in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what’s going on in the 
province. I wish the opposition would get off the doom and 
gloom and get on with the good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. He wants to 
review the session. He’s fired a minister. They’ve had 
numerous investigations into the incompetence of their 
ministers that should have been fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just remember that this whole . . . where this 
whole problem started in the first place. The former minister 
couldn’t take responsibility even to mail her own brother’s 
birthday cards. They didn’t get mailed so she blamed someone 
else for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is typical of this NDP government. They take 
no responsibility for their actions. They blame the media. They 
blame the opposition. They blame all of their problems on 
everyone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the scandal surrounding the former minister is just 
one symptom of the lack and weak leadership and the lack of 
talent on the NDP benches, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Does the Premier think it’s right that his member blame the 
media and threaten to sue the media for her own mistakes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Cannington wants to review the session. Well here we go. In 
this session, a greenprint for ethanol production in 
Saskatchewan in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In this session, Saskatchewan’s first 
commercial wind power in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In this session, a 25-year gaming 
agreement with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In this session, May unemployment up 
— 11,000 new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Expansion of high-speed Internet next 
year and this to 256 communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — $1.2 billion for education — record 
number, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — 5.8 per cent increase in the Department 
of Health in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, 10th balanced budget, in 
this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this session credit rating 
upgrade from Moody’s of New York. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this session a whole 
government reorganization — fewer departments, more 
efficiencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Ten million dollar increase to 
municipalities, a new Cities Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The largest number ever of police 
officers in Saskatchewan. A coordinated strategy, a coordinated 
strategy to take on the sexual exploitation of children that are on 
our street. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
Premier continues to perpetrate the fantasy that the budget was 
balanced, Mr. Speaker. But even using the minister of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Members will come to order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even if you 
use the Minister of Finance’s numbers, the $45,000 surplus, the 
Premier spent it investigating his own ministers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, this is just another 
example of the bungling leadership and lack of judgment that 
we see every day from this Premier. The other day the Premier 
was asked, if he had to do it over again would he put that 
member back in cabinet, and he said yes. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Talk about not 
learning from your mistakes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The Premier isn’t learning from his 
mistakes, Mr. Speaker. According to one recent media report, 
NDP caucus workers were constantly complaining to their 
union about the member from Saskatoon Southeast before she 
was even in cabinet. In fact, he had more complaints about her 
than any other MLA combined and still the Premier put her into 
cabinet. It makes you wonder just how bad the rest of the NDP 
backbenchers really are. 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

 

Mr. Premier, why does the Premier continue to exercise such 
bad judgment? Why has he not learned from his mistakes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . going to continue to do, to do the 
kind of work that we’ve been doing in this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now let’s just, let’s just take a little 
further look at this session. These question period answers are 
too short. Let’s take a little further look at this session. In this 
session we’ve received the ACRE (Action Committee on the 
Rural Economy) committee report . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . one of the most fundamental reports 
in the future of rural Saskatchewan. During this session we 
listened to the people of Saskatchewan. We did not close rural 
hospitals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In this session we listened to the people 
of Saskatchewan. We reversed field on a long-term care 
increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we in the course of this 
session have offered support to the Farm Rail Car Coalition in 
this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’ve taken national leadership on the 
fight for a trade injury payment out of Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, in this session, in this 
session alone, we’ve authorized the funds for the Minister of 
Highways to complete paving and reconstruction of another 700 
kilometres of roadway in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — But just take a look at the human agenda 
in this session, Mr. Speaker. Look at the human agenda in this 
speaker. Look at the decline in the level of social services 
caseloads. Look at the new funding for education capital. Look 
at the leadership in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the kind of stuff we’re about, Mr. Speaker, not the doom 
and gloom and the diversionary tactics of the Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll convert for 
debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 411 converted to motions for debate 
returnable. 
 
Order, please. Order. Order. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 17 — Performance of Government 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
after the long Canada Day holiday weekend to come back to the 
legislature to try to do some business on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session thus far has been a terrible 
disappointment to the people of Saskatchewan as they look at 
the record of the government. They look at the failures of this 
government. They look at this government that is focused on 
internal problems and internal matters and seem to be totally 
oblivious of the problems facing our province and the direction 
that our province is heading. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, over the course of Saskatchewan’s 
history, and we’re approaching being 100 years old, and we’ve 
had our ups and down, Mr. Speaker. The province started off on 
a strong note back in 1905 with a lot of immigration into the 
province, a fast growing population. We saw much of the 
southern third to two-thirds of the province settled. 
Communities were rising up all over the province. There was 
schools being built, there were churches being built, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people that were predicting Saskatchewan’s 
future predicted that our province would attain a population of 
well over 1 million people very quickly. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, when this Legislative Assembly was built 
back shortly after this province was established, the people of 
this province expected our population to reach about 4 or 5 
million people, a bustling province, one of the largest in 
Canada. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon 
expected that by the year 1940 their population would reach the 
. . . 400,000 people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there have been some barriers in the way of 
growth in this province. And we all recognize that there have 
been two world wars, there was the crash of ’29 and the dirty 
thirties, Mr. Speaker, when not only Saskatchewan but most of 
Canada experienced some real difficulties and they experienced 
a stalemate or a pause in the growth pattern. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, at other times when Canada has grown 
immensely and when this province . . . when the nation as a 
whole has gone forward, there have been times, primarily under 
NDP governments, when this province has been stagnant or 
actually slipped backwards. 
 
We think of the 1970s, when this province should have been 
growing much more quickly under the Blakeney government, 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, we did not do the economic things that were 
necessary for the province to grow. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, more recently, through the ’90s, a time of 
unprecedented national growth, Mr. Speaker, our province has 
sputtered, stopped growing, and in fact right now our province 
is sliding backwards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the Romanow government the slide was 
beginning, but it was slight. But, Mr. Speaker, under the current 
NDP government, that slide has accelerated. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it is causing alarm all over the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is particularly disconcerting, and we saw it 
again in question period today, is the fact that the government 
seems to be oblivious — the NDP government, I should say — 
is oblivious to the fact that the province is not making progress. 
The province is not meeting its potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they chime and they chirp and they chorus over 
accomplishments that are rather pathetic, Mr. Speaker. 
Accomplishments that are often figments of their own 
imagination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the current time under this NDP government, 
we have returned to deficits by the Finance minister’s own 
admission. We have a deficit, Mr. Speaker. We have a cash 
deficit. And, yes, the former Finance minister, Janice 
MacKinnon, also admits, Mr. Speaker, that this province is back 
into deficits after a long . . . a lot of effort on her part to prevent 
that from happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only are there been deficits, but, Mr. Speaker, 
now we are plagued with scandals and all kinds of problems 
internally with the New Democratic Party. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess the problems reached their apex last 
week when the best thing the NDP could do in this House and 
the best use they could make at the time of the legislature was 
to somehow fabricate some kind of a motion that would 
indicate that the Saskatchewan Party was the same as the 
Liberal Party under Mr. Campbell in British Columbia. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you’re in trouble, like the NDP are in 
trouble, when you’re failing and when failure after failure 
mounts up, Mr. Speaker, what the NDP try to do is deflect 
attention away from theirselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why in that motion they didn’t 
address their concerns to the member from North Battleford. 
After all, he is supposed to be the Liberal member of this 
Assembly, perhaps the only living one left in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, we’re not here to either sing the praises or 
to criticize the Campbell government but what we do know 
about that government is that they faced a mess left behind by 
the NDP, just like this current NDP government is leaving a 
mess that the Saskatchewan Party will have to clean up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in British Columbia under NDP governments — 
Harcourt, Clark, and Dosanjh, Mr. Speaker, there were huge 
deficits, there were scandals from bingogate to the Premier’s 
deck, Premier Clark’s deck being built in lieu of a gaming 
licence being given to a friend. Mr. Speaker, there was the 

whole ferries fiasco where they built these hugely expensive 
ferries that didn’t go as fast as they were supposed to. They 
were over budget and they underperformed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what the NDP did in British Columbia is 
move that province from one of the wealthiest, most 
progressive provinces into a have-not province, if you can 
believe that, Mr. Speaker — the same as the NDP has done in 
Saskatchewan. We’re still a have-not province under the NDP. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP in British Columbia ripped up 
contracts. They had a contract with Carrier Lumber that they 
ripped up. They also have fabricated the truth, Mr. Speaker, just 
like the NDP in Saskatchewan ripped up written contracts and 
showed no regard for the letter of the law whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in British Columbia the NDP fired people just 
because they were related to people that were not perceived to 
be NDP supporters. That’s the status that occurred or that’s the 
. . . those are the events that occurred in British Columbia, and 
that is why that government was replaced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another . . . a minister, Mr. Moe Sihota, in British 
Columbia enrolled his kids in a private school while he was 
touting the public school sector, Mr. Speaker. That caused a 
scandal. And then Mr. Moe Sihota went on to build a new 
house with non-union labour, and that caused a kerfuffle in the 
NDP. Mr. Speaker, it was just from one disaster to the other. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we used to always laugh at British 
Columbia, and say, well the NDP out there are probably 
amongst the most incompetent in the country. Those poor folks 
in British Columbia are getting what they voted for — it will 
never, ever be that bad in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, nobody 
thought the NDP in Saskatchewan would drop to the level of 
the NDP out in British Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what else did the NDP do out in British 
Columbia? They increased taxes, they expanded the PST 
(provincial sales tax). Does that sound familiar — exactly the 
same thing that the NDP Finance minister in Saskatchewan did. 
He must have been reading notes from his colleagues in British 
Columbia, because he expanded the PST. While he was 
claiming to lower taxes with one hand, he was taking more tax 
revenue with the other through the expanded PST. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the justification for increasing taxes was because 
of an adviser named Mr. Ron Hickle, a former advisor to Allan 
Blakeney. Mr. Speaker, there are connections between the NDP 
in British Columbia and the NDP in Saskatchewan. And in fact, 
one of the most shocking things that I read just the other day 
was a statement by an NDP member on the other side here in 
Saskatchewan, in Crown Corporations Committee. It was the 
MLA for Saskatoon Idylwyld and he said: 
 

Well, I’m just alarmed by the word taxpayer because I 
think all citizens have an opinion on how these Crown 
corporations are run . . . not just a small segment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, now I know that the member is a new member and 
I know that the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld probably has 
much to learn. But you would think one of the first pieces of 
homework that a new member would do would be to recognize 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

 

how many taxpayers there are in Saskatchewan. If you just look 
at the number of tax returns, taxable returns filed in 
Saskatchewan is 481,000, the non-taxable returns are 224,000. 
So the total tax returns filed in Saskatchewan, 705,000 out of a 
population of under 1 million people. 
 
And the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld says that he’s 
alarmed by the use of the word taxpayers because he thinks that 
the general citizenship is more important; that taxpayers are just 
a small segment of our population. Mr. Speaker, that shows 
how misguided our New Democratic government is here in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, total disregard for the taxpayers. 
 
Now as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are employing a 
strategy of deflection to cover up their own incompetence and 
their failures. And let’s just look at a few of the failures we’ve 
seen over the past few years. Mr. Speaker, when I first became 
involved in provincial politics, we saw the nurses legislated 
back from a strike with a contract legislated as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that if there is a disruption in 
health care services, that government sometimes have to act. 
We recognize that. And we recognize that many governments of 
many stripes have legislated health care workers and other 
essential workers back into the workplace if contract 
negotiations have failed. 
 
(14:30) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, only under the NDP in Saskatchewan would 
they also legislate the contract, Mr. Speaker, and totally stomp 
all over the principle of collective bargaining — and that by an 
NDP government no less, and led, no less, by the former, by the 
former president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses who is 
the NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Saskatoon Eastview. And she was justifying this, Mr. Speaker. 
It tells you how quickly NDP members can flip-flop and how 
little their principles mean to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same NDP government that has been 
closing hospitals over the years, starting with 52 hospitals back 
in the early ’90s, closing the Plains hospital, and generally 
shutting down health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the same government that I mentioned that cancelled the 
GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts when they 
were already in force, Mr. Speaker. What should have been an 
illegal action, made legal by changing the law so that breaking 
the law suddenly became legal. Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to 
understand but the NDP somehow or another did it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP government that has most 
recently cut funding for agriculture, cut it by $50 million and 
then has the nerve to go down to Ottawa and ask them to 
increase their spending for agriculture. Yes that spending 
increase is required but the Minister of Agriculture takes a very 
weak position to the bargaining table when he himself is 
slashing his own Agriculture budget and demanding that the 
federal government increase theirs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that stood up in this House 
. . . the Minister of Environment stood up in this House and said 
we are not the least bit vulnerable to a Walkerton-style water 

quality scandal in the province of Saskatchewan, knowing full 
well, Mr. Speaker, that he had read a cabinet document that said 
we were very vulnerable to a water quality scandal of the same 
type and style as the Walkerton issue was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an NDP government that in the last election 
their very top election platform promise was to create 30,000 
new jobs. Mr. Speaker, well that’s a laudable number. It 
certainly isn’t as high a job creation number as we’re seeing in 
the other Prairie provinces — Manitoba and Alberta have 
certainly been outstripping that number. 
 
But you’ve got to start somewhere and so the NDP picked 
30,000 jobs as the number that they would try to create. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, what happened, the member from Melfort-Tisdale 
asks? Well I’ll tell you what happened. We went, from the 
number of jobs in 1999, we’ve gone down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were almost 500,000 jobs back when the election was 
called in 1999 and we’ve dropped down as much as 30, 35,000 
jobs below that level, Mr. Speaker. And we are still far below 
the number of jobs that existed in this province back in 1999. 
And that’s what I mean, Mr. Speaker, when I say that the 
province is declining, it’s going in the wrong direction. And 
that is under the watch of an NDP government. 
 
They promised 30,000 jobs. By their own admission they’re not 
going to make it. Mr. Speaker, it looks like we will have fewer 
jobs when the next election is called than we had back in 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wherever I go — and I’ve been all through 
Saskatchewan on a regular basis — the people of this province 
tell me they’re losing confidence in the NDP. They say this 
government has lost its way. They say this government has 
weak leadership. They tell me that they think the Premier of the 
province is weak. They feel that the Premier has a weak cabinet. 
They’re not sure who is doing what over there, and quite 
frankly, we’re not sure who’s in charge over there either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many times it seems to us that Frank Hart is more 
the premier of the province than is the current Premier. It seems 
like nothing gets done unless Mr. Hart gives his permission, Mr. 
Speaker. Unless CIC plays a role in any major economic 
initiative or action, it doesn’t happen. And that is an indictment 
and that is a sign, Mr. Speaker, of an extremely weak 
government. 
 
But let’s look at the crop of MLAs over on the other side and 
see why the people of Saskatchewan are losing confidence in 
their NDP government here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They see the MLA for Regina Coronation Park. They saw him 
fired. Mr. Speaker, they saw the MLA for Regina South and he 
was demoted. And then they look over at the MLA for Regina 
Wascana Plains and they see that she’s been fired from cabinet. 
Mr. Speaker, they look at the MLA for Regina Sherwood and 
he’s been excommunicated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they look at the MLA for Saskatoon Southeast, 
and we talked about her in question period today. She was hired 
and then she fired. And then she was hired and then she was 
fired. 
 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

It’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the province are 
losing confidence in the NDP government in this province. 
 
We look at the MLA for North Battleford, Mr. Speaker — the 
only Liberal that we have left in the House — and he was over 
on the other side, Mr. Speaker. And he deserted the coalition 
government and he joined the Karwacki party. 
 
Then we look at the MLA for Saskatoon Idylwyld. I mentioned 
him just a little bit earlier on, Mr. Speaker. But we think about 
the member that he replaced. She left in disgust because she 
knew that it was actually Frank Hart who was the premier of 
Saskatchewan, not the newly elected Premier who’s only been 
in office for a short time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we look at the MLA for Saskatoon Fairview 
and we understand he can’t wait to get out of cabinet — 
probably can’t wait to get out of caucus, Mr. Speaker. He’s had 
enough of that outfit. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you blame him? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker . . . No, I don’t blame him. I 
think a lot of people are wondering about their future over on 
the other side. Anybody that’s thinking on the other side, Mr. 
Speaker, beginning to look at their options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the MLA for Saskatoon Fairview that 
can’t wait to get out. And then we look at the MLA for 
Saskatoon Eastview and we understand that she’s looking for a 
better job if it comes along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the MLA for Cumberland and he wants 
to go back to school. He’s trying to find a way to get out of the 
NDP government as well. We look at the MLA for Saskatoon 
Nutana and she says she may retire, this may be her last session, 
Mr. Speaker. The MLA for Regina Victoria is in the same 
position. He may retire. He’s been removed from cabinet. 
 
The MLA for Saskatoon Mount Royal, the Finance minister, 
may retire. We understand that the MLA for Regina Northeast 
might retire. He’s never made it into cabinet. And finally, Mr. 
Speaker, we even understand that the MLA for Prince Albert 
Northcote may be calling this his very last session. 
 
Obviously if all of these MLAs are thinking about packing it in 
or, Mr. Speaker, if they’ve been fired, dumped from cabinet, 
Mr. Speaker, obviously the message that’s being sent to 
everyone in this province is that this NDP government is 
floundering. In fact it’s beyond floundering, Mr. Speaker, it is 
sinking. 
 
We have seen ministerial incompetence on the other side. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a . . . from an opposition perspective we should be 
overjoyed but it is a pathetic sight when we saw the Minister of 
CIC — every question that he’s asked, he cannot give an 
answer. I don’t think he’s given one straight answer in the 
House this entire session. He’s at arm’s length, he’s at arm’s 
length on every issue. His officials give him wrong information. 
He has to hire PricewaterhouseCoopers, Mr. Speaker, to try to 
get him out of trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he has wrong information about SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance); he has wrong 
information about SaskTel. He’s the minister in charge of a 
Crown corporation that’s playing the stock market in Australia 
and he doesn’t seem to mind that whatsoever even though he’s 
lost so much money. I understand the shares are worth about 17 
cents on the Australian stock market. That’s Saskatchewan 
money, Mr. Speaker, that’s going down the tube on the 
Australian stock market. 
 
And then we look at the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, I 
had the privilege, as Leader of the Opposition, to sit in on some 
of the discussions with the premiers and other opposition 
agriculture . . . other opposition leaders in the Prairie provinces 
to discuss the trade injury compensation that we were asking 
from the federal government because of the US (United States) 
farm Bill. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I heard our Minister of Agriculture talking 
about being part of this new agriculture partnership agreement, 
this new framework agreement that was being put in place. And 
he was discussing with his colleagues, the other Agriculture 
ministers, about what a wonderful deal this was going to be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we begin to ask the Agriculture minister 
questions about this new agreement in the House, and he 
doesn’t know the first thing about it. He doesn’t even know 
what’s going to happen to existing safety nets like NISA (Net 
Income Stabilization Account) and like crop insurance, Mr. 
Speaker, let alone any new details of the framework agreement 
that might impact what we had hoped would be trade injury 
compensation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MLA who serves as the Agriculture minister is 
totally out of his league. He’s not in the game, Mr. Speaker, and 
agriculture producers across Saskatchewan have suffered as a 
result. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at the record of the Minister of 
Highways. Mr. Speaker, he thought that he was doing pretty 
good. He got his budget up from about $250 million up to I 
think it was close to $300 million and he started to feel his wild 
oats a bit, Mr. Speaker. And he started to think well, I think 
we’ve got to have this money so we’re going to just . . . we’re 
just going to increase the long-term care fees for senior citizens. 
 
And he got so riled up about that, Mr. Speaker, that he just 
about blew the walls out of this Assembly when he said that’s 
the right thing to do. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, he so impressed his leader, the Premier 
of Saskatchewan, that the following day that the House sat, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier said he reversed his position, and he was 
going to cover the shortfall by taking away gravel money from 
the Highway minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Highway minister just lost $7 million to pay 
for long-term care fee stability. Obviously we believe that the 
fee . . . care hikes were excessive and wrong and we were very 
pleased to see the Premier recant on that. But it seemed rather 
amusing and odd that the Highway minister, who was so much 
in favour of that move, would pay the price by losing the money 
from his budget. 
 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at the Minister of Education, one of the 
transplanted Liberals who has thrown his Liberal membership 
in the garbage and now, Mr. Speaker, is sitting shoulder to 
shoulder with the New Democrats on the other side of the 
House. This Minister of Agriculture doesn’t even blink, doesn’t 
even bat an eye, when his officials tell him to expect a decrease 
in enrolment of 35,000 students by the end of the decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education should be alarmed. The 
Minister of Education should be worried about the loss of 
students in this province. And the Minister of Education should 
be worried about then the subsequent loss of teachers from our 
province. And then the closure of schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — But what does this Minister of Education 
do? This Minister of Education just pretends that nothing is 
wrong. He’s going to increase property taxes for every property 
taxpayer in Saskatchewan to keep the facade going that 
everything is all right in education even though . . . because 
under the NDP the population is dropping. We’re going to see 
fewer and fewer and fewer of our young people educated in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cabinet and these cabinet ministers are a 
shame to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think I’ve touched well over half of the members on the other 
side in talking about their incompetence and the problems they 
are having, but we haven’t talked yet about the Premier. But I 
was incensed and very disappointed in the Premier when he 
said that he was from a wee province. He said he was a wee 
Premier from a wee province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’m proud of Saskatchewan and I don’t think it’s a wee 
province. I’m not about to put my province down. I’m proud of 
Saskatchewan, even if the Premier of Saskatchewan calls it a 
wee province. He may be a wee Premier, he may be a wee 
Premier, but he is not the Premier of a wee province. 
 
We have one of the greatest provinces in Canada. A province 
that someday will move forward. A province that under a real 
government will see growth and will not be the laughingstock 
of the rest of the country like it is under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see a Premier that’s out of control. He’s lost 
control of his cabinet. We saw that with the minister of 
Environment. Mr. Speaker, we made the national news, not 
because of something good but because the Premier couldn’t 
even handle his own cabinet minister, Mr. Speaker, couldn’t 
release the report — still in trouble. 
 
We may now have litigation as a result, Mr. Speaker, of our 
Premier’s incompetence. He can’t manage his cabinet, Mr. 
Speaker. He can’t get along with his Minister of Justice. He 
can’t manage his spending. He can’t keep his Finance minister 
in check, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The result of course is that the NDP support is dwindling. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s like there’s a vacuum on the other side. There’s 
just nothing over there any more, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
and the people of Saskatchewan realize that. 

The people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in the NDP. 
And so they’re looking at what the alternatives might be. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we are so excited about talking about 
our plan to grow the province of Saskatchewan. That’s why 
we’re so excited about the fact that Saskatchewan can grow by 
100,000 people over the next 10 years if we remove this NDP 
government. 
 
That’s why we’re so excited about putting a social partnership 
together in Saskatchewan where business and labour and 
government and First Nations and municipalities come together 
in one . . . with one mind and that is a mind to grow the 
province of Saskatchewan, where they will all contribute to the 
growth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we believe that that’s going to happen prior 
to the province of Saskatchewan reaching its 100th birthday. 
There will be something to celebrate in the year 2005, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s going to be a celebration of the end of NDP 
government in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, the begin of 
growth and prosperity and vision being accomplished in our 
province. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is not a wee 
province. The province of Saskatchewan, land-wise, is one of 
the larger geographic areas in the world, Mr. Speaker. Larger 
than many, many countries — in fact larger than most European 
countries. Mr. Speaker, the problem is we only have 1 million 
. . . actually now we’ve slipped below 1 million people. Mr. 
Speaker, we do not have the people power that we need to 
develop this province. We do not have the tax base that we need 
to develop this province. 
 
We have a government that thinks if we’re going to establish 
any industry like ethanol, that the Crown Investments 
Corporation needs to be a partner in the equity position in those 
ventures or they will . . . they will not succeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that NDP attitude has not only created a lack of 
confidence from Saskatchewan people in our province but it 
also has created a lack of confidence among the investment 
community who bypass this province and look for other 
provinces to put their dollars into where governments recognize 
the importance of the private sector, where they recognize that 
the private sector must be regulated but not be subject to 
competition from the government itself. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that’s lost its way, a 
government that’s far more worried about internal matters. In 
fact I even hear that some New Democrats in Saskatchewan are 
plotting how they might replace the current Premier. They’re 
already trying to look at whether they should resign and come 
back or whether they should stay and, after the Premier’s 
defeated in the next election, how they might best position 
themselves to replace him. That kind of internal navel-gazing, 
Mr. Speaker, is not good for the province of Saskatchewan 
because there’s too much work that needs to be done. 
 
If we’re going to restore confidence of the people in our 
province, we need a government with strong leadership. Mr. 
Speaker, we need a government that knows the issues that are 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

important to people. We need a government that can come to 
grips with the agricultural issues facing Saskatchewan. We need 
a government that actually knows how economic development 
happens — not just talks about it, Mr. Speaker, and not tries to 
buy it with taxpayers’ dollars but actually knows how to create 
a climate where economic development happens. 
 
We need a government that can come to grips with the health 
care issue in this province. Just the other day I talked to a 
gentleman here in Regina who had to take his son to emergency 
because he wasn’t feeling very well. This just happened a few 
days ago. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the son . . . his son was complaining of an 
upset stomach and so he went to emergency — it was after 
doctors’ hours — and they checked him over and they said, if 
he gets worse, bring him back to emergency. And so the father 
and son went home. 
 
And the son was getting worse, so they took him back to 
emergency, to the hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, the father 
recognized that maybe there are others that are more critically 
ill than his son, even though his son was bent over in pain. And, 
Mr. Speaker, his son was throwing up. He waited and he 
watched. He paced. He consoled his son, Mr. Speaker. He 
talked to staff and, Mr. Speaker, nothing happened and nothing 
happened. His son was getting worse. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, an exasperated father — five hours in 
emergency — went to the head reception and said I’ve got to 
take my son to another hospital. If you can’t look after him, I’ve 
got to find some place that will. And finally, Mr. Speaker, some 
people got excited and they did some checking. 
 
And with all the money we invest in health care — your 40 
cents in every tax dollar going into health care — somehow in 
this system the doctor forgot to see the patient. I don’t know 
how it happened, Mr. Speaker. Nobody caught it. With all the 
bookkeeping and all the staff and all the support, you think they 
would have fixed it, Mr. Speaker. The doctor came five hours 
later and apologized, checked the young man over, realized he 
was having appendicitis attack. Mr. Speaker, thankfully that 
young man received attention before his appendicitis broke. 
 
And when we talk about the importance of our health care 
system, this is not a laughing matter. This is a serious and, for 
many people, a life and death matter. And this is . . . and the 
fact that our health care system is failing in Saskatchewan is 
another reason why the people of this province are losing 
confidence in the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken about the concern over education. I’ve 
spoken on the expense of investigations and the reports that 
have been made necessary because of ministerial incompetence 
and the poor behaviour on the part of the NDP government. 
There are more things that I could have talked about, but I want 
to make way and let my colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers 
speak. 
 
But I would close by saying Saskatchewan is too great a 
province to not have confidence in it, Mr. Speaker. Clean water, 
the clean air, the people with vision and determination and 
ambition, Mr. Speaker, our communities that have thrived in the 

past and want to move forward again are too great and too 
valuable to let slip away. We need a government in this 
province that can come to grips with the challenges that we 
face. A government that believes in this province, a government 
that will instill confidence in the people. 
 
We no longer need an NDP government that has shaken the 
confidence of Saskatchewan people. That is why, Mr. Speaker, 
that I would move, seconded by the hon. member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That this Assembly express its non-confidence in the 
Premier and cabinet, due to the NDP’s ongoing weak 
leadership and lack of direction in dealing with issues of 
importance to the people of Saskatchewan such as 
agriculture, economic development, health care, and 
education, and; that this Assembly further expresses its 
non-confidence in the current government due to the 
various expensive investigations and reports made 
necessary because of ministerial incompetence and 
behaviour. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to move this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and especially a pleasure from . . . 
being from central Saskatchewan, to be able to second the 
motion, Mr. Speaker, by the member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
A motion that clearly indicates, on this side of the House, the 
things that we’ve been hearing in Saskatchewan — be it urban 
or rural or northern, Mr. Speaker — that the people of 
Saskatchewan are tired of this government, that this government 
is tired. It has become extremely weak and ineffective and it 
completely lacks vision — completely lacks vision, Mr. 
Speaker, on the direction that is needed for Saskatchewan to 
grow and to grow by 100,000 people over the next 10 years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we take a look at this motion, I think 
there’s something we need to quickly remember here; that even 
though the people of Saskatchewan are frustrated with the lack 
of direction of this government, they’re frustrated by its 
ineptitude, they’re frustrated, they’re frustrated, Mr. Speaker, by 
its inability to even be able to deal with the most . . . the minute 
of calamities that seem to befall it, is that the people of 
Saskatchewan realize very distinctly, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar — who will lead the 
Saskatchewan Party into the next general election in this 
province and will be the next Premier of this province — the 
people of Saskatchewan are looking forward to that day when 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar will be the Premier of this 
province, can lead us out of the doldrums that we are now in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this all encompassing motion which speaks to 
economic development, it speaks to the lack of initiatives by 
this government surrounding agriculture, it speaks about a 
government that, that it seems to have . . . be dragging its feet 
surrounding the issues of health care and certainly they are, 
they’re very . . . it strikes me, Mr. Speaker, that forth wise is 
that this is a government that is completely uncommitted — 
uncommitted, Mr. Speaker — to the needs and the demands of 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

 

education for the 21st century. 
 
Now of course we’ve seen this government . . . And of course I 
was in a position in the early 1990s, Mr. Speaker, being with 
the Prince Albert rural school division — a school division that 
now doesn’t exist because of an amalgamation in the Prince 
Albert region — is that we had the misfortune of participating 
in massive cuts to education by this provincial government in 
the early 1990s. 
 
They seemed for some reason or other they wanted to use the 
backs of local taxpayers and the educational issue to help 
balance their budget. They were still freewheel spending in the 
open market, Mr. Speaker, creating more Crown corporations. 
That’s where that money was going. They told the people of 
Saskatchewan the money was going to balance the budget. In 
the long term it turned out that what they were doing, Mr. 
Speaker, was creating more Crown corporations. 
 
That seems to have been the priority of this government for the 
last 11 years, Mr. Speaker. A government that is taking 
taxpayers’ dollars out of education, out of the care of people in 
this province, out of . . . raising long-term care fees so that they 
can use those dollars, use those dollars, Mr. Speaker, to create 
more government industry in this province — a complete notion 
that has gone flying in the face, Mr. Speaker, of the rest of the 
world and how governments need to operate, Mr. Speaker, it 
doesn’t matter where you go. 
 
Let’s take a look at a few of these things that the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, has brought up in his motion so 
that we can get a clear understanding in this House of how 
someone like the Leader of the Opposition has a clear direction, 
a clear direction, Mr. Speaker, of how this province needs to 
move in order to better itself, and a direction that is clearly 
understood and is clearly accepted by the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we certainly know that with the latest round 
of polling that’s been done, Mr. Speaker, is that what we know 
is the people of Saskatchewan are ready for the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar to be the next premier of this province and we 
are certainly looking forward to that day. But the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, 
has set a clear plan in place. 
 
And let’s take a look at that. Let’s start with agriculture. Now 
let’s take a, you know, a short moment to take a look at the 
dismal record of this government in the past several months. 
 
We know that, as mentioned already by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, that in this spring’s budget in 
order to come up with this so-called budget, this fallacy of a 
budget that the member . . . Finance minister, the member from 
Saskatoon Mount Royal brought forward in March, Mr. 
Speaker, was that although he called it a balanced budget, 
certainly we found huge loopholes in his argument. 
 
But one of the areas that he attacked extremely was the farming 
community of Saskatchewan, our own agricultural community, 
one of the four backbones, one of the four backbones that drives 
the economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Fifty million dollars, as mentioned by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, Mr. Speaker, was taken out of the 

Agriculture budget in order to help the Minister of Finance 
prepare what he still claims is a balanced budget — $50 
million, Mr. Speaker. That certainly could be used to a large 
degree throughout much of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today we heard from the member from Lloydminster the 
concerns that he has in the Northwest around agriculture in that 
area of the world, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking at crops in that 
area of the world that, although they . . . poorly germinated, 
they’re barely out of the ground on top of that. Pasture land is 
actually deteriorating. It’s the first part of July, they still should 
be growing lush but because of the complete lack of moisture, 
Mr. Speaker, in that area of the world, in Saskatchewan’s 
northwest, pastures are deteriorating. The cattle have grazed it 
down almost to the ground. 
 
So what are the options that could be looked at around 
agriculture? Well it’s been suggested that maybe we could turn 
some of those cattle out into the cropland. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the drought is so devastating in that area of the world that we 
actually cannot turn the cows out into the cropland because 
there’s simply not enough there to actually feed the cows. 
 
And so then, Mr. Speaker, how did this government try to help? 
Well they take $50 million out of agriculture. That was 
certainly no help. 
 
The farmers of that area needed to move their cattle into more 
lusher areas of the province, but unfortunately in the spring of 
Saskatchewan there’s often road bans on. In fact . . . in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the road bans are so restrictive . . . and I know 
that from my own constituency where we actually have 
provincial roads where the road ban is down to 8,000 kilometres 
. . . 8,000 kilograms, Mr. Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, you 
can’t haul very much when you’re only allowed to haul 8,000 
kilograms. 
 
In fact what that only allows, Mr. Speaker, is a small farm truck 
pulling a trailer empty. That’s all that’s going to allow. So you 
can’t even get cattle on the trailer. 
 
So many of the farmers in northwest Saskatchewan went to the 
government to see if they could get overweight permits so that 
they could move their cattle from such a devastated drought 
area into the more lusher areas of the province, Mr. Speaker, to 
see if, you know, couldn’t help their cattle out a little bit. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Well what did the province do? Well first they said no. So then 
the farmers, being the wily businessmen that they are, Mr. 
Speaker, actually tried to move their cattle anyway. They had to 
get their cattle to where the feed is. And of course the feed is 
still growing. It hasn’t been put up for winter purposes, and so 
where it’s lush and green, they tried to move their cattle there. 
Well what happened, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This government, in their wisdom, in their support of 
agriculture in this province, actually fined the farmers for 
moving their cattle to pasture. Now is this the kind of 
government that we can expect to help rural Saskatchewan? 
Well we see over and over and over again, Mr. Speaker, this is 
not the type of government that supports rural Saskatchewan. 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

What we see here is a government that is in such disarray that 
they don’t even understand the issue in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And so there’s another issue that arose this spring, Mr. Speaker. 
Of course the United States of America has initiated a program 
to support their farmers because of the trade injury that is being 
. . . devastating across the rest of the world because of 
governments in Europe, Mr. Speaker. And the Government of 
the United States of America retaliated to protect their farmers. 
 
And so then it was appropriate, governments such as 
Saskatchewan and Alberta and Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, they 
went to Ottawa and said, this is a devastating international trade 
policy that . . . it needs to be addressed by the federal 
government. So while the other four governments, the other 
four governments, Mr. Speaker, were actually trying to 
negotiate with the federal government in Ottawa, what was this 
provincial government doing? 
 
Well today the Agriculture minister announced that he actually 
meets with agricultural producers about every six weeks. Well 
in this six weeks period of time, Mr. Speaker, farming can 
change quite dramatically in Saskatchewan. So meeting with 
farm groups in Saskatchewan every six weeks, you know, is 
akin to saying that well, I’m starting to plan my Christmas 
present buying spree, Mr. Speaker. This is a government that’s 
completely lacking in any type of vision for agriculture in this 
province. 
 
In fact this government was so . . . is so tied up in itself that 
when the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier should have 
been working on behalf of rural Saskatchewan and the people 
that are associated with the agricultural industry in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, what were they doing? 
 
Well they were tied up here in Regina. They happened to have a 
couple of cabinet ministers who couldn’t seem to keep their feet 
out of their mouth. And so what they were doing is hiring 
people to do studies and they were having meetings and they 
were talking about things and at the end of the day what did we 
find out? Well it cost us $75,000 to find out that we have a 
couple of incompetent cabinet ministers, which the members on 
the opposition side of the House already, had already pointed 
out to the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in . . . during that period of time, during that period of 
time, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity was lost in being able to 
negotiate and to be able to put forward the arguments in Ottawa 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan — the necessity for 
trade injury payments for Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry. 
And that . . . and that opportunity was lost, Mr. Speaker. The 
opposition party knew it was lost, the people of Saskatchewan 
knew that opportunity was lost, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
the government of the day, this NDP government, still doesn’t 
understand what’s gone wrong. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this is just a couple of examples of a single 
incident; how a government who is so inept, inert, as was 
brought forward today, because of the chaos that is wreaking 
through their cabinet and the caucus, that what’s happening is 
that the people of Saskatchewan are now being forgotten, Mr. 
Speaker, because of what’s happening with this NDP 
government and their lack of initiative in promoting this great 

province of ours. 
 
Now let me just talk about Saskatchewan here as . . . before I 
continue on with some of these other items that I wish to speak 
about, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan, as we all agree in this 
House, is one of the best provinces, one of the best places to 
live in the world. But what did we hear again in June, Mr. 
Speaker? That people are continue to leave this province in 
droves. The population is down again. 
 
The government keeps talking that, well, job numbers are up. 
Well we need this government to show us, Mr. Speaker, where 
the job numbers are up. Because I know that in my area of the 
world, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re anticipating some pretty large 
layoffs this summer — layoffs that can be attributed to the 
softwood tariffs in the United States — but nevertheless, we’re 
going to have large layoffs. 
 
So how can a government say that there’s been a massive 
increase in job numbers? We ask them to show us where those 
job numbers are, because we’re certainly not finding it in the 
forest industry, we’re not finding it in agriculture. Maybe 
there’s a little bit in tourism, although certainly we’ve heard of 
some stories lately, Mr. Speaker, that in the tourism industry 
they’re even having trouble finding people because, Mr. 
Speaker, people continue to leave this province in droves. And 
so how does that continue to help the economy of 
Saskatchewan when we have fewer people today than we did 
six months ago? 
 
But you know, you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s still a great place to 
live. But on this side of the House — on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker — we want to make Saskatchewan a great place to 
work. Because that’s one of the things you never hear from that 
NDP government — that Saskatchewan is a great place to work. 
They always talk about it being a great place to live, but those 
of us on this side of the House have yet to hear, have yet to hear 
one member on the government side of the House say that this 
is a great place to work, that Saskatchewan is a great province 
to work in. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after the next 
provincial election, I can assure you when the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar becomes the premier that this will not only be 
a great place to live but that Saskatchewan will be a great place 
to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — You know something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
in the area that we’ve been talking generally around, we talked 
about agriculture of Saskatchewan being a great place to work 
in the future after the next provincial election. 
 
It is economic development in this province that is going to be 
the engine that drives the future of this province. Because 
certainly we know on this side of the House all the 
opportunities that are available because we hear about them 
every day from the captains of industry, that there is a lot of 
opportunity in Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, we can take a look at the oil fields, we can take a look at 
the gas fields, the opportunities that could exist there. We know, 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

 

certainly when it comes to the area of gas, that our neighbour to 
the south is suffering an energy shortage. They’ve been quite 
pleased to be able to tap into this huge resource that we have. 
 
And there are members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that know clearly that there are large untapped reserves in this 
province. It certainly, the NDP government is not comfortable 
with the people of Saskatchewan knowing about. They seem to 
want to trickle out on a very long-term basis a little bit amounts 
of new reserves that are being found rather than attacking this 
massive market that is available to us. 
 
Because we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly in the area of 
natural gas, that this is one of the clean burning fossil fuels that 
we have, Mr. Speaker. That this is a fuel that does not 
contribute hardly at all to the greenhouse effect. And we should 
be tapping into that huge market. There’s a huge market, huge 
opportunity here. 
 
But rather, this NDP government in its inertia, in its inability to 
make decisions, keeps trotting out an old line to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we’ve heard many, many times, that they 
want to save Saskatchewan’s resources for a rainy day. 
 
Well maybe in Lloydminster and Prince Albert it’s not raining 
that much, but I’ll tell you what, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
certainly have some problems up there and there are people 
leaving those areas of the world in multitudes. And it’s sectors 
such as the natural gas industry that could provide jobs in 
Saskatchewan that would keep the young people of 
Saskatchewan here. And that’s only one small area, one small 
area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would be of a major benefit to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Because not only, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would it keep the young 
people here so that they could have the opportunities, the 
professional opportunities, that would arise from the 
development of this kind of energy, but you know what, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? The contributions that they would make to our 
Saskatchewan society, both financially through their taxes, but 
not only because of the goods and services that they’re going to 
need to purchase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be a great benefit 
to communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And it is those kinds of lost opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that are a great deal of concern to us on this side of the House. 
Now we certainly know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those kind of 
opportunities don’t seem to be of very much concern on the 
government side of the House. And the people of Saskatchewan 
know that and understand that very clearly. 
 
And so that’s why on this side of the House we’re certainly 
looking forward to the next provincial election, because we 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people of Saskatchewan are 
demanding a general election. They’re demanding it sooner 
than later because they want this government replaced with a 
government that is actually going to do something, that is going 
to allow economic development to happen in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And it is through, it is through those kind of 
initiatives that Saskatchewan is going to be able to grow and 
grow by 100,000 people in the next 10 years. 
 
Now certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can hear the member 

from Mount Royal talking about the fact that we’re going to 
have economic development in Saskatchewan. And he calls 
economic development a dream. Economic development is not 
a dream, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Economic development 
anywhere in the world is a reality. 
 
In fact there are very, very few jurisdictions in the world that 
have the restrictions on economic development such as we have 
in Saskatchewan. And it’s because of those restrictions that 
economic development is not taking place. And I’ve already 
mentioned the gas fields that could be developing and opening 
up in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But we also know that Saskatchewan is blessed with some of 
the largest heavy oil fields in the world — heavy oil fields that 
are basically sitting there waiting for, again, a rainy day as the 
NDP have termed it. They’re going to save it for future 
generations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, since the late 1940s we’ve been saving our 
resources for future generations. How far into the future do we 
start saving our resources? Do we save it for another century or 
two centuries? Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
need to start taking advantage of our resources now because as 
we certainly know that there are other alternatives that are being 
looked at for the future and we’re going to lose this opportunity 
if we don’t develop it now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Maybe we’re only going to get a few score years of opportunity 
to be able to reap the benefits of helping Saskatchewan grow 
and develop and become wealthy and become a have province, 
Mr. Speaker. Now wouldn’t that be something if Saskatchewan 
became a have province? 
 
We may not have a lot of time to do that and if we lose that 
opportunity we may never get it again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Those are just two small areas in economic development that 
I’ve started out with. And we certainly look around the rest of 
the province at many other opportunities. 
 
Certainly in my area of the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can 
talk about forestry. Now certainly in Saskatchewan, people in 
Saskatchewan say, well you know we have smaller trees and 
there’s . . . a little harder to access so it can’t be much of an 
opportunity. 
 
But you know who’s saying that? You know who’s saying that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? The NDP government. The NDP 
government again are putting restrictions in place to hold back 
forestry in this province. Certainly we’ve heard of lots of 
opportunity, and I know that this government has been trotting 
out a plan for an OSB (oriented strand board) plant in Meadow 
Lake. But you know what? They couldn’t seem to keep their 
fingers out of the pie. In fact what they did, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that they’re forcing on this company taxpayers’ 
money — taxpayers’ money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $50 million 
they’re forcing upon them. 
 
So let’s take a quick look at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
government is saying that we need to invest, as the province of 
Saskatchewan, $50 million in an OSB plant in Meadow Lake, 
forcing $50 million on a company that did not ask for it; that 
did not say to this government, if we don’t get $50 million 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

we’re not coming here. Instead they cut $50 million out of 
agriculture to give to a company to build a plant, who doesn’t 
want the money. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it sure leads us to wonder on this 
side of the House the priorities of this NDP government. For 
some reason or other they seem to want to get involved in 
private industry, but they don’t want to be able to provide the 
necessary, at-the-ground resources that people are demanding 
for the running of the province of Saskatchewan. And it is this 
kind of meddling that is holding Saskatchewan back. 
 
Because one of the things the people . . . the members on this 
side of the House on the opposition side, certainly realize, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the benefits that are going to be accrued in 
Meadow Lake, and certainly for a large surrounding area 
around Meadow Lake by the building of that OSB plant — an 
OSB plant, I must remind you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
could have built 100 per cent with private monies. 
 
The benefits that are going to accrue from that are very, very 
large. Because certainly we know that there’s an opportunity in 
the future for . . . when the softwood lumber prices turn around, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there should be some profits accrue 
from this. There’ll be corporate income tax to be collected. All 
of Saskatchewan’s going to benefit from that. 
 
Certainly the multitude of employees that are going to be 
needed at the mill, the multitude of employees, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that are going to need to work in our northern forest 
and our central forest to be able to provide the necessary raw 
product to the OSB plant, Mr. Deputy Speaker — those 
workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are going to be able to have the 
opportunity for good paying jobs, and be able to contribute to 
Saskatchewan’s coffers by the paying of income tax. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So we didn’t need to, as a province, become an investor in this. 
It would . . . It could have happened anyway, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We could have saved that $50 million, left it in 
agriculture so that agriculture could get through these tough 
times. But no, the government saw a need that they need to 
become an investor, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this industry. 
 
And so it leads us to worry and we’re certainly very concerned 
on this side of the House, in the opposition side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that kind of involvement from this 
NDP government, where they feel that they must become a 
player in the investment game, is actually driving investment 
out of this province. 
 
And certainly we’ve heard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there 
actually was problems surrounding financing of that project. 
And so then there didn’t seem to be a problem surrounding it 
before this NDP government became involved in it. The 
problems of financing seemed to arise after the NDP 
government became involved in it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it begs the obvious question: if financing wasn’t a problem 
prior to the announcement of this OSB plant, why did the 
problems arise afterwards, and why was it necessary for this 
NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to become involved in 

the OSB plant in Meadow Lake? 
 
Again, we want to take a look in the . . . continue in the forest 
industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the opportunities that could 
abound there. We certainly heard this past winter, this winter of 
2002, where there is a company in Alberta, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is looking to expand in the making of newsprint. 
 
Now certainly we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the amount of 
newspapers that those of us in the House peruse in keeping up 
with the daily news and what’s going on in Saskatchewan and 
certainly we know that there are literally tens and hundreds of 
thousands of people in Saskatchewan who do so just as eagerly 
and willingly as we do, and we take a look across Western 
Canada and in Eastern Canada, we know that you can multiply 
that many, many times, Mr. Speaker, because certainly 
Saskatchewan is only one-thirtieth the population of Canada. 
And so you multiply the necessity for newsprint in 
Saskatchewan across Canada, that there’s probably a huge 
opportunity here for newsprint in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So this NDP government, in their wisdom, trotted out the idea 
that we could have a newsprint plant in Saskatchewan. Again, 
it’s going to require literally scores upon scores of people to 
work at the plant, wherever it may be built, whether it’s in the 
Prince Albert vicinity or Meadow Lake or Nipawin. It’s got to 
have a large source of water. 
 
But what this government did is actually jump the gun on the 
issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They announced a newsprint plant 
for Saskatchewan when the reality of it was that this company 
only wanted to study the optics of whether it would even be 
feasible to build a plant in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what have we heard since, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well we 
haven’t heard one word since as to whether this plant is going 
to be viable, or whether they’re still interested in coming to 
Saskatchewan, or whether the corporate income tax structure 
. . . or whether the corporate capital tax structure is going to be 
of such a detriment that they may not want to come here. But 
we haven’t heard one word from this government in regards to 
that. 
 
So the people of Saskatchewan, who were very eager for this 
type of plant to come to Saskatchewan after the first initial 
announcement — imagine their dismay, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when they found out that it was merely a study. The NDP, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was going to have a meeting and they’re going 
to talk about it and we’ll see how things go and then we’ll 
discuss it some more and we’ll talk about stuff, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This seems to be the way the . . . this NDP government 
approaches issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They want to have a 
meeting. They want to study it. And then we’ll review the 
study. And then we’ll pass it on to a review committee to study 
the study. And then we’ll have a meeting. 
 
And as we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly there’s 
been other reports that have been brought to this legislature, is 
all they do is gather dust. They end up here in the Legislative 
Library sitting on the shelf, filling up space that could be more 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

 

appropriately taken up with things that are actually happening 
rather than studies of things that may happen or could have 
happened. And it reminds me of that short little saying, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — should’ve, would’ve, could’ve. And that 
seems to be the attitude of this NDP government. They could 
have been doing things and they should have been doing things, 
but reality was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they wouldn’t actually do 
anything. 
 
It takes me back as we talk about forestry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
an opportunity that was lost in the early 1970s that . . . It 
actually could have been resurrected by this government 
because they certainly talk about northern opportunities, 
wanting to have economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan. They talk about how good they have been for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the ideas that was bandied about many years ago was 
the viability of a pulp mill at Beauval, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Beauval in northern Saskatchewan. Beauval is in the 
constituency of Athabasca, represented by the member of . . . 
the Minister of Environment and Resource Management who is 
also the Minister of Northern Affairs. And you’d think with that 
kind of a portfolio that somewhere on the radar screen issues 
like this should be coming up. 
 
Well the people of Beauval certainly remembered that they had 
an opportunity for a pulp mill. They also certainly remember 
that it was an NDP government that took it away from them. 
And so lo and behold, much to their dismay, they lost that 
opportunity but they haven’t forgotten about it. 
 
And they’re still waiting for the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where there’s going to be a government who has the vision, 
who has the goal that northern Saskatchewan can become a 
great part of this province and can lead the way in economic 
expansion for this province. But again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
want to remind you that they know very clearly in northern 
Saskatchewan that’ll only happen when the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar becomes the premier after the next general 
election. 
 
And so then there was that lost opportunity by an NDP 
government who thought they knew what was best for the 
people, rather than the people knowing what was best for them. 
 
But you know, there are other opportunities that this NDP 
government has lost and continues to lose. We know that 
through the mid-1990s in Saskatchewan there was a few areas 
of the province that had large, devastating forest fires. One of 
the initiatives by forest companies . . . forestry companies, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was the opportunity to harvest the salvaged 
timber in there, in those areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These 
companies could go in there, quickly log an area, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and what would happen is they’d take out the 
salvageable timber, the marketable timber, in a very quick order 
because they have a very short time frame to operate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because after a fire there’s a lot of 
regeneration that’s going on. And so there’s a very short time 
frame — maybe about three years at most — and there are 
salvage companies out there that would be quite willing to do 
that. 
 

So a pilot project was actually started, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the mid- to late-1990s. And it worked very, very well. In fact, in 
fact what we understand on this side of the House, from 
information that we’ve been able to glean, is that the cost of 
fighting those forest fires in . . . may in all likelihood, Mr. 
Speaker, have been recouped, have been recouped through the 
sale of that timber and the provincial sales tax that was applied 
to those sales. So the government, through the simple salvage of 
timber that is lost in a forest fire, can recoup the entire cost of 
fighting those fires. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look then at that pilot 
project and how it’s turned out in the last few years. Well we 
know that companies have come to Saskatchewan because they 
thought there was an opportunity here. There was actually two 
of the pretty good-sized companies that set up shop here in 
Saskatchewan — one of them in Meadow Lake, one of them 
much closer to La Ronge. And then they were going to operate 
on salvaged timber, set up saw mills to operate on salvaged 
timber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that this timber could be . . . get 
some value back out of it rather than lost to time immemorial. 
 
So unfortunately, the project turned out great. Unfortunately, I 
say, because those of us on this side of the House understood 
the benefits from it. But those members on the government side 
of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP, never did get a 
grasp of the economy of this project; that you could actually 
salvage timber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that wealth could be 
created, that jobs could be created, that taxes would be paid, 
PST could be collected. The PST alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
would almost pay for the cost of fighting the fires. 
 
But an opportunity again is lost, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
this NDP government does not have the vision to understand 
that if you go in there and salvage that timber for lumber 
purposes, that there is a great economic benefit for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, they seem to be . . . get caught up in much wringing of 
hands and gnashing of teeth of what they should do next. And 
in the meantime, the wood has aged, is starting to fall down, 
there’s too much new growth coming in it now, there would be 
too much damage to those forests with the larger regrowth 
that’s in there now. And a huge opportunity is being lost. 
 
And unfortunately through all this process, through all this 
process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of those larger sawmills 
actually went out of business. They are sitting in Meadow Lake 
doing absolutely nothing, rusting, lost a significant amount of 
employment inside the town of Meadow Lake. And I’d sure like 
to have the member from Meadow Lake explain to this House 
how the loss of that business has contributed to the benefit of 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Because I would, I would dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
explain to him that the people of Meadow Lake are outraged 
and highly disappointed that their own member was not able to 
stand up for them in this House and in their caucus, and most 
importantly of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the cabinet, and 
explain to his own colleagues the importance of having that 
salvaged timber recouped for the benefit of the province. And 
certainly, most importantly or just as importantly for the benefit 
of his own constituency. 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

And that is a great deal of concern to all of us in this province. 
Because certainly on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we understand the importance of projects such as that 
even though the member from Meadow Lake may not as . . . 
understand them as clearly as we do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we continue looking at the area of 
forestry and the opportunities that are being lost, we certainly 
know on this side of the House, there was a very large fire and 
of course it was mentioned a couple of times today, close to the 
city of Prince Albert — a very old-growth forest east of the city 
of Prince Albert. There’s another forest there, old-growth forest, 
Fort à la Corne Forest, that over the last few years has suffered 
a few fires and that. There was opportunities there, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to address — to address 
the issue of salvage in that forest. 
 
And there’s going to be the issue of salvage in the Nisbet Forest 
after this large fire that consumed about 88 square kilometres, 
which is a pretty good-sized chunk of forest in southern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What kind of initiatives 
that are going to take place by this NDP government to be able 
to salvage some of that timber? 
 
We heard also today mention by the member from Carrot River 
Valley some of the costs that can arise from fires. And certainly 
the one at Nipawin accrued a six-figure bill to it in all 
likelihood, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But let’s take a look at the size 
of fire that was in the Nisbet Forest — a much larger fire, a 
much longer period of time to bring it to its knees, and so then 
the costs to that fire are going to be significantly higher. 
 
One of the ways this government could have recouped those 
losses . . . recouped that loss — because certainly we saw in 
their budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there was a massive cut 
to the Forest Firefighting Contingency Fund — and one of the 
ways they could recoup those monies, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
by harvesting that salvaged timber. 
 
So let’s hope in the next few days because we haven’t got a lot 
of time to wait on this, that this government will take the 
initiative to start those kind of salvage operations as soon as 
possible. Because as soon as that fire is out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the forest operators of Saskatchewan, the smaller 
forest operators of Saskatchewan, could be in there salvaging 
that timber and bringing some wealth into the Prince Albert 
region — bringing more wealth into the Prince Albert region, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And let’s hope that inertia and the 
wringing of hands is not going to prevent this government from 
making the appropriate kind of decisions that are necessary, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s going to continue throughout 
much of Saskatchewan this year. There has been a lot of forest 
fires, and certainly the member from Carrot River Valley has 
mentioned that forest fires at this point in time are up about 270 
fires over last year and that’s a significant amount. There’s a 
great deal of opportunity that could be gained here. I’m sure — 
I’m sure this government is going to be hearing in very short 
order from some entrepreneur in the Turnor Lake region of 
Saskatchewan, an area north of Buffalo Narrows, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where someone there might come up with an idea for 
salvage also. 
 
And we hope, on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the Minister for Environment and Resource Management 
will listen very closely to those ideas. Because he should be 
able to give the okay that it’s okay to . . . in northern 
Saskatchewan, to create wealth, to create jobs, and to put people 
to work in good paying jobs because that’s certainly something 
we know on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
opportunities in Saskatchewan’s woodlands can bring a great 
deal of wealth to Saskatchewan. Certainly, significantly more 
than they’re doing right now. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke about a couple of 
opportunities for salvage in Saskatchewan’s forests after a 
devastating fire has gone through it. But there are other 
opportunities that this government . . . has been brought to 
them. Certainly, it’s public knowledge that they’ve had ideas 
proposed to them about further development of forest 
opportunities. 
 
There’s been talk in Prince Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a 
finger joint plant. Now a finger joint plant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
takes small pieces of salvage lumber and moulds them together 
and it glues them together to make a straight piece of wood that 
can be used for a multitude of purposes. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Again, the lack of 
initiative, the fear of this NDP government to allow someone to 
have a creative project that’ll bring wealth to a region just 
seems to seize their hearts with fear. And so, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’ve lost a couple of opportunities. Well we haven’t 
lost them yet because certainly we know that after the next 
general election, when the member from Rosetown-Biggar 
becomes the Premier, that those opportunities are going to 
abound. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? That type of project, 
the one I was just speaking about, a finger joint project, will 
actually . . . is actually tariff exempt. It’s not subject to the 
softwood lumber tariff that the United States government is 
imposing upon lumber producers in our province, because it’s 
considered a finished product. It’s a value-added product. It’s 
worth a few more dollars. It’s going to be tax exempt. 
 
And so then why aren’t we doing those kind of projects in this 
province? Instead, we see an NDP government again meddling 
in the private sector with much wringing of hands and gnashing 
of teeth, afraid to allow projects such as that to go ahead. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that brings a great deal of concern 
to us on this side of the House. But more importantly, more 
importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a great deal of concern to 
the people of central and northern Saskatchewan that those type 
of projects aren’t in place now because they know very well 
that, over the past few years, there’s been a great deal of wealth 
that’s been lost in this province, a great deal of wealth that, 
through corporate income tax and personal income tax could’ve 
contributed to the health and well-being of Saskatchewan’s 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other areas of economic 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

 

development that need to be talked about also this afternoon, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the areas that’s of a great deal of 
concern and we see has a great deal of opportunity, an 
opportunity in Saskatchewan that is actually like no other — 
there is actually no other in the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
and that’s the tourism opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now certainly members on this side of the House have had the 
opportunity to travel in northern Saskatchewan extensively, to 
understand the hopes and dreams of northern Saskatchewan. 
And the people of northern Saskatchewan are saying that we 
have not even begin to scratch the surface of tourism 
opportunities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, on this side of the House we’ve actually had written 
questions to the government to try to help us understand the 
amount of leased land they have in northern Saskatchewan and 
north of the northern administrative boundary. How much land 
is actually leased out for . . . you know so we could get a grasp 
on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the kind of 
economic opportunities that are actually going on in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we found out that the percentage of 
land that’s actually being used for economic development in 
northern Saskatchewan is so minute that it doesn’t even register 
on the Richter scale, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gets below the . . . 
somewhere down .01 per cent is actually the amount of land in 
northern Saskatchewan that is being used for economic 
development. 
 
But we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are huge opportunities 
in northern Saskatchewan and more specifically in tourism. The 
people of northern Saskatchewan have been saying to this 
government — they’ve actually made proposals to this 
government — why can’t we have more opportunities for 
tourism in this province? 
 
Oh well, this government of course in their . . . because they’ve 
got much fear in their heart about what might go wrong, is that 
they aren’t able to see what might go right for tourism in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
northern Saskatchewan have some great ideas for tourism 
opportunities in northern Saskatchewan. They have 
opportunities that will bring Europeans into this province, that 
will bring Asians into this province, that will bring people from 
the southern part of North America into this province — people 
that will come here and enjoy the great beauty, the great 
opportunities that we have in northern Saskatchewan. But this 
government because of their fear and . . . basically their fear 
they might lose control of something is delaying and staying 
those opportunities. 
 
What needs to happen here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we need a 
government in place that has the confidence to let these people 
move ahead with the enthusiasm that they’re bringing to 
economic development in this province. Those entrepreneurs in 
northern Saskatchewan who have the will and have the 
initiative to bring tourism to a level in this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, where we can actually see Saskatchewan, and 
northern Saskatchewan more specifically, grow and prosper 
under a Saskatchewan Party government. And certainly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, on this side of the House we can hardly wait 
for that day. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here again we have a government that 
the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence in, which is 
why the member from Rosetown-Biggar has most specifically 
brought this motion today. Because after a four-day weekend 
we certainly know on this side of the House, and I suspect on 
the government side of the House too, is that the people of 
Saskatchewan have completely lost confidence in this 
government. 
 
They’re asking when’s the next general election. They’re not 
saying anything about oh, the government could have done a 
better job with agriculture. Well maybe the government could 
have done a better job with the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. Maybe the government could have done a better job 
. . . They’re just saying when’s the next election. They want to 
know when the next election is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so that’s why we get motions such as this, brought forward 
by the member from Rosetown-Biggar, because he knows, as 
well as I know, as well as the rest of the members on this side 
of the House and all — and all — the people of Saskatchewan 
are wondering when’s the next general election so we can throw 
out this inept NDP government and get moving on with our 
lives in Saskatchewan. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan 
are calling for. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve talked about three areas of 
economic development now that are extremely important to the 
people of Saskatchewan, but I want to talk about one more area 
yet in economic development before we move on to health and 
education. Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the great opportunities 
and one of the great lucks — and it’s just luck but we just don’t 
seem to understand when things are going well for us — is that 
Saskatchewan has been blessed with some of the most 
necessary and needed mineral resources in all the world. 
 
We know that in northern Saskatchewan we have some of the 
largest deposits of uranium anywhere in the world, we have 
some of the highest concentrates of uranium anywhere in the 
world, and that the world is clamouring for this cheap and safe 
energy output. So what’s this NDP government doing about it? 
Well again as I mentioned earlier, after much wringing of hands 
and gnashing of teeth, they’re not doing much of anything. 
 
In fact what the NDP government has bragged about is that — 
and to some degree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this NDP government 
has made a move that is of some benefit to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan, is that they put in northern hiring 
practices to ensure that the people of northern Saskatchewan 
actually can benefit from some of these jobs surrounding the 
nuclear industry. 
 
But what this NDP government failed to do, even though the 
world was demanding it, even though the rest of the world is 
demanding it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this NDP government failed 
to put in the policies that were necessary to expand that nuclear 
industry so that not only the people of northern Saskatchewan 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

could benefit . . . or few people from northern Saskatchewan 
could benefit from it. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to take a 
look at this industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see if we could 
expand it to the point where even more people from northern 
Saskatchewan can benefit from it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
even the tradespeople and the skilled people in southern 
Saskatchewan could benefit from the expansion of that industry, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Because we know very well that when we have higher oil prices 
in Saskatchewan, when we get into Europe and Asia, those 
prices get even higher. And those people are demanding cheap, 
safe nuclear energy and the people of Saskatchewan can deliver 
that. And why is this NDP government sitting on their hands 
waffling on an idea that is a great resource to this province and 
is a great resource to the people of this world? That’s one area 
we can look at. 
 
One of the unfortunates that the automobile industry in the 
United States, and certainly all of North America, have to put 
up with is that in their new . . . in new technology now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the computerization that takes place in 
today’s automobiles is that there are very specific rare earth 
elements that are being used nowadays. 
 
Well there are actually a couple of the areas, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that are very prolific, very prolific with these rare earth 
elements, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of them is China. Well as 
we know on this side of the House, a rather unstable 
government there, a rather unstable source, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And that is of a great deal of concern to the 
automobile manufacturers in North America. 
 
But there is another source, there is another source, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that could be of a great benefit to the automobile 
industry in North America. In fact it probably could be of a 
benefit to the automobile industry not only in North America 
but in Europe also, and maybe even Asia, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And that place is right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. There are areas surrounding what we call in northern 
Saskatchewan, affectionately, as the Athabasca Basin where 
there’s large areas of rare earth elements that could be 
developed. 
 
But you know what again, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because of the 
ineptitude and the inertia of this NDP government, mining 
companies around the world are waiting to see when this 
Saskatchewan Party government is going to take power, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, so that they can start to move in that direction 
of harvesting those rare earth elements so that . . . 
 
And you know what’s going to happen again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? It’s going to create more wealth. It’s going to create 
more wealth in Saskatchewan — high-paying jobs, people that 
are going to pay income tax, corporations that are going to pay 
corporate income tax. And that’s going to create a better 
situation for all of Saskatchewan. So that will be one more 
element, one more element, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we can 
start to help Saskatchewan from being a have-not province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and to start being a have province. Because 
certainly it’s of a great deal of concern to us; it’s a great deal of 
concern to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that Saskatchewan is a have-not province with all the resources 
that we have and we’re still a have-not province and yet the 
NDP government can’t seem to understand that. 
 
Now over in my neck of the woods again we have a great 
opportunity, and in fact just right in my constituency. Of course 
the government has mentioned on many occasions that this 
opportunity exists about 60 kilometres east of Prince Albert. 
Well of course the Minister of Industry and Resources lives in 
Prince Albert so that’s where he’s . . . that’s the description he’s 
going to use. I like to use the description that this opportunity is 
right in the middle of my constituency. 
 
And the member from Melfort-Tisdale likes to point out that the 
opportunity actually exists about 60 kilometres north of the city 
of Melfort. But the opportunity exists. It doesn’t matter if it’s 
east of Prince Albert or north of Melfort or smack dab in the 
middle of the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers and that 
opportunity is diamonds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have diamonds in Saskatchewan and we have lots of 
diamonds in Saskatchewan. When members on this side of the 
House have gone out to the diamond fields to see how things 
are progressing out there, what do we find? We find an 
enthusiasm to come to Saskatchewan to create wealth in 
Saskatchewan, to provide hundreds upon hundreds upon 
hundreds of jobs for the people of Saskatchewan for many 
generations to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what we find 
out there. 
 
So why isn’t this happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Why isn’t 
this government making a major announcement that there’s an 
opportunity here exists and they want to see this development 
go ahead? We haven’t heard anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
This government has been absolutely silent on this issue. What 
they’re saying is nothing. Why aren’t they saying something? 
It’s time to step to the plate and say why is this project not 
going ahead? That’s the billion-dollar investment that it’s going 
to take to create a diamond industry in this province. Where is it 
and why aren’t we hearing anything more about it? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Now on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 
going to tell you very clearly that when we become government 
we’re going to find out how long it’s going to take before that 
diamond mine’s going to be in operation. We’re going to know 
that on this side of the house. We’re not going to be sitting here 
in Regina wringing our hands, gnashing our teeth, wondering 
which cabinet minister is going to stick their foot in their mouth 
next. We don’t have to worry about that on this side of the 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Because what’s going to happen, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that we’re going to be out there making sure that 
that . . . those economic opportunities are being coming to 
Saskatchewan and are going to stay here for decades to come 
after that. That’s what’s going to happen when this . . . people 
on this side of the House become government after the next 
general election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just . . . it was just some comments I 
wanted to make about economic development, and certainly 
I’ve had the opportunity to say a few words about agriculture. 
But I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s absolutely crucial we just 
say a few words about a couple of other things that the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar mentioned in his motion, this motion of 
non-confidence. 
 
And the next one, the third one . . . item on the list, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is health. Now health care in this province is starting 
to become a great deal of concern and has been a concern . . . 
although it has been a concern it’s become a great deal of 
concern now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I take a look around at my friends and neighbours who have 
been trying to access the health care system, are getting caught 
up in the bureaucracy of the health care system. And I must, I 
must state that very, very distinctively, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is the bureaucracy of the health care system that members on 
this side of the House and the people of Saskatchewan are 
concerned about. 
 
They are certainly not . . . they’re not concerned about the 
quality of health care professionals in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Because we know on this side of the House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan know very 
clearly that we have some of the best health care professionals 
in the world. We’re doing everything we can to try to keep them 
here. 
 
We’re trying to encourage them to stay here, that things will get 
better after the next general election in Saskatchewan. They’re 
hoping, they’re hoping, Mr. Deputy Speaker — those 
professionals — that there will be a change in government. 
They’re crossing their fingers, they’re crossing their toes that 
the next general election will be sooner rather than later so that 
we can move on with quality health care in this province. 
 
Now it was mentioned earlier when, if we talked about studies, 
how this government has a tendency to do a study and then they 
review it and then they’ll hold a meeting, and then they’ll 
discuss things, talk about stuff, and then they’ll review that, and 
then, and then they’ll put a . . . have a report on the study and 
then they file it. It’s collecting dust. 
 
We have a report that was done by one of their own supporters 
who . . . what he believed was a clear vision of what should be 
done with health care. On this side of the House we didn’t agree 
with it all. There was some areas we agreed with. But what 
happened to that report? Well the government tinkered with it a 
little bit, looked at it, studied it, reviewed it, put it on a shelf 
somewhere, and then reduced the amount of health districts and 
said, this is our great plan — we’ll have fewer health districts. 
 
Well on this side of the House we asked them, well, how does 
that bring more nurses into the system, how does that keep 
doctors in Saskatchewan? What does that do for the backup 
services in all the hospitals in Saskatchewan — those health 
care professionals that are so crucial to providing quality health 
care for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well the government was absolutely appalled that we’d even 

ask that question. After all, we must have been sucking lemons 
that day, that we had the tart taste in our mouth. Who are we to 
be talking about health care in Saskatchewan? They’re the 
fathers of medicare in this province. Well they may be the 
fathers, but they’re quickly becoming the grandfathers of 
medicare. It is because of their own ineptitude, their own 
inertia, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are ending up with one of 
the worst health care systems anywhere because of this NDP 
government. 
 
There was actually very little they have to do to it. The member 
from Melfort-Tisdale has put together a quality health care plan 
for the people of Saskatchewan, endorsed by the people of 
Saskatchewan, a great deal of help from the people of 
Saskatchewan to construct the plan, specifically health care 
professionals — whether it’s in the nursing sector, whether it’s 
in the more technical sector, whether it’s in the . . . doctors 
participated in that — and came up with a very good plan. It’s 
even on our Web site, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that the people of 
Saskatchewan can have a look at what health care could be like 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the NDP government’s response to that was to get rid of 
health districts. They say that if we had fewer health districts 
and more people managing out of the city in the government, 
more government people, more bureaucracy in the Department 
of Health, that health care will be better. If we take money from 
health care and put it into health management, we’ll be better 
off. 
 
Well people on this side of the House know better than that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The people in opposition know very clearly 
that putting more money into management is not going to fix 
health care. It’s putting it into front-line services. The people of 
Saskatchewan know that we need to redirect the money that’s 
already in place. We need to redirect the money that’s already 
in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and put it into front-line services 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the things the people on this side of the House — 
and we certainly made that promise in 1999 — is that health 
care costs need to keep up to the cost of inflation. But what has 
the NDP government done? 
 
Well they were going to do all sorts of good things. They were 
going to have a meeting and we’ll study it. Well they did hold 
the study and then put it on the shelf. They decided to talk about 
stuff and ending up doing absolutely . . . virtually nothing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And we’ve ended up with a system that 
continues to deteriorate — longer and longer waiting lists for 
surgeries, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a loss of health care 
professionals that is arguably one of the highest in the Western 
world. 
 
So we asked the government: well what are you going to do 
about this? Well they’re going to have a meeting and we’ll 
discuss it and we’ll do stuff. In fact, when we questioned the 
Minister of Health on this several occasions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what is this government going to do to fix health care 
in this province? Well we’re going to have a meeting. 
 
We don’t need to have meetings. The reports have been done. 
There’s actually another report being done even as we speak 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

now, the Romanow Commission. All the information is out 
there on how to make publicly funded health care better. But 
this NDP government in their complete lack of initiative, in 
their inertia to make a decision, in their ineptitude led by the 
wee Premier from our wee province — which all of us on this 
side of the House take offence to, that we’re a wee province — 
that the wee Premier of this province is so afraid to make a 
decision that health care continues to deteriorate in this 
province. 
 
What we need is a plan. We need a plan to keep health care 
professionals in this province. That’s why the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar has brought this motion of non-confidence, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan have 
no confidence that this government can keep or attract new 
health care professionals to Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only do we need to keep the people that are here, we need 
to keep the ones that are going to be graduating in the very near 
future, whether it’s in the College of Nursing, College of 
Medicine, and certainly through the SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) courses, technical 
courses that are being offered in Saskatchewan. We need to 
keep those people here, but not only the people that are in place. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What we’re finding 
is that health care professionals are leaving and retiring faster 
than we can graduate them. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 
absolutely crucial that we start to keep these people here that 
are already here, keep the people here that are going to 
graduate, but we need to attract new people to Saskatchewan 
just to protect the system that we already have in place now. 
 
But we need the initiative, we need the initiative such as the 
initiative that’s going to be shown by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar when he becomes the Premier, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We need that kind of initiative that people are going to 
feel comfortable with staying in Saskatchewan, that going to 
have . . . He’ll have the initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
attract new people to Saskatchewan because they know that not 
only will Saskatchewan be a great place to live, it will be a 
great place to work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we certainly 
don’t see that from that NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— that Saskatchewan is a great place to work. 
 
It needs to be a great place to work because that’s how we’re 
going to be able to protect health care and the needs of 
Saskatchewan people not only in this decade but the decades to 
follow, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I mentioned earlier when I first started, 
I talked about education a little bit, the cuts that this 
government has made to education in the early 1990s with their 
lack of initiative to even be able to keep up with the cost of 
inflation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because certainly the cost of 
operating school divisions in this province has risen to a large 
degree. 
 
A lot of it, a lot of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of this NDP 
government, because of that lack of initiative to appropriately 
fund education, that we now have an attack on the property tax 
base that is virtually unheard of in the rest of the world, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 

Let’s just take a quick look, take a quick look around us. In the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the property 
tax base picks up approximately 60 per cent of the funding of K 
to 12 education in this province — 60 per cent. 
 
So how does that compare to our next door neighbours? Well 
lets, let’s move east to begin with, to the province of Manitoba. 
How much of the property tax base there goes towards publicly 
funded education in the K to 12 system? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll tell you. It’s 35 per cent. Only 35 per cent of the 
property tax base . . . of the funding of education comes from 
the property tax base in Manitoba, Mr. Deputy Speaker, only 35 
per cent — 60 per cent in Saskatchewan, but only 35 per cent in 
Manitoba. 
 
Well let’s make it even worse, and it can . . . it does get worse, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let’s go west. Let’s go west to that great 
downloading province of Alberta who continues to download 
on its taxpayers. How much of the provincial K to 12 education 
system is funded by the property tax base there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s only 26 
per cent. Only 26 per cent of public education in Alberta is 
picked up by the property tax base — 26 per cent in Alberta, 35 
per cent in Manitoba, 60 per cent in Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . and it wasn’t, it wasn’t that 
long ago, it was only a short time ago when I was on the school 
board, the Prince Albert rural school division, where it was 
almost . . . it was just over 40 per cent. Just over 40 per cent of 
the property tax base paid for the provincial funding of K to 12 
education. So that’s a huge shift. That is a huge shift. 
 
And I can remember when, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 
member from Canora-Pelly was the president of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association is that the school 
trustees at that time enacted a program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
have this government move towards a 60 per cent funding of 
education, K to 12 education in this province. A move towards 
60 per cent. In fact we had a slogan; we called it 60/40, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when I was a school trustee. 
 
And by golly, we almost became a prophet. We became a 
prophet in reverse, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We didn’t move from 
60/40 . . . to 60/40 funding. It moved to 40/60 funding, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That’s the NDP’s commitment to education in 
this province. 
 
And here we have a government that verbally espouses the need 
for publicly funded education, but unfortunately that’s all we’ve 
ever got from them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to be able to talk 
the talk. What we need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a government 
with the confidence to move forward, the confidence that 
education is an extremely high priority type of necessity for a 
new Saskatchewan, the type of Saskatchewan that is going to 
grow by 100,000 people in 10 years. 
 
And it’s that kind of confidence that we have on this side of the 
House, that education is important, that it needs more funding 
from the provincial coffers, rather than, rather than, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, taking money out of the General Revenue Fund, 
money that is put there by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for 
health, for education, for social services, for infrastructure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

 

And instead, what does this government use those monies for, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well we got $20 million in Atlanta, 
Georgia. We have $80 million in Australia. How does this help 
education and health care? Sixty-five million dollars in land 
titles to create a system that we already had. It doesn’t work. 
Sixty million dollars from the General Revenue Fund in cable 
TV by SaskTel, to invest in a system they don’t even know if 
it’s going to work. But it’s taxpayers’ dollars, it’s not their 
money, it’s not private investors’ money, it’s taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And it is this kind of inept attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
towards the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that is of most concern 
not only to us on this side of the House but to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan are tired of this 
NDP government’s ineptitude and attitude that it doesn’t matter 
because the taxpayers’ dollars of Saskatchewan belong to the 
NDP government. And we say after the next general election 
that’s going to change. 
 
(16:00) 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we said, made a few reports . . . or 
made a few comments about a few issues out there and so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think we need to take a look at just one more 
area, just one more area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is absolutely 
crucial, absolutely crucial, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to how we can 
grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 years. And that’s 
that we need a government, we need a government — and we 
will have a government, Mr. Deputy Speaker — led by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar, who’s going . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — . . . who’s going to invest in infrastructure for 
this province, who is going to invest in infrastructure for this 
province to grow Saskatchewan? That’s what we need in this 
province. And after the next general election, that’s what’s 
going to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, after the next 
general election there’s going to be a lot of members missing on 
that side of the House. In fact it . . . appropriately pointed out 
earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar. He named off a few members over there who 
are already starting to bail out. I remember those years in the 
late 1980s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the rats were leaving a 
sinking ship and we’re seeing the same scenario in today’s era 
now too in this NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so I remember earlier today in question period the Premier 
spoke that, by golly, the Department of Highways is going to 
fix and build up to 700 kilometres, 700 kilometres of road in 
this province this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 700 kilometres. 
Well now that seems like a, seems like a pretty good number for 
the NDP but of course they’re . . . being the small thinkers that 
they are, and of course we’re a lot bigger thinkers on this side 
of the House. 
 
Let’s put that in perspective. Let’s put that in perspective, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. If we look after 700 kilometres of road in this 
province of just provincial highways in this province in a year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to understand how many years 
it’s going to take to do the rest of them, how many years it’s 
going to take, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to fix all the highways in 
this province. It’s going to take 37 years — 37 years, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — to fix all the highways in this province. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the time we start today 
fixing the roads that they’re fixing now, and by the time we get 
to the end of the process, in 37 years the first road will have 
been deteriorated so badly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’ll be 
undriveable — much like the one that I have to use to drive to 
my farm, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is a principal . . . a main 
highway, a provincial highway in this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is this kind of lack of initiative 
that this government sees that they need to invest dollars 
throughout the world rather than in Saskatchewan. It is this kind 
of ineptitude that has led the member from Rosetown-Biggar to 
bring this motion that the people of Saskatchewan have no 
confidence, no confidence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
government. And that’s why, as the representative from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, I’m extremely proud today to second this 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and enter into this 
debate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard the members opposite talk this 
afternoon about their confidence in this government. Well at the 
conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be moving 
an amendment to the original motion. 
 
But before I get to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to spend 
just a few minutes talking about the official opposition and their 
position on issues throughout the province, that affect the 
people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We hear the members opposite day after day promise the 
citizens of this province every single thing that they ask for. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they promise everything to everybody without 
any concern about an ability to deliver it. They don’t talk about 
the financial consequences to the province. They don’t talk 
about having to make choices because of course in opposition 
they don’t have to make choices, Mr. Deputy Speaker; they can 
promise all things to all people. And they can promise to be all 
things to all people whenever they want and wherever they 
want. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do just that. 
 
But I have to, I have to remind the members opposite and the 
people of Saskatchewan that we had a government like that in 
the 1980s, a government led by premier Grant Devine. A 
government, a Conservative or a Tory government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that promised all things to all people. They promised 
that they’d deliver more than the people of Saskatchewan could 
afford. 
 
And what was the end result, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They went 
into debt. They went $15 billion in debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And out of that, Mr. Speaker, what was the legacy of that 
government? We are paying today close to $700 million in 
interest on that debt. The actions of the government of the 
1980s, the Tory government of the 1980s is handicapping the 
children of today. They’re preventing us from implementing 
programs; they’re stopping us from spending the money that’s 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

earned each fiscal year in this province because we are paying 
$700 million to the debt, interest on that debt. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it doesn’t 
matter that the members opposite went and had their official 
name changed to the Saskatchewan Party. The people of this 
province understand a Tory is a Tory is a Tory. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they hear, when they hear the 
members opposite spouting the exact same philosophical 
position that was spouted in the 1980s, that put this province 
more than $15 billion in debt, are they going to fall for it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? I think not. The people of this province are 
far, far too intelligent to do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t need 
another government in the future like we had in the 1980s. And 
it doesn’t matter if they changed their name. There is no doubt 
the Saskatchewan Party is no different than the Tory 
government of the 1980s, with the promises, the philosophical 
position, and what they do to this province. 
 
Now, it’s the same old people. There are members there who sat 
and worked in the offices of cabinet ministers in the 1980s, 
Conservative cabinet ministers. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do not 
need a repeat of the 1980s. 
 
So for those reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will move an 
amendment, seconded by the member from Regina Victoria, 
and I will amend the motion by removing all the words after 
Assembly and replace with the following: 
 

Express its continued confidence in the Premier, the 
cabinet, and the Government of Saskatchewan for their 
wise and prudent and careful leadership. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a very good amendment because it 
talks about the actions of this government and its leadership. 
And its leadership’s very, very prudent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government has made advances in the economy over the 
last decade. It’s made advances in education where we have 
now the largest education budget in history. It’s made advances 
in health care. We spend more than 40 cents of every dollar in 
this province on health care, Mr. Speaker. We have made 
advances in agriculture. We have helped through biodiversity to 
continue to make improvements in the agricultural sector in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is good news in this province. We’ve 
had members opposite talk about the doom and the gloom in 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the reality is, there is 
great news in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have seen growth, we have seen growth in this province. 
We have seen years of improvement. I want to refer to a minute 
. . . for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker, 
pardon me, to an article called “The Saskatchewan Advantage”. 
Now lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, this article appeared in an 
Edmonton paper and it talks about the advantages of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It talks about child poverty. And it talks about: 

Twelve years ago, the House of Commons passed a 
resolution to do its best to eliminate child poverty by the 
year 2000. This is a particularly important goal for society. 
Children live in poverty through no fault of their own. Yet 
poor children are severely disadvantaged in the 
opportunities they have and in their ability to create bright 
futures for themselves. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the . . . this 
article and the one province in this country that has done a 
significant amount to deal with child poverty. 
 

A report released earlier this month (and I’m quoting again, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the article) by the Canadian 
Council in Social Development found that Saskatchewan 
has done a much better job than either Alberta or Ontario in 
reducing child poverty, especially among single-parent 
families. Between 1993 and 1998, Saskatchewan cut the 
incidence of poverty among single-parent families from 51 
to 20 per cent. 
 

A drop of 31 per cent. It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

It accomplished this not by increasing welfare rates — rates 
for a single parent with one child were actually cut by 
almost 10 per cent — but by a myriad of other programs 
such as child-care subsidies, a prescription drug plan and 
provincial income supplement. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

In 1998-99, Saskatchewan spent $37 million on child 
benefit programs compared with $6 million in Alberta, a 
province with a population three times as large. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker, this is only one 
example of how Saskatchewan through its innovation and 
willingness to work with the people has been able to create 
solutions that benefit the people of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Conservative Alberta, the richest per capita 
province in this country spent $6 million on child welfare last 
year. And Saskatchewan, a province that has far fewer 
resources, spent $37 million. It’s about priorities. 
 
And the members opposite don’t understand about priorities 
because they want to promise all things to all people. But on 
this side of the House, we understand priorities and we will put 
children, we will put children first, Mr. Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you 
about the commitments that this government has made in a 
number of initiatives over the last several years, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to talk about one of the items that the members opposite 
like to talk about on a regular basis. I want to talk about taxes, 
something that the members opposite claim to have all the 
knowledge of in the world, Mr. Speaker. And they have the 
only plan that would ever work. 
 
But I want to talk about tax cuts in this province. Since 1993, 
provincial income taxes, sales taxes, and fuel taxes paid by the 
average Saskatchewan family have been reduced by 24 per cent. 
We de-harmonized the sales tax and have reduced sales and 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

 

personal income taxes in every budget since we’ve balanced the 
budget. 
 
We eliminated the flat tax. We eliminated debt reduction surtax. 
We eliminated the high income surtax, Mr. Speaker. We 
lowered provincial sales tax by 33 per cent and provided a sales 
tax credit to assist lower income families and people. We 
lowered the corporate capital tax rate for small businesses by 40 
per cent since 1991. And since 1991, we introduced dozens — 
dozens —of targeted tax and royalty incentives to help 
business. 
 
I’m going to mention some of the key areas that we in fact hit 
upon with tax reductions: manufacturing and processing, 
enhanced oil recovery, potash and base mineral development, 
aviation, film and video, livestock and horticultural facilities, 
and research and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is committed to building 
an economy but doing it in a sustainable way that allows us still 
to meet our goals of dealing with those very important priorities 
of child poverty. It’s not about cutting taxes in an unsustainable 
way that means you have to take from other priority programs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or, Mr. Speaker, we have worked very 
hard to do that in an environment of balanced budgets. This 
year, Mr. Speaker, once again, a balanced budget in very trying 
and difficult times. But the members opposite keep talking 
about the economy isn’t working, we can’t balance the budget. 
They talk doom and gloom all the time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk . . . I’d like to talk about what 
the Provincial Auditor says and this was on CBC Morning 
Edition, February 21, and this is a quote from Provincial 
Auditor Fred Wendel on the Saskatchewan economy. Mr. 
Wendel said . . . the question asked by Sheila Coles was: 
 

What kind of shape do you see us being in in a few years 
down the road? 

 
Provincial Auditor said: 
 

Well one of the things we have to put out each year is a 
report called Understanding the Finances of the 
Government. It tracks the government’s financial position 
and brings in economic indicators and shows the 
government’s net debt, which is the accumulated deficit 
compared to its gross domestic product which is like your 
family income. We compare that and we track that with the 
government’s financial condition which has been 
improving considerably over the last many years. 

 
And when we compare ourselves interprovincially, we stack up 
about third place in Canada, Mr. Speaker — third place in 
Canada. So we are one of the provinces better able to withstand 
a downturn in our economy now in comparison to most other 
provinces. 
 
So if we did end up . . . if we do have a deficit, we have a 
deficit. But we are in a much better position to deal with it than 
we were just a few years ago because our economy has grown 
so much and the government has reduced its accumulated 

deficit over the past few years. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor is an independent, an 
independent officer of the legislature that speaks on behalf . . . 
or is a watchdog on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to 
ensure the government conforms to its own rules. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what does the Provincial Auditor say? He says we are 
in a very good position to withstand a downturn in the 
economy. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about the initiatives that we have had in 
our budget, okay. But before I get to that, I want to talk for just 
one second about the fact that this year again, in what can be 
described as a very tough economic time in the province of 
Saskatchewan where there is some uncertainty because of the 
struggles in the agricultural community, but even in these very, 
very tough times, this government received a credit rating again 
this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We received that credit rating because the financial institutions 
in this country and those rating agencies that rate governments 
were very, very pleased with the government . . . the job being 
done by the Finance minister of Saskatchewan, Eric Cline, and 
the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would remind the member that he’s 
to refer to all members by their title or by their constituency and 
never by their direct name or, for all that matters, any other 
name. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I apologize for 
using the Finance minister’s name. 
 
But again, the Finance minister has done a terrific job on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan and has again, once again 
received an upgrading in our rating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the economy of Saskatchewan is continuing to grow. It’s 
had challenges because of a downturn in the agriculture 
economy, but it’s continuing to grow. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan have confidence in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They have confidence in this government, they 
have confidence in its people, and they have confidence in 
themselves. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am . . . or Mr. Speaker, I’m 
extremely pleased to move an amendment for the motion: 
 

By removing all of the words after “Assembly” and 
replacing it with the following: 

 
express its continued confidence in the Premier, the 
cabinet, and the Government of Saskatchewan for their 
wise, prudent, and careful leadership. 

 
Seconded by the member from Regina Victoria. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to participate in this debate. This matter of confidence 



2428 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

or lack of confidence in the government is not something that 
should be taken lightly. I last recall there being debates about 
real confidence in a government more than 10 years ago, in the 
final years of the Devine government in Saskatchewan when 
there were very real concerns about the economy in 
Saskatchewan, when the economy was faltering, when 
Saskatoon, as an example, was considered to be a town that had 
gone bust; that in Regina, both realtors and union members 
were on the same picket lines to decry some of the initiatives of 
the then Devine government; that fiscally, as a result, in part, of 
the mismanagement of the economy but generally the 
mismanagement of the government, the government continued 
to wrack up record, record deficits year after year to push our 
debt to the highest level in all of Canada. 
 
This was a time that population figures . . . we weren’t losing 
5,000 people a year net, we were losing 25, 30,000 people a 
year net, Mr. Speaker. Those were the days that we did see 
large shifts in the requirements for education funding to come 
from school boards as opposed to coming from government, 
although government did seem to have all kinds of money to 
wrack up record deficits. That was a time that the government 
decided to cut back on highways spending, although they did 
seem to have all kinds of money for other kinds of initiatives, as 
evidenced by their large deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yet none of the members who had spoken in this House at that 
point evinced any lack of confidence in the Devine 
administration at that time. And some of those members, Mr. 
Speaker, were either members of the Devine administration, or 
like the member for Souris-Cannington, ran on the PC ticket in 
the election. And they didn’t run because they lacked 
confidence in the Devine administration and those horrible, 
horrible, horrible statistics that were so evidenced of a great 
malaise and just a horrible government in the history of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that didn’t prevent them from 
supporting that administration at this point . . . at that time. 
 
To now talk about a lack of confidence, Mr. Speaker, given the 
fact that our economy is on the rebound that we will see 
population figures also increase as a result of that, that we are 
beginning to turn around the question of property tax load for 
those who are paying for education taxes, that we are beginning 
to see a turnaround in our highways, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t 
suggest to me any lack of confidence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It does suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the standards of what is 
expected from a government have been elevated, and elevated 
greatly, during the course of these last 10 years, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s to the credit of this New Democratic Party 
government administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are making considerable progress, as the 
people of Saskatchewan know. This is not cause for a lack of 
confidence; this is cause to encourage government to keep on 
with the excellent program that it has. And in order to do that, 
Mr. Speaker, I would certainly encourage people to attend to 
the business of the government. 
 
And having said that, Mr. Speaker, and to allow for that, I move 
that we now adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to go to 
government business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 32 — The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly . . . I look forward to entering debate on this particular 
Bill, an amendment to The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with amendments that are required 
to help move the old system of land titles registry into this new 
LAND (Land Titles Automated Network Development) system, 
or the automated registry system, the . . . quite often . . . that is 
being managed and operated by the Information Services 
Corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We certainly know of all the problems that have arisen out of 
this move to automate land titles registry and the transfer of 
land titles and so on. 
 
I thought perhaps I might just take a brief moment, Mr. 
Speaker, to briefly review our system of land survey and how it 
has served the property owners of this province for many, many 
years back when our great province of Saskatchewan was first 
set up as a province. 
 
And then of course it was realized that we need to divide up the 
province into parcels that are manageable for the on wave of 
immigrants and settlers that were moving to our province to 
take up the farming and residences within our villages and 
towns as they were developing along the rail lines and so on. 
 
And the system was designed that seemed to work very well. In 
rural Saskatchewan, it is a system of townships and ranges with 
meridians, starting with the first meridian and moving on to the 
second and third and so on. And that system seemed to work 
very well for many, many years and it was fairly 
straightforward. 
 
A title for a parcel of land or a lot, it was a piece of paper. It had 
the owner, the names of the owner or owners on the land. It also 
described the land of course or the property, whether that be a 
quarter of land or a lot in a town or a city or village. And it was 
simple. It was very convenient to transfer these titles, very low 
cost. And as I said, it worked very well for many years. 
 
Then for . . . but as time progressed and other jurisdictions, and 
I suppose there was a need to update and modernize this 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

 

system, this government decided that they are going to build a 
new system, something that other areas, other jurisdictions 
don’t have as far as this particular system. 
 
Now that was one of their choices. They could have chosen to 
look at some neighbouring provinces, seen . . . have a look and 
see what they have done and brought that system into 
Saskatchewan. But this government chose to reinvent the 
wheel. And it’s been wrought with numerous problems, Mr. 
Speaker. I know my office has, in the last six months or more, 
has received numerous complaints and concerns about this 
system. Complaints dealing with long delay and now more 
complaints about the excessive costs of doing simple things. 
 
And I might just explain, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll outline a very 
simple example. Two owners . . . two people have joint 
ownership of a piece of property. In this case, the example I’m 
thinking of, I believe there’s mineral rights attached to the land. 
Under the old . . . and the object . . . or the purpose of making 
changes to the title is that one of the owners has bought the 
other owner’s interests and now becomes the sole owner of that 
property. 
 
Under the old system, this was a fairly simple transaction, fairly 
inexpensive, really didn’t take a lot of time to accomplish it. 
 
Now under the new system it’s . . . seems that with the 
automation, it’s complicated the system. It’s added more work 
for all parties involved with the transfer of the title and certainly 
as more time and more people involved with the handling a title 
transfer translates into more money. And certainly the people 
that are either selling or buying — or perhaps both, depending 
on how they agree to share the costs — will incur considerably 
more costs, Mr. Speaker, to transfer title. 
 
So I think there needs to be a lot of work done in that particular 
system, Mr. Speaker, and the Bill that deals with the 
amendments, we . . . there are a number of questions that we do 
have, Mr. Speaker, but those concerns that we have certainly 
can be dealt with in Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 33 — The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 33, Land Titles 
Amendment Act — again, as with Bill 32, it again deals with 
amendments to the land survey and land titles Acts that will 
allow and perhaps expediate and fix some of the problems that 
are being experienced with the current automated land titles 
registry system that has been put in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I had indicated in my remarks with regards to Bill 32, there 
certainly is more . . . there are quite a number of problems and 
additional costs. And, Mr. Speaker, I have an example here as I 
indicated earlier as far as costs and I . . . perhaps I’d like to for 
the . . . put some of these comparisons on the record. 

(16:30) 
 
Looking at the two schedules of fees for the old system, the old 
land titles registry system and the new automated system, there 
is quite a significant difference in costs as I’d 
indicated earlier, and I would like to give some examples. 
 
Under a basic search of a title, Mr. Speaker — in other words 
an individual wants to look at the title of a property to see if 
there is perhaps a . . . who the owner is, if there is some 
encumbrances on the title and so on — a simple search under 
the old system would cost an individual $2. Under the new 
system that fee goes up to $6. For the register of transfer of a 
title, a title that is clear and free, unencumbered, and is merely 
being transferred from one individual to another, under the old 
system that was $64. Under the new system, it’s $160 — so 
some pretty significant increase there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To obtain a copy of a title, a printed copy, under the old system 
it was $6 and under the new system it’s $12. So just those few 
procedures which are normally involved in transferring title of a 
piece of property from one owner to another, we have a 
difference in cost under the old system of $72 and under the 
current system — this new and automated and supposedly faster 
system, Mr. Speaker — of $178, for an increase of $106. And 
this is a cost that has to be borne by the purchaser or perhaps if 
the purchaser and the vendor agree to split costs, the two parties 
will bear the cost. 
 
But that’s only a part of the additional costs that are associated 
with transfer of title, Mr. Speaker. I have talked to a number of 
people in the real estate industry and to lawyers and other 
agents who have dealt with transfer of title of property for 
many, many years, and what they are telling me is that under 
the new system there is a lot more information is required. It’s 
detailed information. I believe it’s three pages of information 
with a number of boxes that have to be filled out exactly and 
those sorts of things. And they are telling me that the time 
needed to be spent to prepare a package of information to 
transfer a title under this new system, their staff has to put in at 
least 30 or 40 per cent more time. 
 
And you know the old saying, Mr. Speaker, that time is money 
and of course, certainly that additional cost isn’t being absorbed 
by the person doing the transfer. It’s passed on to the people 
who have initiated the action and most often the purchaser of 
the property. 
 
Now one of the features that was supposed to make this system 
so great and more . . . facilitate the transfer of title more 
expediently and so on was that it should happen in a very short 
period of time. Same day service ultimately was the goal. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I talked to a lawyer’s office, last Thursday I 
believe it was, and they were telling me that no information 
could be received by ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) or be . . . or that their offices could get 
information from the land titles registry office. And that . . . 
And you know what the reason was, Mr. Speaker? The reason 
was that the fax machines were down. 
 
We’ve got an $80 million system that’s supposed to be on-line, 
same day, instantaneous land titles transfer, and we haven’t 
been there yet. I don’t know why it’s . . . Do we need another 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

20 or $30 million to fix this boondoggle that we have here, Mr. 
Speaker? It seems like. I would hope not. But it . . . for a system 
that costs 60 or 1 million and projected to cost $80 million, 
business couldn’t be done because the fax machines were down, 
Mr. Speaker. Well this is . . . this is certainly not acceptable, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now another attribute or sales points of this whole system as 
touted by this government is that they were going to be, once 
they got this system working — and that’ll be, I . . . I would, 
would suggest quite some long time; in fact, it may never work 
quite as it was supposed to, and flawless — is that they were 
going to be able to sell this system to other jurisdictions. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I would doubt very much that they’ll ever sell this 
automated land titles transfer system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In order to sell a system, first of all it has to work. And this 
system certainly doesn’t work as I’ve indicated. It’s costly. It’s 
taking far too long to have a title transferred. As a matter of 
fact, I was told today that the delay in Saskatoon is anywhere 
from 7 to 11 days. That doesn’t sound like same day service to 
me. And if you’re going . . . so you know, as I said, if you’re 
going to sell a system, first of all, you’d . . . it has to work. Well 
this system isn’t working. 
 
Secondly, in order to sell a system, you have to offer a complete 
support system to ensure that the people using your system 
have, when they encounter some technical problems, they have 
somewhere to call back to and get the help that they’re needed. 
So from talking to users of the system, that support system 
certainly isn’t in place. 
 
And thirdly, you’ve got to offer a guarantee. And you have to 
because there’s liability involved with transferring title. If it’s 
not done correctly, there can be some huge liabilities. And is 
this something that this government wants to undertake and to 
accept liability? I would think not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps cows would fly 
before they ever . . . this NDP government ever sells one of 
these systems to another jurisdiction. 
 
And as I indicated, there are a number of questions that we do 
have but I think, Mr. Speaker, that those questions can be 
addressed in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 48 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise today to speak to Bill No. 48, the changes to the 
alcohol and gaming regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very lengthy Bill. We see some 36 
changes as I went through the Bill and marked them off. So 
there are huge changes being put forth for the alcohol and 

gaming regulation Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess what’s most alarming about this Bill 
is the number of issues that are now going to be decided 
through regulation as opposed to before the legislature. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this become common throughout . . . 
theme throughout this Legislative Assembly sitting where many 
of the important decisions are now being removed from the 
legislature and are being decided in regulation, which is out of 
the view of the public and out of the view of the legislators. 
 
And we’ve seen this especially in Bill No. 61 to do with 
regional health authorities where many of the decisions are 
made by regulation. And people in Saskatchewan should be 
very concerned about that because then they lose the ability to 
have their member enter into debate and to debate it in the 
legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with regard to this Bill, we have now three 
pages that are under regulation that previous to now were in 
legislation, and they have been removed from the floor of this 
legislature and I find that very alarming. 
 
One in particular that has been put into regulation is the whole 
issue around acceptance of gifts which, as you know, was a 
topic of great debate in the legislature last year where the 
minister accepted gifts, and others in Liquor and Gaming 
accepted gifts from liquor companies and so on. And there was 
a whole review around that. 
 
Now instead of it be . . . coming before the legislature to be 
debated and to be talked about, these issues will be dealt with in 
regulation, and I find that very alarming that that is the move 
that this government has taken is to remove those issues from 
the floor. And I do not believe that it was what Justice 
Wakeling had in mind when he brought down his ruling that it 
should now be taken out of the purview of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many other areas of this Bill that we 
have some concern about, and certainly we’re concerned about 
section 133 which is what I just referred to where the . . . it is 
completely repealed and put all into regulation. 
 
Another section, Mr. Speaker, section 46 . . . and 45.1 which 
expands people and groups who are eligible to now receive 
permits in order to sell liquor and to hold events, and some of 
those changes now are that individuals and corporate applicants 
can receive permits. And it’s unclear what implications this is 
going to have to those people that presently are able to receive 
permits. And so there’s a . . . there is some concern around this. 
 
And if you refer to page 9 of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, if you’ll just 
allow me, it gives the new categories, and I’d just like to read 
that into the record: 
 

Adding new categories of eligible entities for commercial 
liquor permits. The amendments add new categories of 
entities that are eligible for commercial liquor permits 
including partnership of persons, co-operatives, non-profit 
corporations, regional park authorities, crown corporations, 
and credit unions. 
 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

 

This expansion of eligibility will not result in an increased 
number of persons seeking liquor permits because current 
ineligible entities restructure to conform with existing 
legislative criteria. 

 
And this is from the explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
there is some concern about this expansion, and how it’s going 
to impact on those that today are eligible to receive permits. 
 
And another part of this, Mr. Speaker, which I find a little 
strange is that they talk about that it might . . . you must focus 
on good character is a requirement in order to receive a permit. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess that is a judgment call and anyone 
can receive a permit and not act in good faith. Their previous 
character should not probably enter into this discussion because 
it certainly is a call by the person that is giving the permit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we go on further and talk along that same 
theme, under the horse racing part of the Act, section 10(1), 
they again talk about good character when they’re applying for 
a licence. And again this is certainly a judgment call and is open 
to interpretation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess in light of the fact of all the concerns 
that the horse racing industry has with SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) I find it quite ironic that in the 
Bill put forth by this government that they are talking about a 
good character requirement and using it as an argument and a 
prerequisite for obtaining a licence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had occasion to speak with many people in 
the horse racing industry and they certainly do have concerns 
with how their industry has been destroyed in this province. 
And it’s been destroyed because of an NDP government that 
did not see the value of a horse racing industry in our province. 
 
We’ve lost breeders, we’ve lost riders, trainers, the track 
personnel, those that supplied feed and equipment, and all the 
spinoff benefits from a horse racing industry. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve seen the loss of some 50 horse racing families that have 
left our province and gone elsewhere, many of them to the 
province of Alberta where they are appreciated and the industry 
is thriving. And we’ve certainly lost a heritage industry in our 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not because the people that are in the 
horse racing industry do not have the will to grow this industry 
here but they have been met with roadblocks at every turn by 
this government, who has in their wisdom decided that 
bureaucrats and those that have never been involved in the 
industry somehow know better how to run the horse racing 
industry than those people that have grown up in the industry 
and have made it their lifelong passion. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that this government would 
see a way to turning this around and changing, and certainly 
when the Saskatchewan Party becomes government we will be 
willing to work with those in the horse racing industry to try 
and regain this industry for our province. We see where the 
government is putting in some $1.6 million into paying for 
purses and so on, yet we have very few horses that are actually 
racing, very few people that are involved. 
 

But we’re still expending a huge amount of dollars and yet most 
of the money that is generated is generated through simulcast 
and teletheatre. And the only reason that there’s any 
entertainment of live racing in this province at all is because it 
is a prerequisite, you must have live racing in order to have 
simulcast and teletheatre. 
 
(16:45) 
 
So I think that this whole area needs to be very seriously looked 
at, and certainly the Bill only talks about good character being a 
prerequisite and very little else to address the concerns of the 
horse industry in Saskatchewan. And so I find it very faulty in 
that regard. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been debated in the 
legislature previous to today. We will have many questions in 
the Committee of the Whole, and I would now like to move Bill 
48 to Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 61 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 61 — The 
Regional Health Services Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
the second reading debate on Bill 61 this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is certainly one of the most important pieces 
of legislation that has been brought forward this session 
because, of course, it affects health care delivery in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and therefore it affects the health of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 61 comes in the wake of the 
government’s Action Plan for Health Care which was formally 
announced, introduced, in the province of Saskatchewan in 
December of last year. And now the Bill has been presented to 
the Assembly, a Bill that is very, very sweeping in scope; a Bill 
that replaces several other important pieces of health care 
legislation in the province; and a Bill that will reorganize the 
health governance system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think you’d forgive the members of 
the opposition, I think you’d forgive the people of the province 
for being very, very wary of Bill No. 61. They would be wary, 
Mr. Speaker, because it represents another phase of NDP 
reform of our health care, the first phase occurring in 1993 — in 
the early 1990s — in 1993 when the government’s wellness 
model was heralded by the NDP as their reform of our health 
care system. 
 
And what happened as a result of those reforms, Mr. Speaker, is 
now a matter of the public record — the closure of more than 
50 hospitals in the province of Saskatchewan, including the 
Plains Health Centre here in Regina happened in the wake of 
that reform. 
 
The waiting list crisis we’ve seen in this province has happened 



2432 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

in the wake of that first reform. The chronic shortage of 
front-line staff has happened in the wake of the NDP’s first 
reform of the health care system in 1993. 
 
And all of the problems, the significant concerns of 
Saskatchewan people with regard to health care have happened 
in the wake of this NDP government’s reform of our health care 
system that occurred in 1993. So the government embarked on a 
consultation process, on a third party review and they presented 
to the people the Action Plan for Health Care, and now as a 
large piece of that plan, Bill No. 61, The Regional Health 
Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill is very important not only of 
course across the province but it’s very important in southwest 
Saskatchewan and has been watched very, very carefully in 
southwest Saskatchewan by all of the residents there — prime 
among them, Mr. Speaker, those residents who can remember 
the formation of health care region no. 1. The very, very cradle 
of medicare in Canada happened in my hometown, Mr. 
Speaker, in Swift Current in that very, very early health district, 
that health care region. 
 
And so the people of southwest Saskatchewan and of Swift 
Current were very interested when they were hearing initially 
about the Fyke report and they noted with some concern that in 
his initial configuration of a potential map of regions much 
similar to what we’re dealing with today, Swift Current was to 
be collocated with Moose Jaw. 
 
Two large centres were to be collocated together and that 
caused a great deal of concern on the part of myself as the MLA 
but most importantly on the part of the people of Swift Current, 
on the part of those involved in health care delivery knowing 
that competition for scarce health care resources and facilities 
would be made that much more difficult by the fact if we were 
to be collocated with Moose Jaw. 
 
And so the city council and the health district and others in the 
community made a case, a strong case that when the final maps 
were drawn that Swift Current would indeed not be collocated 
with Moose Jaw but rather that we would be the centre of our 
own region. 
 
And while that much has happened in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
while that much has been proposed at least by the government, 
what is unclear is whether or not this government’s latest 
attempt to reform the health care system will bear any better 
fruit than its first attempt in 1993. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is still recovering from the NDP 
health reform of the early 1990s. And it has been a long and 
painful recovery of waiting lists and health care worker 
shortages and facility closures. 
 
And the government now has introduced Bill No. 61 and asked 
people to trust it, that this is the right thing for health care in the 
province. And it should pardon those people in the province 
who just aren’t quite ready to do that in light of the recent 
history. 
 
And I would just want to make these few observations about the 
Bill, both as a member for the legislature and an MLA in the 

entire province of Saskatchewan but more specifically as the 
MLA for Swift Current. 
 
We have a health care problem in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. It 
isn’t just about the facility, but that’s a big, big part of it. Those 
who are pushing for a new facility in the community of Swift 
Current — in the last session I introduced 6,000 petitioners into 
this Assembly who called on the government to build a new 
facility — those people understand that it’s not just about a new 
hospital. 
 
That the new hospital is just part of a plan to attract the kind of 
health care professionals we need to have the kind of modern 
facility we need to offer regional health care services to the 
region, to all of southwest Saskatchewan. But they do 
understand it’s important to have a modern facility. 
 
We don’t have that today in the city of Swift Current. We have 
a facility that was built in the late 1940s. Its last capital 
improvement came when I was in grade 6 in 1971. And since 
that date there’s no substantive capital improvement to that 
facility, Mr. Speaker. And the deleterious state of the hospital 
speaks to the fact that it has been neglected, especially in these 
last 10 years, by the Government of Saskatchewan, by the NDP. 
 
The facility, as it exists now, is literally falling apart. I hear 
from health care workers who work there, fairly consistently, 
very, very concerned about the state of the Swift Current 
hospital. 
 
And I have tried to give voice to those concerns in this 
Legislative Assembly and elsewhere, and will continue to do so 
and will use my remarks on Bill 61 to do that again. Because I 
don’t think we can say too often or too loudly that Swift 
Current needs a new facility; that we deserve and need a 
regional hospital to serve the region. 
 
This district does set out Swift Current as the hub of the region 
in the southwest. It draws it, it draws it that way on the map. 
But what the map doesn’t say, Mr. Speaker, is whether or not 
Swift Current has the kind of facility that we need to be able 
deliver, to deliver a regional health service centre for all of 
southwest Saskatchewan. Because as it stands right now, there’s 
a great concern in my hometown and across the southwest that 
the facility in Swift Current currently will not be able to do that. 
 
And that is why others that have spoken before me on this Bill 
have raised serious concerns about this government’s track 
record in health care and this latest, very top-down approach 
they’ve taken with Bill 61. And that’s what it is. It’s a very 
top-down approach that wrestles yet more control and influence 
away from local people over their health care system and places 
it with Saskatchewan Health and the Health minister. And I 
think there are . . . the other speakers that have gone before me 
have raised those very, very serious concerns. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the critic, the member for 
Melfort-Tisdale, and others want to speak very clearly to those 
concerns and ask questions that underscore those and other 
concerns in Committee of the Whole. And so with those very 
brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is prepared to see 
this Bill move to Committee of the Whole. 
 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 62 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 62 — The Health 
Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 
apportant des modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur 
la santé be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very tempting to use this 
opportunity to again speak about the need for a hospital in Swift 
Current. But I think we’ve covered the bases here in reference 
to Bill 61 and, in light of the fact that this particular Act is 
involving some consequential amendments arising from the one 
we just discussed previously, we’ll also be moving that to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 54 — The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad to have the opportunity today to talk about The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act. I think many people in the 
province are glad to see the parts of this Bill that are here. But 
the same comment, Mr. Speaker, came out of many, many of 
these people that come down to funding from municipalities 
and especially in this case our cities, towns, and villages out 
there who . . . they’re having to deal with water, sewer 
problems, infrastructure of one kind or another, Mr. Speaker, 
and the buck always seems to stop with the local municipality 
out there. 
 
This Bill covers a wide variety of things, Mr. Speaker, from 
property assessment to dangerous animals. But most of the Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, seems to be what the communities out there are 
quite satisfied with — in fact, in many cases, are looking for. So 
we will have some questions, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll deal with 
those in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 55 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 55 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The same, Mr. 
Speaker, as the previous Bill. I think the main concern to 
municipalities and the rural municipalities is also funding. In 
fact right now in parts of the province that are still in the 
drought situation and are hurting very badly, I think right now 

funding is even more crucial than it has been in the past. And I 
think by the end of this year, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see 
more arrears than we’ve ever seen before out in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Bill itself, Mr. Speaker, covers again a great deal of . . . a 
great area of points that actually municipalities out there were 
looking for and I think are quite satisfied with. So once again, 
Mr. Speaker, we will be asking questions on this Bill when we 
get into committee but . . . and I think have our questions 
answered at that point. So we would let this move on to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 56 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 
a pleasure this afternoon to rise and say a few words concerning 
the people of northern Saskatchewan and their hopes and 
aspirations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly an interesting Bill we have here — 
Bill No. 56, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve seen in this Bill . . . and sure we have 
some concerns. We certainly have a lot of concerns around 
funding, again for municipalities. 
 
And of course that’s one of the things that’s been promoted on 
this side of the House is that infrastructure is crucial for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and certainly the provincial 
government has a role in that. And the lack of initiative by this 
government in this area certainly is going to provide us with 
some opportunity when we get into Committee of the Whole, 
Mr. Speaker, to be able to talk to the minister about that. 
 
We do see some things in this Bill, such as the expansion of 
leadership opportunities for northern municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker. And certainly something that the people of 
Saskatchewan have been able to finally get through to this 
government. So it’s appropriate that the people of 
Saskatchewan have the opportunity to be able to show that they 
do have the ability to provide leadership in their communities. 
 
Certainly there are aspects of this Bill which speak about how 
to deal with the more mundane aspects of operating 
municipalities and how to help municipalities be able to become 
more in tune with what’s necessary in their communities, and 
they put the bylaws in place rather than have these aspects of 
municipal government looked after by Big Brother. 
 
And so we will have some questions about this Bill for the 
Minister of Government Relations, Mr. Speaker, and so then 
it’d be more appropriate to deal with this in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 



2434 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 69 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Thomson that Bill No. 69 — The 
Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 
Technicians Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. This is an interesting piece of 
legislation, not so much in what it does but in how it ended up 
being Bill No. 69 and where it came from. Because, as we are 
quite well aware, Mr. Speaker, that this originally, early on in 
this session was Bill No. 29. And we kind of wonder, how come 
did it go from 29 to 69? Is it more or less important? Is it bigger 
or smaller? 
 
And I think it has a lot to do with question period, Mr. Speaker. 
We know in question period we’ve been asking all kinds of 
questions and the answer that’s been somewhat prevalent in the 
last week or two. We get an address for the NDP headquarters 
and there’s some discussion as to what it really is. They have 
some address that I don’t think anyone’s been at. We always 
say at 666 chaos drive. I think this one relates to that chaos 
drive very well because how in the world could you have a Bill 
and get it all ready and present it as Bill No. 29 and then go 
back . . . and this by the way, Mr. Speaker, as you’re aware of, 
relates to The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists and 
Technicians Act is what it’s called. That’s what it was called 
back in Bill No. 29. 
 
However when they did that one they got it all wrong and then 
they did go back to The Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians Act or individuals and they told 
them this is not at all a good piece of legislation; you have it all 
wrong. This by the way, Mr. Speaker, would be a good time, if 
we had the time, and I’m not going to take it, to debate the 
merits of having a fall session because it would have given the 
opportunity for the government to go ahead and put this 
legislation on the table, would have given them from a fall 
session to some time in the spring to get it right. 
 
As it is, as I said earlier on, they came up with Bill No. 29. The 
government hadn’t done its due diligence and it was all messed 
up. So they came back with Bill No. 69. Now it’s interesting. 
When they come back with Bill No. 69, the same group that had 
the concerns about it the first time, the Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians, said that this is still all wrong. 
So twice in a row in one spring the NDP can get the same Bill 
all messed up. And I think that’s where the address that I 
mentioned earlier on — chaos drive — comes to bear and is 
very aptly put to this particular NDP government. 
 
So here we go again. We had the one Bill; it was wrong. We 
have another Bill; it was wrong again. And yet, Mr. Speaker, 
we need to carry this one on as quickly as possible so what we 
will need to do with this one, Mr. Speaker, is move it into the 
Committee of the Whole and deal with it there. And possibly at 
that point the NDP government would listen to some reasoning, 
listen to what the technologists and technicians have to say, and 
maybe when we tamper with the second Bill the second time 
around, hopefully the government will be able to get it right. 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we take Bill No. 69 and 
move it into the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 68 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 68 — The 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act as proposed by the NDP 
causes some great concerns with individuals in this province 
who have made a livelihood or developed businesses around 
providing consulting services to municipalities and to people 
concerned about the quality of drinking water in this province. 
 
There are some of those individuals and some of those 
businesses that have indicated to us that by Sask Water now 
becoming for all intents and purposes a consulting firm that will 
compete directly with these private sector businesses, that it’s 
going to be very difficult for them to survive. 
 
This is just one of the issues, Mr. Speaker, that we want to 
pursue, and we will be prepared to pursue that in Committee of 
the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 67 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorje that Bill No. 67 — The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 71 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorje that Bill No. 71 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act is an Act that 
comes about directly as a result of the North Battleford water 
crisis and some of the issues that were identified in Justice 
Laing’s report. Now I understand that in this Act there are some 
regulatory changes that were recommended by Justice Laing, 
but there are also a number of other changes that could very, 
very severely impact the way that municipalities do their job 
around the provision of safe drinking water to their 
communities. 
 
Some of the reporting provisions have caused some concerns 
and some questions within municipal government, and those we 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

 

would like to pursue further in Committee of the Whole, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 65 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand and be able to speak to the Bill No. 65, the 
forest . . . forest amendment Act. 
 
And I’d just like to say that this Act here, I believe, has a lot to 
do with the regulations and administration of the Dutch elm 
disease which is so prevalent in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As you know, in cities like Regina and Saskatoon and many 
other parts of the province, Dutch elm disease is thriving and 
there is a lot of concern with people in the province regarding 
this disease. 
 
This Bill allows the department to assume administration of the 
Dutch elm disease program by moving the authority of 
applicable regulations from The Pest Control Act to The Forest 
Resources Management Act. 
 
The other amendments in this legislation will authorize the 
department to set province-wide standards to govern planning 
and operational activities of all forest companies. Up until now, 
Mr. Speaker, such authority was separated . . . was separately 
spelled out in each licence granted. This new Act that’s 
proposed under Bill 65 will also provide more authority to 
penalize those in violation of the Act by broadening the scope 
of activities that can be penalized. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had a few people write in regards to 
this Bill and they have some concerns with it. And some of the 
concerns that I want to point out are the fact that . . . the 
concerns that the practice surrounding the imposing of 
administration penalties is that the administer delegates its 
authority to the local Saskatchewan Environment office, who 
are also charged on a day-to-day basis with directory . . . 
directing forestry activity in their area. 
 
And also another concern, Mr. Speaker, to this Act is where 
local forestry officials determine that a licence has committed 
an offence, they will investigate the allegation, accept 
submissions from the licence, and will therefore either accept 
the submissions by . . . or levy a penalty in accordance with the 
regulations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason that the members, regarding the 
. . . this forestry Act, have these concerns is they feel that the 
government has taken authority away from the smaller 
organizations and given it to the minister itself. 
 
There is no appeal for this progress . . . from this process, other 
than the way the justice review which essentially only deals 

with questions of law as: did the minister have the jurisdiction 
to impose a penalty? 
 
At the local level, personality issues arise and when local 
officials is both involved in the day-to-day management of the 
issues with industry, and is also the sole person to decide 
whether an offence has taken place. 
 
The proposed amendment also provides that a licence may be 
held responsible for . . . licensee may be held responsible for the 
actions of his contractors or employees even when they act 
according to the instructions within their authority. 
 
Essentially the government is saying, trust us; we will not abuse 
our authority. And that’s typical of our present NDP 
government: trust us. There are others who . . . whoever will 
also say that while this appeal has rarely occurred, the right to 
an appeal to . . . in a court, is the best safeguard that none will 
be required. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s some other questions that myself and 
some of the other members have in regards to this Bill, but I 
think we can move it on to COW (Committee of the Whole) 
and we will present our questions at that time. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 75 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 75 — The Cities 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill has been awaited very patiently and very eagerly by the 
cities of the province of Saskatchewan. They’ve put many, 
many hours of work into this Bill to remove red tape, to clarify 
a certain way that things are legislated. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will have many questions on this Bill, but 
find no problem with it to this point whatsoever, so we’ll get 
our questions answered in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 76 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 76 — The Cities 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant 
des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Cities 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill, I 
believe, was made necessary by the bringing forward of The 
Cities Act and again, once again, we will be able to get our 
questions answered in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

Bill No. 77 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 77 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2)/Loi 
de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 
boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on Bill No. 
77. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve already debated this Bill and it ties 
in with Bill No. 48, and so, Mr. Speaker, I move that we move 
this Bill to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 79 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 79 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think this Bill is very, very important to the well-being and the 
future of this province. We had an Agriculture Committee that 
worked on this for possibly a month. We heard presentations 
from people all over this province and we realize I think, as 
every member in here does, that there was a mixed reaction of 
those for and those against this Farm Land Security Act being 
opened up. 
 
But I do think, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very positive step — 
might even liked to have seen it gone somewhat further than the 
Bill itself states. But I think it’s a step in the right direction and 
I think it’s what the province needs for a prosperous future 
when we come to the agriculture problem we have in this 
province. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there’ll be questions 
brought forward about what is in the Bill, what is not in the Bill 
that was suggested by the committee, and we will answer those 
questions in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to express my reservations on some of the 
provisions of Bill No. 79, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Farm Security Act. 
 
Our farm land is second only to our people as our greatest 
Saskatchewan asset. We are blessed with more than 40 per cent 
of Canada’s farm land. While our grain and oilseed farmers 
have faced two difficult decades, I believe that in the long term 
there will be no more valued asset, in a world of food shortages, 
than good quality farm land. 
 
Our ability to build our own future in this province depends in 
part on our ability to control our land resource. With Bill 79, 
Mr. Speaker, we give up some of that control. Bill No. 79, the 
proposed law before us, makes fundamental changes to the 
rules governing who can own Saskatchewan farm land. It 
makes it possible for a broad range of Canadian corporations, 
syndicates, joint venture companies, and partnerships, to own 
an unlimited amount of Saskatchewan farm land with no 

provisions for the Farm Land Security Board to make a 
determination of whether these purchases are in the public 
interest. 
 
I do not believe this to be a wise path of action. Instead I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, we should be setting down well-defined, 
transparent criteria in legislation which the Farm Land Security 
Board would then use to assess each application to own 
Saskatchewan farm land that is made by a Canadian corporation 
or other Canadian owned entity. 
 
In effect the board would serve as our screening mechanism. It 
would approve applications to purchase farm land that are in the 
public interest by virtue of the fact that they better our 
community, create local employment, improve our provincial 
economy, and are truly environmentally sustainable. 
 
Canadian corporate land purchases that do not meet these four 
criteria should, in my personal view, be rejected by the Farm 
Land Security Board. However under the legislation now before 
the Assembly, they will no longer be reviewed and assessed by 
the board. 
 
Therefore there will no longer be any screening mechanism for 
purchase of Saskatchewan farm land by Canadian corporations 
that are not traded on the stock exchange. Mr. Speaker, I worry 
that this new legislation will be exceedingly difficult for the 
Farm Land Security Board to enforce. The existing board has a 
very limited budget and a very small staff. For example, how 
will the board actually determine where applicants reside? How 
will we know when purchasing entities are entirely Canadian 
owned? 
 
Since applications will no longer be needed from other 
Canadian citizens, just how will the board know when the 
purchaser of land is a Canadian citizen versus a situation where 
a Canadian citizen living in another country is quietly acting on 
behalf of foreign residents who want to control farm land in 
Saskatchewan? How will we uncover situations where the real 
purchasing corporation is actually hidden behind another 
Canadian controlled company, in other words a corporation 
behind a corporation with complex layers of directors and 
shareholders? 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the potential for abuse is real. 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will have a very difficult 
time enforcing this legislation and will find it difficult to 
monitor future land transfers. Mr. Speaker, let me say a word 
about why I do not believe, why I do believe we should not 
open Saskatchewan farm land up to ownership by Canadian 
corporation entities in the way the Bill proposes. 
 
First I worry about absentee land ownership in our 
communities. Non-resident corporate ownership will often 
mean the owner isn’t living in the local community where the 
farm is located and may not be contributing anything to the 
community. Second I worry about long-term vertical integration 
in which privately held Canadian corporations buy up large 
tracts of Saskatchewan farm land. Mr. Speaker, these are two of 
my concerns. 
 
The third of my concerns, Mr. Speaker, is with respect to land 
speculation. This I think is not a concern in the current context 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

 

of low commodity prices in the agricultural area. But, Mr. 
Speaker, in the event that commodity prices for agriculture 
products improve, this is a concern. And one only has to look 
south to states like Montana to see that the concern about 
privately owned corporations, non-agriculture corporations 
buying up large blocks of land for speculative purposes is 
indeed a worry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to make reference to one other concern 
before I take my seat. And this is actually my greatest concern 
about the Bill. And it relates, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that I 
believe this Bill runs the risk of opening the door to foreign 
individual ownership and foreign corporate ownership by way 
of a challenge under the North American Free Trade 
Agreement. 
 
Let me clarify that the Bill now before the Assembly does not 
permit any extension of current foreign ownership limits. The 
rules for non-Canadian owners remain at 10 acres for both 
individuals and non-Canadian entities, a policy I am very 
pleased is being maintained. The risk is, however, that an 
American individual or corporation will launch a challenge 
arguing that our legislation is discriminatory to Americans 
under the provisions of NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement). Such a challenge is particularly likely to come 
from American corporations. 
 
One of the basic principles of NAFTA is that American 
companies are to be treated like Canadian companies when it 
comes to rights of investment. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I worry 
that rights this legislature extends to the Canadian corporate 
entities that are not publicly traded will in turn have to be 
extended to American corporate entities that are not publicly 
traded. 
 
The result of a successful challenge by US or Mexican 
corporations to the NAFTA review panel could therefore open 
up our proposed legislation to ownership of Saskatchewan farm 
land by American and Mexican corporations as well as 
Canadian corporations. Should this happen, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people could lose control of their farm economy 
in a very significant way over a 25- to 50-year period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to express my 
reservations on this Bill, and I thank my colleagues on the 
government side for the opportunity to do that. And so those are 
my concerns, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak to 
Bill 79, The Farm Land Security Act. 
 
As you may know, Mr. Speaker, I was on the Ag Committee, 
the Agriculture Standing Committee, concerning this Bill. And 
we sat for many days — mornings and evenings — listening to 
representation from citizens from all over Saskatchewan. And it 
became very evident that there was a very . . . the people that 
made presentations were very divided on how they felt about 
The Farm Land Security Act and what to do, what changes to 
be made, if any. 
 
We had a number of people that came forward and felt a real 
fear about opening up the process. And that fear, I must say we 
all feel. We all took that into consideration. But I believe, I 

believe many of the concerns are . . . concerning opening up the 
Act are not well-founded. 
 
I believe at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, that times have 
changed. There may very well have been a case to keep these 
restrictions in place back in the ’60s and ’70s. The world has 
changed considerably since then and now we see Saskatchewan 
is in a position of needing huge sums of money to revitalize the 
economy, revitalize rural Saskatchewan, create more jobs. And 
as the ACRE report said, that we’re looking at needing a $20 
billion investment . . . a $60 billion investment over the next 20 
years. 
 
And I think that the case has to be made that allowing 
non-residents to purchase Saskatchewan farm land is not the 
panacea that’s going to solve the whole problem. It’s one piece 
in the puzzle. It may be even one small piece in the puzzle 
concerning encouraging investment in the province. 
 
And we listened to people with their fears and their concerns. 
And we also listened to a number of people that represented 
individuals or groups that said that we must move on to 
encourage investment to get Saskatchewan going. We need to 
open it up to non-resident ownership of farm land in this 
province. And again there, those people really felt the need for 
that change. They felt that the change had to be made for the 
future of the province in a positive way. 
 
And so at the end of the day the committee had to sit down and 
take all those divergent views into account and come up with 
recommendations. And I believe the Bill that we’re discussing 
today is a step in the right direction. I believe that opening it up 
to Canadians, whether they live in Saskatchewan or not, to 
owning and operating farm land is an important step. It’s a 
necessary step. 
 
Also opening it up to Canadian farming corporations that are 
100 per cent Canadian owned is another step in the right 
direction. I have some doubts about why it wasn’t opened up to 
other Canadian corporations, whether they are being traded on 
the stock exchange or not. If they’re Canadian companies with 
51 per cent of the shares held by Canadians I don’t see the 
reason why we couldn’t go that step. 
 
The other aspect of the farm security of course is the potential 
of opening up to foreign ownership. This Bill does not address 
that. That’s something that I believe needs to be looked at. I 
understand the concerns around to opening up to 
non-Canadians. I share those views as well. But I also recognize 
the very importance of attracting investment in this province. 
 
And when we discuss this issue with the people that made 
representation to the committee, and among the committee 
members, I think it was unanimous that we felt that there was a 
huge perception problem concerning the farm land security Act 
— that right now the farm security board was allowing I believe 
up to 90 per cent of all applications to be granted. So if all those 
applications are being exempt from the Act, what was the big 
deal about changing the Act? 
 
And I think it came down to, again, the perception that 
Saskatchewan is closed to outside investment. That’s the 
message that people are getting from outside Saskatchewan, 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

outside of Canada — that Saskatchewan does not welcome 
outside investment in agriculture. And we’ve heard a number of 
cases where people have applied to the board and have been 
granted exemptions, and then other people have applied and it 
seemed on the face of it, exactly the same circumstances and 
they were denied an exemption. So that created . . . creates a 
huge problem about perceptions. 
 
And as well as people from other province just hearing that 
there is this Act in place that we’re debating, and there’s the 
board in place, many people said, well I’m not interested in 
going, jumping through the hoops and the regulations and 
conditions that Saskatchewan has put in place. If they don’t 
want my investment I’ll go elsewhere. 
 
And they do go elsewhere. They’ll go to Manitoba. They will 
go to Alberta to invest in farm land and build their feed lots and 
their intensive livestock operations or buy grain operations and 
run successful businesses. 
 
So that’s the other thing that we had to wrestle with, was the 
perception that people and businesses outside of Saskatchewan 
had. 
 
There are a number of other areas that we talked about, was the 
concern about the . . . basically the foreign investment — I 
guess technically they’re Canadian investors — but Ducks 
Unlimited have had on the purchase of farm land in this 
province. Once Ducks Unlimited has purchased land, it’s out of 
farming for perpetuity, and that was a big concern to many, 
many people in the provinces. Many different groups made 
presentations concerning the actions of Ducks Unlimited. 
 
So that’s something that I think the government needs to 
address. They did not address that in the Act. I understand the 
board . . . well the board did tell us that they put a moratorium 
on any more Ducks Unlimited purchases, but with this Act the 
government does not give direction to the board concerning 
purchases by Ducks Unlimited. 
 
So there’s a number of areas around there that need to be dealt 
with, and have not been dealt with with this Bill. But 
fundamentally we believe that this is a step in the right 
direction, that we need to go further, but the government has 
decided not to go further at this point. 
 
So I would like as a member of the committee . . . It was a great 
opportunity to sit on the committee, to deal with the issues. And 
I would like to say again, step in the right direction. We need to 
go further, but not just in land, farm land security Act, but 
regulation and rules and conditions, and perception of rigid 
rules and conditions in this province, that other people in 
provinces and companies have of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we need to start moving on that whole area of rules and red 
tape. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would support this Bill as far as it 
goes. And we would like to let this go on to Committee of the 
Whole and ask more questions there. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just also 
like to add my comments as the Vice-Chair of the committee 
and again say that it’s very emotional — the hearings that we 
held, it’s a very emotional issue. 

We heard arguments on both sides of the issue. We found, or I 
found, that individuals that made presentations, if you did a 
quick tally, it was weighed more heavily on the side of not 
wanting to see changes; whereas organizations, the tally was 
weighed more heavily on the side of wanting to see changes 
made to The Farm Land Security Act. 
 
The basic clear message though for those who spoke on it was 
that the original intent of the Act basically had not been met. It 
was the understanding the intent of the Act was to keep the 
family farm relatively small, to make land affordable and 
available for young farmers to start. And in fact, it hasn’t done 
either of those things. 
 
Statistically Saskatchewan farms are larger than those of our 
two neighbouring provinces of Alberta and Manitoba. And the 
Saskatchewan farmer, the average age of the Saskatchewan 
farmer is as old and a little bit older than our neighbouring 
provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba . . . or sorry, Alberta 
and Manitoba. 
 
So if the Act, in fact, isn’t accomplishing what the goal was, 
what it was put in place for, then the question is why do we 
need to keep the Act in place and is it in fact being a deterrent? 
And there are some indications that perhaps it is. 
 
We heard from a number of different groups and individuals 
who said that it was a deterrent to investment coming to our 
province, and that is a very, very serious issue. So we need to 
consider that and that’s what, what I felt was extremely 
important to look at. And there was comments that Alberta and 
Manitoba have managed to attract investment dollars to 
intensive livestock industries — for example, Alberta with the 
cattle, Manitoba with the hogs — and perhaps this Farm Land 
Security Act was one of the factors that investors looked at and 
decided to invest elsewhere. 
 
So there was that factor. The other thing that was said by one 
particular presenter, which I thought was a good point, if it is 
indeed good public policy to depress the land prices through 
The Farm Land Security Act, then it should perhaps be financed 
by the government rather than financed by the farmers who 
wish to retire. Because they hardly can afford to be the ones that 
have to carry the purse on this type of public policy. 
 
So there was a lot of discussion amongst the committee 
members. There’s a lot of fears of change. There is fear that . . . 
of corporations buying large tracts of land. There’s a fear of 
vacant land owners. And we have to look at our neighbouring 
province of Manitoba which made its change, not all that long 
ago, and those fears were never realized. They haven’t found 
that they have more vacant land owners than they have 
previously or that corporations have . . . are buying large tracts 
of land. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add that I will be supporting 
this Bill. And the one thing in particular that I wish I would 
have seen in the Bill, and I’m hoping that the government will 
keep this in consideration, there are a number of concerns about 
Ducks Unlimited which is now the largest foreign land owner in 
our province and there are concerns about that corporation 
buying large tracts of land. They admit themselves that they’re 
buying it with US dollars. 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

 

They’re taking the land out of production. They want 
conservation easements which will take it out of production for 
perpetuity, and I believe that is a concern. And right now, 
presently, the Farm Land Security Board has a moratorium on 
the Ducks Unlimited purchasing any more land. And I would 
advise the government to look into this issue quite thoroughly 
and take heed to address the concerns there. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure to stand in the House today to participate in this 
particular debate this afternoon. 
 
Much of what my colleagues have said, I would be remiss if I 
didn’t emphasize again some of the points that they have 
highlighted. I don’t want to go on at length, Mr. Speaker, 
because so much of the material that they covered simply was 
adequate to address the concerns of the official opposition as it 
relates to this particular Bill. But there are a few points that do 
bear repetition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as one of the members of the official opposition 
who served on the Standing Committee on Agriculture which 
dealt with this particular issue of foreign ownership of 
Saskatchewan farm land, I was privy to the expressions of 
concern and interest by various groups. Some took a very 
negative view of the consequences of opening up Saskatchewan 
farm ownership to people who weren’t resident in this province. 
Others looked at it from a much more positive light and 
reflected on the possibilities that any changes in ownership laws 
might send a message of importance to people who were 
looking at Saskatchewan as a place where investment was 
welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to focus my comments, I think, in a fairly 
narrow area, and that has to do particularly with the fears of 
people as they relate to the changing ownership rules for 
Saskatchewan farm land. If fear of change is the only reason we 
are not prepared to proceed with this kind of legislation, then 
we are indeed a province that will not be well served. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fear is that if we change the ownership rules, 
we are going to see a flood of foreign investment here, a 
takeover of our land by people who don’t reside here. And the 
assumption, frankly, Mr. Speaker, is incorrect. I think it’s 
ill-founded, and I think it’s fear based on very poor practical 
reasoning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farm land might be owned by anybody, but it’s 
not a commodity that can be picked up and moved. You can’t 
take a quarter section of land and relocate it elsewhere. It’s not 
like losing a national treasure that is portable. Farm land is 
stationary. 
 
And in the case of farm land that might be owned by somebody 
outside of this province, it’s not as though that land will not be 
used for productive purposes. That land will in fact of necessity 
be put to practical use and productive purposes because the 
individual who expends money to buy that land is going to want 
a return on investment. So, Mr. Speaker, we are going to see 
investment in Saskatchewan farm land by people from outside 
of this province for a good purpose, a purpose that will be of 
ultimate benefit to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

If anybody took the time to listen to the recommendations of the 
ACRE report and give those recommendations serious 
consideration, the one thing that was stressed repeatedly was 
the amount of money necessary, the amount of investment 
money needed in this province to make rural Saskatchewan 
blossom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sad reality is that there isn’t enough money in 
this province alone to accomplish the purposes that need to be 
accomplished in rural Saskatchewan if we are to, not prosper 
but just stabilize the rural economy. 
 
(17:45) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, in my view, 
is sound, but it is only a tentative first step needed to be 
undertaken in order to achieve the investment opportunities that 
Saskatchewan wants to realize. 
 
And I think that having taken this initial step, we have sent a 
message not just to Saskatchewan residents who have moved to 
other provinces, not just to other Canadians who would 
consider investing here, but it is a signal, a positive signal, to 
investors of substantial importance around the world, that 
Saskatchewan has investment opportunities here and that we 
might eventually welcome their money in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1974 when this legislation was brought in, there 
was a fear that Saskatchewan farm land ownership would be 
overtaken by Europeans, by Americans. There was a concern 
that Saskatchewan born and raised young farmers wouldn’t be 
able to take up farming and to have enough land to make their 
enterprises a success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is, the fact is that after 31 or 32 years of 
existence, that particular piece of legislation has not 
accomplished its intended purpose. It hasn’t allowed for more 
young farmers to get started. It hasn’t allowed for them to 
prosper. In fact, it’s probably done the exact opposite of what 
was intended. 
 
We need to base our consideration of this particular piece of 
legislation on the facts. And the facts are, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan is in need of change and investment and 
opportunities for young farmers. And much of that will be 
achieved by investment in this province by sources or from 
sources from outside of the province. 
 
I’m glad that this particular piece of legislation opens up 
ownership to Canadian citizens and residents. I’m glad that it 
opens up ownership to Canadian citizens living outside the 
country. I’m glad that it opens up ownership to farm based and 
family owned private corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are all important changes. They aren’t 
enough to accomplish what we ultimately could accomplish, but 
they are important changes that will be to the benefit of this 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as a member of the official opposition 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, while I’m disappointed 
that the legislation brought in by the government does not go as 
far as the committee recommended, I’m prepared to support the 



2440 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

legislation as introduced by the government. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 57 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We see 
here this afternoon again Bill No. 57, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Amendment Act, the so-called replacement for our 
present no-fault system. It’s only somewhat of a replacement, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of a half measures type of movement by 
this government. They still can’t seem to be able to let go, Mr. 
Speaker, of the no-fault system. 
 
And so knowing that no-fault is not working anywhere else in 
the world, the complaints that have come to this government 
and certainly many times to the opposition, Mr. Speaker, in 
regards to no-fault, we see this government trying to make this 
half-hearted attempt to make some minor changes to this Act. 
 
There is one clause in here which we were interested in as 
opposition. Something that we’ve certainly promoted to a large 
degree is that there needs to be a measure, Mr. Speaker, of 
recognition for those people who are safe drivers on 
Saskatchewan highways. And conversely, Mr. Speaker, we 
need a process in place to increase the penalties for those people 
who are a danger to safe drivers on Saskatchewan highways. 
 
And now after many years of prompting by the opposition, and 
we see now that the government is taking our advice, and 
they’re introducing a program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to reward 
those people on their . . . when they renew their car insurance 
for a reduction of up to 7 per cent. You can gain safety points 
up to 7 per cent. 
 
I know on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I’ve . . . talking 
to many of my colleagues and virtually all of us are going to be 
able to participate in this program, and we certainly want to 
thank SGI for finally taking this initiative that we promoted 
quite widely. 
 
Nowhere do we see a program such as that we’ve had in the 
past, Mr. Speaker, where people who are safe drivers, who are 
very conscious on today’s highways, are penalized for being 
conscientious drivers. 
 
And so then finally Saskatchewan is taking that big step into the 
20th century and so we want to recognize — and certainly from 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker — that we are moving into 
the 20th century. We’re only 100 years behind everyone else 
now and so then we need to recognize that the members on this 
side of the House, after many years of pushing the government 
for this recognition, it is now taking place. 
 
Because what has been happened in the past, Mr. Speaker, is 

that those conscientious drivers on the highways, on our 
Saskatchewan highways, were paying a price for those who are 
less conscientious. And that’s unfortunate because what it 
meant then, Mr. Speaker, is that if you just wanted to, you 
know, basically turn your vehicle into a weapon is that there 
was no significant penalty for that, and that’s unfortunate, Mr. 
Speaker. So this new safe driver program is certainly going to 
provide a lot of initiative to Saskatchewan drivers to be more 
conscientious on Saskatchewan highways. 
 
But the big part of this Bill, the big part of this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, has to do with the adding a tort system to no-fault 
insurance. Now this is . . . it seems like it’s going to be a bit 
convoluted. We’re very concerned about adding tort to no-fault. 
How is this going to work, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And let’s just use an example, Mr. Speaker. Say there’s two 
friends that are looking at the system and of course they’re 
going to have a hard time looking at it now because the 
government has provided virtually no information on how a 
tort/no-fault system is going to work. So say into July now 
they’re going to be able to make a decision on how this is going 
to work and one of them chooses no-fault but the other one 
chooses tort. 
 
And the two friends go up to one of their cabins, and one of 
them might have a cabin up at a resort, and in the manoeuvring 
of vehicles inside of a small lane one of them bumps into the 
other. This is where we’re going to start running into some 
problems. This is where as opposition we see some problems 
with this Bill. 
 
What happens in that case scenario? One of the drivers is 
operating under the old no-fault system, which they’re going to 
be allowed to do, and the other one is operating under the tort 
system, which he is also allowed to do. So does that mean then 
that if you’re under the tort system and it was your buddy that 
backed into your car by accident, that you’re going to be able to 
sue him even though he’s under no-fault? Is that going to be 
possible? Or because one person is under no-fault, does that 
mean that if you elected the tort system, does that mean then, 
Mr. Speaker, that he’s exempt? That the gentlemen who’s under 
no-fault then is exempt from being sued by someone who’s 
under the tort system? 
 
So technically what could happen here, Mr. Speaker, is that 
only . . . if half the people of Saskatchewan choose the tort 
system, you’re only going to be able to be allowed to use it in 
all likelihood . . . This is what we’re very concerned about, Mr. 
Speaker, is that only if two people who are under the tort 
system are involved in an accident, is the tort system going to 
be allowed to work. 
 
And so then that virtually eliminates . . . you could eliminate 
virtually, Mr. Speaker, 75 per cent of the accidents from falling 
under the tort system. 
 
And this certainly . . . And we’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, from 
legal minds in Saskatchewan, and certainly from those people 
who are involved in the insurance industry, that this could 
become a very convoluted type of process where you have two 
systems operating under one umbrella. 
 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2441 

 

And so then because, because the government was unable to 
make a decision . . . and we spoke about that many times today 
and certainly the member from Rosetown-Biggar spoke about it 
quite illustriously, Mr. Speaker, about a government unable to 
make up its mind. As we see again in this Bill, Bill No. 57, a 
government completely unable to make up its mind of what it 
wants to do. 
 
They’re getting attacked from all sides because of no-fault 
system that was put in place quite a few years now in the early 
’90s by this government; certainly a system that was highly 
applauded by the automobile makers in Detroit, because we 
certainly heard a loud cheer rise up at that point because 
suddenly they’re not, not to blame for any of the problems that 
they might have accruing in their vehicles that could cause 
harm to someone. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government just couldn’t get their 
head around that no-fault is not working. A change is needed to 
be made. So they go to this half and half system that is going to 
be so complex, is going to cause a great deal of difficulties so 
that we feel, Mr. Speaker, we’re just not getting enough 
information. 
 
And so then because so much more needs to be learned about 
what’s going to go on in this system, because the government 
has not been completely forthcoming in dealing with the 
professional associations out there of how this new Automobile 
Accident Insurance Amendment Act is going to affect the 
citizens of Saskatchewan, it’s important that we have these kind 
of debates, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s important that the 
people of Saskatchewan through their MLAs get the 
opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to voice their concerns, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about how this . . . how this Act may or may 
not affect them. 
 
And certainly, when you go into basically a two-tier system, 
and certainly we see two-tier rising up from this NDP 
government on many occasions, when you go into this type of 
two-tier automobile accident insurance system it’s the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to be very confused about how this is 
going to affect them. Should we take tort? Should we stay with 
no-fault? These are the kind of questions that need to be 
answered before — before — it becomes time to renew your 
insurance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not afterwards. 
 
And it is because of this lack of forthrightness that the people of 
Saskatchewan are highly concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
so then because the Saskatchewan Party is working very hard 
with the professionals of Saskatchewan in regards to these 
changes to no-fault insurance that we would like to continue to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 70 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 70 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been looking 

forward to speaking to the Bill 70. This is a Bill that the 
government has been hinting at bringing in for quite some time. 
There is quite a history to this whole debate. 
 
The first sign that the government was going to introduce the 
hog industry into labour standards was back in the NDP 
leadership race where the present Premier promised that he 
would bring this in if elected to be leader of the NDP Party. 
And then later on we hear that the Minister of Labour 
announces at the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour that they 
will be introducing this Bill into the legislature in the upcoming 
spring sitting that we are now in. 
 
And it’s an odd way of introducing a Bill. It’s an odd way of 
advertising and speaking to the stakeholders about a situation, a 
Bill, a piece of legislation that affects a fundamental industry in 
our province. 
 
One has to look at why the government has introduced this Bill 
and the repercussions surrounding the introduction of this Bill. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it raises a number of questions, and some 
of the questions are . . . is why they are picking on just the pork 
industry and at this time leaving the rest of agriculture outside 
labour standards. And that’s a question that the hog industry has 
asked the Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, why they 
would be doing this. And again it goes back to a political 
decision made by the Premier and the Minister of Labour, not 
based on any need or necessity or fact, but based on a political 
decision to bring this legislation in. 
 
But we have heard that the . . . in correspondence from the 
minister to the pork industry that they will deal with the pork 
industry now and then discuss labour standards in the rest of 
agriculture later. Well that is not a . . . that is very disturbing to 
hear that type of response from the Minister of Labour. That 
means the government is considering at some date to introduce 
labour standards to all of agriculture and, as we know, that 
agriculture has been exempt from labour standards. And there is 
very good reasons why agriculture’s been exempt from labour 
standards and it is also the same reason why the pork industry 
should continue to remain exempt from labour standards. 
 
And the main reason is that in agriculture you’re dealing with 
animals. You’re dealing with seasons. You’re dealing with 
weather-related concerns, cycles, and agriculture doesn’t fit into 
a nine-to-five job. It is . . . the work needs to be done when it is 
ready to be done. You care for animals when the animals need 
to be cared for. You can’t just go home at 5 o’clock and leave 
certain jobs concerning feed and health concerns left to another 
day, because there could be catastrophic consequences to those 
decisions. 
 
And the pork industry is very concerned that . . . well not only 
their industry but all of agriculture, and the ripple effect it may 
have on the other parts of agriculture. 
 
The Labour minister did not consult properly with Sask Pork 
and the pork industry. At the end of the day, when pressed, the 
minister says, well we’ve been talking about it; it’s been in the 
newspaper quite a few times. That’s consultation. Well 
unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not consultation and 
the government really dropped the ball concerning this whole 
issue. 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

We are asked why would the government bring in this 
legislation. I would just like to point out some areas of the 
labour standards and compare that to what the pork industry, for 
the most part, is doing now concerning labour standards on the 
operations. 
 
Take, for example, a comparison of annual vacations. Labour 
standards — three weeks after one year of holiday; four weeks 
holiday after 10 years. For the most part, the industry gives 
three weeks after one year; four weeks after five; five weeks 
after 15 years; six weeks after 25 years, so above labour 
standards. 
 
Public holidays: labour standards — nine days per year, and a 
person . . . and in the industry they also give nine days per year. 
 
When you talk about minimum wage, minimum wage in this 
province has just been revised. It is now 6.30, I believe, an 
hour. The starting wage in the pork industry, for the most part, 
is $8 an hour, well above minimum wage. 
 
Personal days, sick leave: none required under labour standards. 
The industry gives three days per year. Dental and disability 
insurance: none required by labour standards, but the industry 
provides a cost share with the employees. Worker’s 
compensation: required under labour standards but not required 
under the pork industry. Dependant life insurance: none 
required. The company pays the dependant life insurance. 
Health benefit plan: none required under labour standards and 
the company is paying for a health benefit plan. 
 
And it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. So again one wonders why 
there was such a rush to bring the pork industry under labour 
standards when the industry already is meeting labour standards 
or is well above labour standards in many areas. 
 
The other indicator that government or politicians have is 
concerns brought to their constituency offices about problems 
in the province. Well again, have there been any concerns 
concerning not having the hog workers under labour standards? 
Well for the most part, none or very few. This has not been an 
issue. On the east side of the province where the bulk of the hog 
industry is, there’s been very few if none, no complaints 
brought to the MLAs in that area. The hog workers of this 
province are quite happy the way the industry was being run, 
how they’ve been treated. But again the government felt for 
political reasons that they had to bring in labour standards into 
being this session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to look again, as I spoke in The Farm 
Security Act, about perception in this province. And perception 
is such a critical item when we as a province need to attract 
investment. We need to send out the right signals to investors 
outside of Saskatchewan, outside of Canada, that we are 
welcome to investment. And again bringing the hog industry 
under the labour standards sends out the wrong signals, the 
wrong perception, to potential investors and either chases away 
existing businesses from the province or stops potential 
investors from coming into the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other item is . . . It’s such an obvious point, is 
that Manitoba — which has a well established hog industry — 
has not brought in labour standards to their workers. Alberta, 

again, which has a well-established hog industry, has not 
brought labour standards into its province. So one wonders why 
Saskatchewan — who has a fledgling hog industry, we have a 
growing industry and we want to grow the industry — why we 
would start putting up regulation and red tape onto a growing 
industry with such a huge potential in this province. 
 
And again, the only answer is for political expediency. The 
Premier promised it, so that’s what’s going to happen. It’s not 
based on any economic indicators or problems in the workforce 
or problems at the workplace. It’s just for political reasons and 
that’s an unfortunate way to run a province and to run a 
government when we are so . . . in such desperate need for 
investment capital to be brought into this province and to grow 
this province and create more jobs and to develop this province 
to the potential that we could have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just, for the record, want to 
say that we will be opposing this Bill for all the reasons I 
outlined. It’s an unnecessary Bill. There’s no need for it other 
than for the political decision that was made by the Premier and 
the promise that he made to organized labour to bring in labour 
standards into the pork industry without any need or reason. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 72 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to make a few comments about this workers’ 
compensation Bill. On the surface, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it looks 
like an unofficious little Bill. Really, a lot of the remarks in the 
Bill and a lot of the regulations are something that seem like 
they aren’t going to be disruptive to anyone. 
 
But the Workers’ Compensation Board itself is something that 
is a concern to many people, both employees and employers. 
And it’s a big concern to MLAs because I’m sure that most of 
us get a lot of our calls to our office regarding this office. 
 
Fiscal accountability is one of the issues that has come to the 
forefront about Workers’ Compensation. It’s something that the 
people of the province know that in the last year there was 
actually a $68 million mistake in this Workers’ Compensation 
Board, something that the actuary adjustment for the year 2001 
showed that the estimates of future costs of claims received in 
that year was going to amount to $69 million. 
 
That’s a huge amount of money. It raises a red flag to many of 
the people in the province, both employee and employer, when 
we’re talking about the concern that we have about this 
department. It’s actually a 48 per cent increase in Workers’ 
Compensation administration costs over the past six years. 
 
Now many of us in business know that workers’ compensation 
is something that we have to do; it’s a protection for our 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

 

employees. But none of us in business have known that we’ve 
allowed a 48 per cent increase over the past number of years. So 
it’s something that it’s a big concern and something that we 
want to look at. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a really delicate balance that 
government must achieve in making policy that’s going to be 
good for both employees and employers in the province, 
something that we know is going to be making a difference to 
people when they’re deciding if they’re going to start a business 
in this province. 
 
We all recognize the importance of having safeguards for our 
employees, but at the same time it has to be a situation that 
works for everyone. We know that this Bill is going to make 
changes to a number of issues. And we don’t have any dispute 
over the fact that things like burial costs have increased. We 
know that the amendment is going to allow changes to take 
place from 5,000 to $10,000 to pay for burials. 
 
We’re not disputing the fact that the last increase in wage cap 
was in 1985. The increase in the wage cap is now from $48,000 
gross to 51,900 and that’s something that is good. 
 
We realize that the amounts awarded for permanent functional 
impairment are completely out of whack with other provinces. 
And it’s important that we balance the needs in our province to 
other provinces because people have the opportunity to go right 
across this province, right across the country, Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to starting businesses in Canada. And we have to 
make our environment attractive to everyone, so again, for both 
employees and employers. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are concerned about the way 
Workers’ Compensation Board is working within the 
administration part of it itself. We also know that there is a 
two-year waiting list at the Worker’s Advocate before they can 
even appeal a person’s claim. It’s something that’s a concern 
for the employees of this province. 
 
And we are wanting to know if this Bill is actually going to 
make Workers’ Compensation more transparent. Are people 
going to feel like they have an opportunity to question what’s 
happening in the board and with a . . . both from the employer 
and employee perspective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many issues that we want to talk about 
with this Bill. We haven’t had the opportunity to discuss the 
impact with people across this province, so at this time we’d 
like to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I ask leave of the House to 
move to motions for returns (debatable) and at the same time I 
would ask leave of the House for the Opposition House Leader 
to be able to stand motions in the name of members of the 
opposition who may not be here. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave on two accounts. First of all is leave granted to move to 
motions for returns (debatable)? 
 

Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — And secondly is leave granted for the House 
Leader of the opposition to stand the motions which other 
people might not be here for . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Opposition and his caucus. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(18:15) 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 51 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I move no. 18, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for North 
Battleford that the order for the Assembly return do issue for 
return no. 51. Is the Assembly ready for the question? Let me 
go back one step. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the seconder is the hon. member 
for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 63 
 
Ms. Draude: — I move an order of the Assembly to do return 
63, seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: the name of each published 
department policy, report, study, review, or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessors, 
the Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 2001-2002 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 64 
 
Ms. Draude: — To move order of the Assembly for return 64, 
seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessor the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education, in the year 2000-2001 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 65 
 
Ms. Draude: — To move order of the Assembly for return 65, 
seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessor the 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1999-2000 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 66 
 
Ms. Draude: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale that an order of the Assembly to return 66 
showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessor the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1998-1999 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak against the 
resolution . . . or return no. 66, and subsequently as well for the 
. . . through to return no. 72, for all the same reasons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all hon. members will be aware that there has been 
a recent reorganization, and the departments of Education and 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, along with the 
Provincial Library and the early childhood development unit 
from Saskatchewan Health have been consolidated to the new 
Department of Learning and created the need for the 
consolidation of many files within the new department. 
 
The transition of the files among all the department’s units 
makes this collection of information a hugely time-consuming 
task, and we would require person hours that are hard to 
estimate but large without a doubt to search through the 
information from government storage. 
 
And as we go through these, we’ll see here, Mr. Speaker, that 
these requests go back as far as 10 years. It is an immense 
amount of time that would be required to compile the responses. 
And for that reason I’m noting as well that the responses have 
been provided for going back as far as the fiscal year ’99-2000. 
I will speak . . . I move . . . well I will speak against this 
resolution and urge the House to defeat it. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 67 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move an order of the Assembly 
for return no. 67, seconded by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessors the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1997-1998 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, for the remainder, through to 
item 33, return no. 72, I won’t repeat but the arguments are 
exactly the same as in the last question and that we’ll be voting 

against all of those returns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 68 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that I move an order of the 
Assembly to return no. 68, seconded by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessors the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1996-1997 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 69 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that I move an order of the 
Assembly for return no. 69, seconded by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessors the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1995-1996 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 70 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that I move, seconded by the 
member from Moosomin, to move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 70 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessors the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1994-1995 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 71 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that I move, seconded by the 
member from Estevan, that an order of the Assembly do issue 
for return no. 71 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessors the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1993-1994 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Motion negatived on division. 



July 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

 

Return No. 72 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, that I move, seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 72 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: The name of each published 
departmental policy report, study, review or consultant’s 
report undertaken by this department or its predecessors the 
Department of Education and the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education in the year 1992-1993 and the 
cost of conducting each of these to the government. 

 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 73 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Moosomin, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 73 showing: 
 

To the Minister responsible for Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation: (1) Provide all the details 
concerning the provincial government’s lease of a new 
aircraft including details regarding the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund and any private companies 
involved in the lease. (2) Whether the government will 
table the cost analysis it used to compare this lease 
arrangement with the cost of using charter aircraft. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 74 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Estevan, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 74 showing: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: Whether the Minister 
can please provide which cities, towns, villages and 
hamlets currently have permits to dump sewage effluent 
and/or raw sewage into provincial lakes, streams, rivers, 
ponds, waterways and all other bodies of water. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 95 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, to move 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 95: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: (1) For each municipal 
sewage treatment plant in Saskatchewan, please provide 
what the specified requirement was in terms of allowable 
coliform count in water being discharged in the year 2001. 
(2) In the case of each facility, please provide the number 
of times that this requirement was breached and on what 
date such a breach did occur in the case of each facility. (3) 
Please provide what the coliform count was on those days. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 96 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena to move 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 96, and 
this is as per return no. 95 but referencing the year 2000. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 97 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Estevan, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 97 as per no. 96, but 
referencing the year 1999. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 98 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Arm River, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 98. This is as per no. 97, but 
referencing the year 1998. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 99 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 99. This is as 
per return no. 98, but referencing the year 1997. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 104 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that, seconded by the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale, that an order of the Assembly 
for issue no. 104 showing: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: (1) The amount of 
revenue that was generated in 2001-2002 from various 
environmental charges and/or taxes placed on consumer 
products and the amount of this revenue that was used in 
environmental programs. (2) Please provide the breakdown 
in revenue for the various environmental charges and taxes. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 105 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker I 
move, seconded by the member from Lloydminster, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 105 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation: (1) With 
regard to the new Sound Stage in Regina, the number of 
productions that are currently being produced there. (2) The 
number of booking contracts that have been signed for 
future productions, and the value of each of those contracts. 
(3) Please provide what the original budget was for the 



2446 Saskatchewan Hansard July 2, 2002 

 

development of the new sound stage in Regina. (4) Please 
provide what the current projection is of the anticipated 
total cost. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 117 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move a motion, seconded by the member 
from Cannington, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 117 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: The amount that it did 
cost to move each home that was relocated in the year 2001 
under the “Housing Authority” program. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 118 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move a motion, 
seconded by the member from Carrot River Valley, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 118 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: The amount that it did 
cost to move each home that was relocated in the year 2000 
under the “Housing Authority” program. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 126 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the hon. member for Lloydminster, to move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 126 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: (1) Whether the Minister will 
provide an itemized statement as to how the $33.3 million 
dollars from the September 2000 initiative announced by 
the Federal Liberal Government for purchasing crucial 
diagnostic and treatment equipment was spent in 
Saskatchewan. (2) Please provide what diagnostic and 
treatment equipment was purchased and please provide the 
cost. (3) Please provide what purchases were made other 
than diagnostic and treatment equipment, and the cost. (4) 
Whether there is any money left from this health initiative 
by the Federal Liberal government that has not been spent. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 18:42. 
 


	Assistance to Municipalities for Firefighting
	Assistance to Municipalities for Firefighting

