















































Hansard: June 20, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2209 
 June 20, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan concerned about the 
condition of Highway No. 23 west from the Junction of No. 9 to 
the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
No. 23 in order to avoid serious injury and property 
damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Porcupine Plain and 
Somme. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of people who are concerned about the tobacco 
legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
shortcomings in the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Melfort and Tisdale. 
 
And I’m happy to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Esterhazy, 
Whitewood, and Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by individuals all from the 
community of Chaplin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from the citizens from the town of Elbow concerned about 
Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from injured workers who are not being covered by WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board). The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizen by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and equitable 
treatment be given to those injured and disabled people and 
their families, and be diligent in this most urgent matter. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon, Osler, and North 
Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition from constituents concerned with the boundaries of the 
new regional health authorities. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea, by placing those communities in the Regina 
regional health authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
regional health authority. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the town of 
Govan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens concerned about the 
lack of cellular telephone coverage in rural Saskatchewan. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Kincaid. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the placement of the communities of 
Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, and Bulyea in the Regina health 
authority as opposed to the Saskatoon health authority; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 23, 59, 132, 134, 157, 164, and 165. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a privilege to stand in the House this afternoon on 
behalf of the members of the Public Accounts Committee to 
present the third report of the twenty-fourth Legislative 
Assembly — the Public Accounts report to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the end of a few comments, I will be moving a 
concurrence motion to that effect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your committee has worked diligently for a . . . 
throughout the first, second, and third sessions of the 
twenty-fourth legislature, and this report will contain all of the 
information from each of those sessions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the opportunity to conclude our 
examinations of a number of reports from 1999 and 2000, and 
the bulk of the work from 2000 Fall Reports and 2001 Spring 
Reports are done, but there are still some specific topics that 
need to be looked at. In fact, we have deferred examination of 
one topic until an investigation is completed. 

Mr. Speaker, throughout the term, we’ve had a number of 
members of the Legislative Assembly sit on the Public 
Accounts Committee. And I wish to thank the — 
approximately, I believe — 10 members from the government 
have served on the Public Accounts Committee and 5 members 
from the opposition. And of course with the adoption of the rule 
back in April, 2000 that permitted temporary substitution of 
members, we’ve had a great deal of other members on both 
sides of the House sit in for members when they were absent. 
So I want to express my appreciation as Chair of Public 
Accounts to all of those members for helping us do our work. 
 
I want to also thank all of the staff from the Clerk’s office, from 
the auditor’s office, from the comptroller’s office for assisting 
us in doing our job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, therefore I would move, seconded by the 
Vice-Chair, the member of Regina Northeast: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 71 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister of Public Service Commission: how many 
employees does the Government of Saskatchewan have in 
management support group 1? 

 
And there is a number of questions in the same concept, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 71 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety: what are 
the names of the people currently employed in the office of 
the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, and for each 
person what is their title, and what is their annual salary? 

 
I also have questions for all of the departments of the same 
nature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Firstly, I see in 
your gallery today some representatives of the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Police Officers who I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to other members of the Assembly. And I had 
the pleasure of meeting at least one of them, accompanied by 
another police officer who’s not here at the moment, this 
morning. 
 
And specifically — and I’d ask them to rise as I call their name 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

 

— we have from Saskatoon, Brent Penner and Patrick Nogier 
and Wayne Walker, who I had the pleasure of meeting this 
morning. And I understand they’re accompanied by Bernie 
Eiswirth, who’s the executive director of the federation. 
 
And I know all members appreciate the good work that these 
individuals and their colleagues across the province do on our 
behalf each and every day. And I know all members will want 
to join with me in welcoming them to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if 
I can make another introduction. I see in your gallery also an 
old friend of mine who is Mr. Rik Steernberg, who is a city 
councillor in Saskatoon, and I think is in his third term. And I 
have every confidence, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Steernberg will be 
involved in local politics for a long time to come. 
 
And I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming Rik to 
the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too on behalf of 
the official opposition would like to welcome the people we 
have here this afternoon from the Federation of Police Officers. 
We really appreciate the work that they do for us and for the 
people of this province on a day-to-day basis, especially when 
it’s not on a personal basis as the Minister of Finance just 
mentioned in his particular case. 
 
So we welcome them here this afternoon and look forward to 
meeting with them a little later on. Please join me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I’d like 
to introduce 26 grade 4 students from Hillside School in 
Estevan. They are seated in the east gallery. 
 
And these students are accompanied by teachers Mrs. Barlow 
and Mrs. Murray, and chaperones Mrs. Hovind, Mrs. Haas, 
Mrs. Shirley, and Mrs. Dyck. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce the rest of the students in the east gallery this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. They come from Melfort, the 
Broadway and Burke Schools. And as well as the 27 students 
that are here this afternoon, they’re accompanied by their 
teachers from Burke School, Ms. Collette Hayward and Ms. 
Heather Wright. And from Broadway School, Mr. Randy 
Steciuk and Mr. Darrel Zary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here on an annual basis to come and visit 
the proceedings of the House and it’s a great pleasure to 
introduce them and welcome them here. And I would ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
honour to introduce to you an eminent citizen of Saskatoon, Mr. 
Rik Steernberg, seated in your gallery. I’d ask him to please 
rise. 
 
He is a three-term popular councillor of the city of Saskatoon 
and now the Liberal candidate in Saskatoon Fairview. He is 
such a dynamic and powerhouse of a candidate I understand the 
present member for Saskatoon Fairview is so scared of his 
chances he’s thinking of resigning. Oh in fact maybe he has. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Steernberg is here this afternoon in the hopes 
of being edified in question period. I’d ask all members to 
welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of this legislature, one 
Tanner Morrison who’s seated in the western gallery right now. 
If you could please rise, Tanner. 
 
Tanner is finishing off grade 11 at O’Neill High School here in 
Regina. And in addition to being a wicked drummer with his 
band, he’s also a championship debater. There’s a trophy down 
the hall, Mr. Speaker, in the Legislative Library, where 
Tanner’s name appears as the top debater — not once, but 
twice. 
 
So I think we could all stand to learn a thing or two from 
Tanner. He certainly knows his way around these benches. 
Anyway if we could please give him a warm welcome, Tanner 
Morrison. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to join my colleague in welcoming and recognizing Tanner 
Morrison. 
 
And I would say in this Assembly at this day and age and this 
. . . at this time, that this is a gentleman to watch for in the 
future. And I’d like to also welcome Tanner. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Wadena Resident Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Mr. 
William Reynolds from Wadena who is celebrating his 100th 
birthday today, June 20. 
 
Mr. Reynolds was born in Scotland and immigrated to Elfros 
with his parents. He farmed in the Elfros area all his life and his 
neighbours tell me he was an excellent farmer. His passion was 
his black, Aberdeen-Angus cattle. 
 
Upon retirement, he moved to Wadena with his sister. Mr. 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

Reynolds entered into the state of matrimony when he was 80 
years young. He lived in his own home until four years ago 
when he moved into assisted living. 
 
As a farmer, Mr. Reynolds had a daily exercise program as well 
as working. In retirement, he currently walks a half a mile daily 
to the cemetery where his deceased wife is interred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the things we take for granted in today’s 
world, including electricity, cars, telephones, and running 
water, are new inventions since Mr. Reynolds was born in 1902. 
Things haven’t . . . The things that haven’t changed are the 
importance of family, friends, and lending a helping hand. Mr. 
Reynolds still values these priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Assembly to join with me in 
wishing Mr. Reynolds a very happy 100th birthday and wishing 
him many, many more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welfare Decline Continues in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the best social program 
is a job. 
 
May marked the 90th straight month of decreasing welfare 
caseloads in Saskatchewan. This unprecedented reduction is the 
result of government efforts to assist welfare recipients to enter 
the workforce and provide additional support for low-income 
earners. 
 
Between May 2001 and May 2002, welfare caseloads 
throughout the province have declined steadily. On average, 8 
per cent. The decline is due to two factors. In 1997, this 
government declared war on poverty through its building 
independence program. Since then we have been winning the 
battle. Building independence has helped 6,000 families — 
including 13,000 children — leave the welfare rolls. 
Furthermore non-agricultural sectors of the economy have 
produced 35,000 jobs over the last six years. Building 
independence removes barriers people on welfare may 
experience when they try to take advantage of the economic 
opportunities in our province. 
 
Based on this success we are expanding building independence 
to further support people as they move from assistance to 
employment. This includes 150 new daycare spaces and the 
recently announced Jobs First program. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Artesian 
School’s Final Graduating Class 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 31 the final 
grade 12 graduation ceremony was held at the Artesian School 
in Spring Valley, as grades 10 through 12 are being 
discontinued at the school. There have been children attending 
classes at Spring Valley since August 1914, when it was called 
the Artesian School District No. 3213. 
 

As school districts gradually became consolidated and other 
schools closed, the facilities at Spring Valley became 
overcrowded. New buildings were moved in or added. The high 
school was first opened in 1938 and the present school building 
constructed in 1958. Grade discontinuance of 10 through 12 
was a sad event for the Artesian School. 
 
There have been many successes to celebrate in Spring Valley 
although the resources may have been somewhat limited at 
times. Students have always excelled and set standards in 
excellence in critical thinking, independent learning, and strong 
work ethic — typical of graduates of our rural schools. Students 
have graduated into all walks of life. Unfortunately in the past 
decade many have relocated to neighbouring provinces and 
even out of the country, and I hope many of these graduates will 
be able to remain here. 
 
I wish all graduates the very best of success in their further 
studies and their careers as I’m sure all members of this Hon. 
Assembly do. I am certain that their education at Spring Valley 
and their rural Saskatchewan background will serve them well 
wherever life takes them and in any field of endeavour that they 
may choose. Congratulations, graduates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Loan Program 
For Heating Upgrades Extended 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to share with members of the Assembly 
that the SaskEnergy network prime rate loan program for 
replacement of furnaces, hot water heaters, and other selected 
natural gas appliances, is being extended for a full year to June 
30, 2003. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — This initiative developed in partnership with 
private sector plumbing and heating contractors has proven very 
popular. So far 4,000 SaskEnergy residential customers have 
been granted prime rate loans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program is proving to be a practical way to 
help homeowners save money on their energy bills while at the 
same time reducing greenhouse gas emissions from their 
households. 
 
So far, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy customers have saved more 
than $1 million in energy costs and borrowing costs by 
purchasing more efficient natural gas appliances through the 
loan program. For example, Mr. Speaker, the installation of a 
furnace with 95 per cent efficiency will generate energy savings 
for the average customer of approximately $300 per year. 
 
I’m also pleased to tell the Assembly that on average, each 
homeowner that used the prime rate loan to replace their old 
furnace reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 2.2 tonnes per 
year and cut their household greenhouse gas emissions by 20 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, in closing, congratulate the SaskEnergy 
board and staff and the 123 members of the SaskEnergy 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

 

network for their help in delivering this program. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Vanscoy District Rodeo 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nice weather once 
again blessed the organizers of the Vanscoy district rodeo —
1,500 people attended the three-day event filling the stands to 
capacity. The expanded weekend schedule allowed for those 
attending to get more bang for their buck, or some might say, 
buck for their buck. 
 
Saturday kick off with a gymkana competition bringing 
competitors from around Saskatchewan and the new youth 
cattle show made its debut on Sunday. Two performances by 
William Gough, five-year Australian champion whip cracker 
brought gasps from wide-eyed onlookers as his carefully 
controlled whip neatly sliced a piece of paper held in a very 
brave volunteer’s mouth. 
 
The rodeo performances kept audiences on the edge of their seat 
with thrills and spills. Whoops and hollers could be heard 
across town. Competitors from Manitoba, Alberta, and 
Saskatchewan, and as far away as North Dakota joined in the 
competition. 
 
Intermission was a special treat when locals Tim and Jackie 
Edwards and TJ, the one-of-a-kind trained Texas Longhorn 
steer performed for the first time in Vanscoy. Many had never 
seen the amazing show. This CCA (Canadian Cowboys’ 
Association) rodeo provided top quality entertainment to all 
who attended with the exciting, brave daredevil acts of the 
cowboy. 
 
Congratulations to Vanscoy and district on a wonderful rodeo. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Hero 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. One of the clichés that we hear these days is that there 
are no more heroes in our society. But like most clichés, this 
one doesn’t bear very close scrutiny. 
 
If one definition of a hero is a person willing to put their own 
life at risk to save another, then I’m happy to report to the 
Assembly that in our city, Prince Albert, we have a genuine 
hero based on an incident that happened this past weekend. And 
to ruin the suspense, I’m even happier to report that the story 
has a very happy ending. 
 
On Sunday at our annual Founder’s Day event on the Riverbank 
Park, in the evening a three-year-old child fell into the river and 
was being carried away. When he was spotted he was several 
metres downstream. The water was cold and the current was 
swift. Mr. Stuart Matice, an off-duty facilities worker at the 
Prince Albert youth custody facilities, went after the boy. 
 
Though Mr. Matice had not been swimming in over five years, 

he reached the child just as it was going below the surface. He 
fought back the current, brought the child to shore. The child’s 
face was blue and it was treated for shock. 
 
Mr. Matice was well, but exhausted. The entire episode took 
less than 10 minutes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Matice is the father of 
three and currently he and his wife look after five foster 
children. And now there’s another child in his debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was an extraordinary act of selflessness and 
bravery by a family man, a Prince Albert resident, and a civil 
servant. And I want to say that I’m very proud on all accounts 
to know that this brave soul has saved a young child in our 
community. 
 
And I want all members to join with me in thanking Mr. Stuart 
Matice for saving a life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Melfort Area Athlete Wins Scholarship 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce you to another 
young lady from my constituency who has made a name for 
herself in the world of track and field. 
 
Brandi Armstrong recently won three gold medals in the 
Saskatchewan High Schools Athletics Association provincial 
track and field meet. These medals are the most recent in a long 
list of provincial, national, and international medals this young 
lady has won in track and field since she was five or six years 
old. Brandi is graduating from the Melfort & Unit 
Comprehensive Collegiate this year, but her competing year is 
not over. She’ll be competing in the senior nationals in 
Edmonton, at the juniors in Kitchener this summer. 
 
This fall she’ll be starting a whole new adventure. Brandi’s 
achievements caught the attention of Rice University in 
Houston, Texas and she has accepted an offer for a four-year 
full scholarship. Mr. Speaker and members of the House, please 
join me in congratulating this exceptional young lady for her 
past achievements and wishing her the very best in all her future 
endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Financial Assistance for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning, 
Jean Chrétien got up and he went to a farm in Ontario and he 
spent $800 million of the provinces’ money — without 
consulting the provinces. This is unbelievable. Not only is he 
abandoning his own responsibility for international trade, but he 
is imposing that responsibility on provincial taxpayers, knowing 
full well that they can’t afford it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s frustrating that the Premier’s meeting with the 
Prime Minister last week appears to have had no impact 
whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going to do now? 
How is he going to convince the federal government to live up 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

to their responsibility after they’ve made the announcement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on the 
premise of the member’s question, we’re in agreement, absolute 
agreement, and I’m pleased that that agreement exists. That 
today the Prime Minister of Canada and the federal Minister of 
Agriculture unilaterally have imposed, or threatened to impose, 
or would seek to impose this kind of financial burden on the 
regions and provinces of Canada most affected by international 
trade subsidies is, as one of my colleagues has just said, 
shameful. 
 
What shall we do, Mr. Speaker? Well I’ll tell you what we’re 
not going to do. We’re not going to roll over. We’re not going 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I’m counting on the support of the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers. I’m counting on the 
support of the members opposite. I’m counting on, as we’ve 
enjoyed, the support of the Liberal member of this legislature 
and the Liberal leader and the Liberal Party in this province. 
I’m counting on the continued support of the mayors of 
Saskatchewan, have spoken with one voice; the support of farm 
leaders in this province; the chamber of commerce; the support 
of journalists in this province. 
 
And with that kind of support and that kind of unanimous 
position, we’re going to Halifax, the Minister of Agriculture’s 
going to Halifax next week, and we’re taking the position to 
that table, and the fight is on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
agree with the Premier. And for weeks, when the Premier has 
asked us to stand behind him on principle, we have done that. In 
fact, we have done more, Mr. Speaker. But now it is up to the 
Premier to deliver. He needs to win that battle for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Farm families need help now. The Premier’s 
efforts up to this date have not produced any results. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Canadian producers do not see the trade injury 
payment that they have been counting on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farm groups have stood behind the 
Premier. The official opposition has stood and continues to 
stand behind the Premier but, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the 
Premier to deliver. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — What tools, what instruments of war is the 
Premier taking into the battle? What’s he going to do? How is 
he going to get this trade injury support package fully funded by 
the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the implication that the 
Leader of the Opposition would try and draw from his 
comments is that, you know, if he were in Ottawa, this would 
have got solved. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he was in Ottawa. He was a member of the 
Reform Party of Canada, sitting in Ottawa. He was the 
Agriculture critic for the Reform Party of Canada, now the 
Alliance, and while he was in Ottawa, what happened? What 
happened? 
 
Well the federal Liberal government established this 60/40 split. 
How did he, how did he solve the problem when he sat right in 
the House of Commons? I reported yesterday . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Once the Leader of the Opposition 
returned to the province to take up his role of this amalgamation 
of Liberals and Tories and Conservatives and everything that 
got together over there, to lead that group, well then he went all 
by himself right there to Ottawa and he was going to talk to his 
good friend, Lyle Vanclief. He calls him his good friend, Lyle; 
calls him his good friend, Lyle. 
 
Well the reporting of that visit, the headline reads, 
“Saskatchewan Party leader gets the cold shoulder.” The cold 
shoulder. Well I ask the Leader of the Opposition, who calls 
himself a good friend of Lyle Vanclief, to please phone Mr. 
Vanclief this afternoon and get this changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I have to laugh at the 
silliness of the Premier. The Premier went to Ottawa — the 
Premier went to Ottawa as the Premier of Saskatchewan — and 
came back empty-handed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier came back to this House and 
suggested there was hope — the decisions hadn’t been made. If 
the Premier would have asked me to accompany him to Ottawa 
to help him out, I’d have been glad to do that. But he has taken 
responsibility. He needs to shoulder the responsibility. He is the 
Premier of Saskatchewan and he needs to answer for his 
inability to deliver on the commitment that he’s made to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are severe problems around the Premier’s 
failure to deliver. If in fact, Mr. Speaker, the province does not 
gain access to the federal dollars that are earmarked through this 
program, if in fact there is not a trade injury payment, one of 
our most important industries will be devastated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier promising to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the agriculture industry of Saskatchewan? 
What is he prepared to deliver on behalf of his government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the member opposite might be interested to 
know, provides support to the agricultural producers of this 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

 

province at a per capita rate four times the rate of anyone . . . of 
the Canadian average and double the rate of any other province 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s the commitment of this 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say so, I did not stand 
in the House of Commons, I did not stand in the House of 
Commons preaching to the Liberal government in Ottawa that 
subsidies to farm producers in Canada should be eliminated. I 
did not do that. That was the position of the member now from 
Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will stand behind the record of this government 
in support of Canadian and Saskatchewan producers any day of 
the week on any platform in Canada. I wish the Leader of the 
Opposition could say the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m disappointed that the Premier deliberately misrepresents the 
statements that I have made. I heard the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would just ask the 
Leader of the Opposition to be mindful of the language he’s 
using and to withdraw those statements before he proceeds with 
additional statements. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw those 
statements. But I heard the Premier say to the federal ministers 
in Saskatoon that he would be happier if there were no subsidies 
whatsoever — that’s exactly the same thing that I was saying in 
Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, we have said exactly the same thing. 
 
I heard the Premier say that, but he also said the same thing that 
I said, that as long as other nations are subsidizing their 
producers, Canada must be in the game. And that’s the position 
that I have always taken. To say otherwise is not being truthful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s coalition 
appears to be crumbling. Ralph Klein has already said that he’s 
in for 40 per cent. Bob Friesen, who was at that meeting in 
Saskatoon and said that he was with us, was also at Jean 
Chrétien’s news conference and he was praising today’s 
announcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is the Premier going to keep this front united 
when one province and one major national farm group has 
already bailed out on him? Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I ask the members to 
allow the question to be put. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, they’re making a lot of noise 
because they’re in big trouble here. Mr. Speaker, has the 
Premier contacted the other provinces and what position will 
the Agriculture ministers be taking in Halifax? It’s good enough 
to say he’s going to war; he’d better tell us what kind of a battle 
strategy he has. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Interestingly enough, this government 
has to fight the treasury of Washington. Now we have to fight 
the Liberals in Ottawa. Now we have to fight the Saskatchewan 
Party in Saskatchewan and some of their colleagues around the 
country. Now the member . . . the member of Canora who 
should get on his feet and says what he says in this House . . . 
Never gets up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the situation. We are taking this case to the 
ministers of Agriculture in Halifax. We’re going to have the 
support of many of the ministers of Agriculture from across 
Canada — you can count on that. And they’re going to come 
from a variety of political parties. And if . . . I’ve just got to say 
to the Leader of the Opposition: please be part of the solution in 
this one case. Set aside your partisan desire, your partisan desire 
to seek power . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just remind the Premier to direct his 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I find it very sad that the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party stood in this House and said he was 
supporting the government, and yet the Premier said, now we 
have to fight you. So it’s unfortunate today’s announcement by 
the federal government actually raised more questions than it 
did answers. So I’d like to go through a few of the details with 
the Ag minister, if I may. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government is saying that there is $1.2 
billion in new money for bridge financing and they want the 
provinces to put up $800 million. Mr. Speaker, if the provinces 
cost shared the bridge financing, how much would be 
Saskatchewan’s share of this new money? Exactly how much 
does Ottawa expect the provinces to contribute and how much 
new money would actually find its way into the producers’ 
hands? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the press conference today 
that was held by the Premier in Saskatchewan clearly indicates 
the kinds of damage that this new farm Bill or this new 
announcement from the federal government will do for 
Canadian producers, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, order. Order. Order. Order, 
order please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the question that the member 
from Watrous asked is a very important question, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of what Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers are going 
to receive at the end of the day here if in fact unanimity doesn’t 
remain across the country. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, the announcement by the federal 
government puts into the hands of Canadian producers, at the 
end of the day, somewhere in the neighbourhood of $450 
million for Canada. That’s what this new farm package by the 
federal government delivers. 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, and 
hopefully on that side of the House . . . And provinces across 
Canada today and farm leaders need to take a position because 
this window, when it closes in the next three or four months, 
Mr. Speaker, will leave Canadian farmers in a position that 
they’ve never been in in the history of this country. And it’s our 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to stand together, to stand together 
on this piece and be sure that the federal government doesn’t 
jam the provinces and farm organizations and farmers in this 
country in the way in which they’re attempting to do it today by 
their announcement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe the minister’s office is working under the assumption 
that the money is being allocated based on the Fredericton 
formula. That means that Saskatchewan would get about 22 per 
cent or about $220 million a year. That would cost the province 
about $88 million a year and it would only amount to an 
average of approximately $4 per acre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that roughly the figures that the minister is 
working with or has he found out something different from 
Ottawa? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in my last response to the 
member I had outlined for her what the new portion of the 
money is. And I said to the member opposite that what 
Canadian farmers, what Canadian farmers would receive this 
year . . . Canadian farmers would receive this year is about $450 
million annually is what they would get. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
is about $2 per acre in Saskatchewan at the end of the day — 
about $2 per acre when we translate that, Mr. Speaker, into 
what might happen here on an emergency payout for our 
Canadian producers. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said on other occasions, this is a 
monumental occasion for Canadian farmers, for agricultural 
producers, and for provincial governments in Canada. This 
window, when it closes, as I said a moment ago, in the next 
couple of months, will be a devastating . . . will have a 
devastating impact on not only provincial economies, but on the 
industry of agriculture in Canada. 
 
And that’s why today’s debate, the kind of work that we’ve 
been doing on this side of the House for the past year and a half, 
bringing trade injury to the top of the issue, Mr. Speaker, is so 
important. And the discussions and the meeting that we’re 
having in Halifax next week will be critical to ensure that we 
can deliver the kinds of package that we wanted for Canadian 
farmers. And that’s why unity in this House is so important 
today and that this government stands with farmers in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to ask the minister if that’s what he’s been told from 
Ottawa or if that’s what he’s calculating here on his own, 
because Terry Hildebrandt of APAS (Agricultural Producers 

Association of Saskatchewan) is saying that it will not be based 
on the Fredericton formula, and the federal government is 
working out a new formula that will be based on need. And that 
would mean more money for the Saskatchewan producers, but 
it would also mean more cost for Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister tell us today if he has heard 
anything about a new formula to meet the need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the formula here in many 
respects, Mr. Speaker, has very little relevance on what . . . to 
what the entire package provides, because the total package for 
the Canadian agricultural industry, Mr. Speaker, today is just 
under — is just under 2 billion, Mr. Speaker, is what that 
number is. And it uses in it, Mr. Speaker, the $1.1 billion that’s 
already in the pool — already in the pool. 
 
So what Canadian farmers are going to have to their disposal, 
Mr. Speaker, into the future in terms of managing the 
agricultural industry is what I’ve said, 450 brand new million 
dollars for all of Canada. And we will have to deliver, within 
that $450 million, a trade package, Mr. Speaker, and a brand 
new set of programs under these risk management programs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that . . . those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, if we’re . . . 
if we’re to think for a moment that we end up with this package, 
if we were to think for a moment, we would have a crop 
insurance program in this province which would be the lead, 
Mr. Speaker, and a NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) 
program in this country that would be the lead, Mr. Speaker. 
What would happen here, Mr. Speaker, is that we would have a 
reduction in programming in Canada if we go down that route. 
And I say to the members, we need to stay together on this 
piece, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there also seems to be 
conflicting reports out of the federal government as well. Lyle 
Vanclief has said that the provinces have to put up their 40 per 
cent share in order to access the federal money. But today Jean 
Chrétien apparently said that the federal share will be available 
to producers whether the province kicks in with 40 per cent or 
not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, which one is it? If the federal share . . . is the 
federal share available to Saskatchewan even if the province 
does not cost share the 40 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member raises a very good question, 
because it’s our understanding . . . it’s a very good, it’s a very 
good question, Mr. Speaker, because it’s our understanding that 
the federal government is . . . has tied this entire package as one 
piece, Mr. Speaker. So that if you don’t sign on to the 
agricultural policy framework, you don’t get any of the trade 
injury money. That’s how we understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what the member . . . what the 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

 

Minister of Agriculture says federally was that in fact there may 
be . . . or the Prime Minister says there may be an opportunity 
to split that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So my sense is that the federal government has tied this as one 
package, Mr. Speaker. They are going to jam the $600 million 
down our throat, Mr. Speaker, which is the trade injury piece, 
which is the 1.2 billion for the next two years, Mr. Speaker. 
And that Canadian people, Canadian people, Canadian farmers, 
Canadian producers, and agriculture producers, and 
governments will be responsible to pick up the federal debt, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I know the minister has 
alluded to the answer to this question, but it also seems . . . or it 
still seems a little unclear. How much of this is actually new 
money? How much of it is a . . . or how much is repackaging 
the existing money? 
 
The federal government is talking about an overall package of 
5.2 billion over six years. Is this 5.2 billion on top of the 
existing funding for programs like crop insurance, NISA, and 
CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program)? Or does it replace 
existing funding for programs like crop insurance, NISA, and 
CFIP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . one more time. Because today, today 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member just may want to start 
over to get on the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try this response to the 
member from Watrous one more time. Today we have in crop 
insurance and NISA and CFIP, $1.1 billion annually. If you 
multiply the $1.1 million by five, of which this package is 
about, it’s $5.5 million. It’s now in the new package. It’s now 
part of the new package of new money. 
 
Then they added to it, Mr. Speaker. They added to it $180 
million for agricultural policy framework. And then they added 
to it additional bridge funding of 5 to 600 million, 600 million, 
and then they added to it trade injury — $600 million, cost 
shared by the provinces. That’s their piece, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What happens here, Mr. Speaker, is that the entire total package 
is 5.2 billion of which 5.5 is old money — 5.5 is old money. 
The new package of the money is 2.7 billion for six years, Mr. 
Speaker, divided by six, is $450 million per year for Canadian 
farmers to cover off, Mr. Speaker, to cover off the agricultural 
policy framework and trade injury, and jam it down the throats 
of Canadian farmers and farm organizations . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Handling of Ministerial Investigation 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
maybe if the Premier was a little more focused on real issues, 
things would turn out better for Saskatchewan. But instead 
while Ottawa was putting together this disastrous ag package 

we’re just talking about, the Premier was busy dealing with the 
former minister of Environment. 
 
Today we find out that the Saskatchewan taxpayers paid 
$25,000 to find out why someone didn’t mail a birthday card to 
the minister’s brother’s kitties. After spending $25,000 on a 
report that said to put the minister back into cabinet, the 
Premier ended up firing her two days later anyways. Talk about 
bumbling leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Premier pay $25,000 of taxpayers’ 
dollars to try to vindicate a loose-cannon minister at over 
$8,000 a slap, a minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. Order. 
There’s been a long, long tradition that the members in this 
Assembly are to be referred to by titles or by their 
constituencies. Derogatory adjectives and name-calling are 
simply not permitted. And before I permit anybody to go any 
further during this question period I would ask the member to 
rise, withdraw those statements, and apologize. 
 
Would the member rise and withdraw the statement regarding 
his description of the former minister of the Environment? 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the 
statement, loose-cannon minister. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member withdraw it without 
equivocation and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, I withdraw that statement 
unequivocally and with . . . apologize to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I now recognize whoever wishes to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the time the 
events in the former minister’s office occurred and were 
brought to my attention, it was my conclusion that this is a 
matter that needed to be taken seriously. It needed to have 
someone outside of government to look at this circumstance. 
And for that matter it required someone from out of province to 
look at this circumstance. And thirdly, it required someone of 
the reputation — national reputation and expertise — to do the 
work that I could enjoy confidence in, that this House could 
enjoy the confidence in, and that the people of Saskatchewan 
could enjoy the confidence in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that regard, we contracted with Ms. Marilyn 
MacKenzie to do the work. It is a significant amount of money; 
it is not a happy circumstance; but in hindsight it was the right 
thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
Members will come to order. Members will come to order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Natural Gas Discovery 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

Speaker, I’m pleased to inform the Legislative Assembly that 
earlier today, the minister responsible for SaskEnergy 
announced that TransGas is working with the petroleum 
industry to develop one of the most significant natural gas finds 
in the last 10 years in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — One of the larger producers, 
Profico, announced a recent discovery in the Shackleton reserve 
area located in the . . . northwest of Swift Current. Husky 
Energy and Cavell Energy have also invested in this field. 
These companies are showing a great deal of confidence in the 
resource and in the business climate of Saskatchewan. 
 
According to TransGas, this new discovery could add one-half 
a trillion cubic feet to Saskatchewan’s natural gas reserves. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s nearly a 20 per cent increase from today’s 
reserve estimates. This find will extend our role as the second 
largest energy producing province well into the future. 
 
As you know, the petroleum industry is the key driver of the 
Saskatchewan economy, and when our resource sector performs 
well it gives a major boost to economic growth for 
Saskatchewan. The oil and gas industry provide quality jobs 
and new capital investment for our province, and it also 
generates revenues that are used to support many of our social 
programs. 
 
Last year the industry invested about 1.4 billion in the province 
through drilling slightly more than 3,300 oil and natural gas 
wells. It also contributed around $624 million to our province 
through royalties, production taxes, and bonus bids. 
 
The province has doubled its oil production between 1991 and 
2001. Indeed the industry accounts for approximately 8 per cent 
of our GDP (gross domestic product). It also brings jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. The industry employed about 21,500 people in our 
province last year and many of those jobs are in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the success of the industry is of critical 
importance to us. As we continue to build a province of 
opportunity we will depend even more on our non-renewable 
resources. 
 
The natural gas find in the Shackleton area is significant and we 
are pleased that industry and government are working together 
to capture opportunities for tomorrow. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
respond to the announcement, the ministerial statement, on 
behalf of the official opposition Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the news today, the news today of the discovery of 
this Shackleton reserve is good news indeed for Swift Current 
— my hometown, Mr. Speaker — for southwest Saskatchewan, 
and for the entire province, Mr. Speaker. And the official 
opposition would like to congratulate Profico Energy and 
Husky Energy on this initiative. 
 

We want to congratulate them for their commitment to invest in 
this particular industry in the province, and I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, the information the minister read is, this find 
represents almost 20 per cent . . . fully 20 per cent of the current 
reserve in all of the province of Saskatchewan. So it is a very 
significant find and it will have a major economic impact in my 
hometown and across southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, even more impressive about this 
announcement is the fact that the private sector, the private 
sector in these energy companies, are going ahead with this 
investment in a jurisdiction that offers them the highest capital 
tax rate in all of Canada. That’s how good this find is, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s how good these . . . large these reserves are, 
that they’re prepared to come to this province given the current 
business climate and given the highest corporate capital tax in 
all of Canada. 
 
Now to be fair, Mr. Speaker, to be fair . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The member . . . Order. Order. 
Order, members. 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, to be fair, Mr. Speaker, TransGas, the 
subsidiary of the provincial Crown corporation, is very much 
involved in the project. They are the monopoly distributor of 
gas in the province and so you need them simply to provide the 
pipeline infrastructure for this project to go ahead. 
 
But they are there, Mr. Speaker. They made the decision to 
make the investment, did TransGas, and they gave this province 
a perfect example of what Crown corporations can do when 
they focus on their core function and when they focus on the 
province instead of Chile and Mexico, Mr. Speaker. And more 
to the point, they’re showing the province what they can do 
when they partner with the private sector. 
 
And I would just conclude with this, Mr. Speaker. We 
understand that this same subsidiary, this same subsidiary may 
be a candidate for a joint venture privatization that would even 
more fully develop this particular subsidiary, that would more 
. . . that would enable this particular subsidiary to expand in 
Saskatchewan and to protect head office jobs. 
 
We understand that SaskEnergy officials are working on a 
couple of deals right now for such a joint venture privatization 
and we would say this, in addition to commending this news 
today of this find, we would say to the government to join with 
the Saskatchewan Party pragmatic position on Crowns. If this 
deal is a good one for the Crown corporation and for the 
province of Saskatchewan, put down the manifesto and do the 
deal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 206 — The Democratic Unionism Act 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of Bill No. 206, The Democratic Unionism Act. 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 209 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2002 
(Freedom of Speech in the Workplace) 

 
Mr. Weekes: — I move first reading, Bill No. 209, The Trade 
Union Amendment Act, 2002 (Freedom of Speech in the 
Workplace). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly 
to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule 
46. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked leave of the Assembly 
to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule 
46. Would the Premier just briefly outline the nature of the 
motion, or read the motion into the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Canadians this morning 
listened to their Prime Minister and the federal Minister of 
Agriculture describe a farm package that is proposed to affect 
Canadians coast to coast — producers coast to coast for a 
period of up to five years. 
 
This legislature on previous occasion has voiced its opinion on 
what should have been included in this package. It’s not there. 
We feel that because of the events of this day, it is important 
that this legislature again reaffirm its position and instruct our 
Minister of Agriculture, as he meets with ministers of 
Agriculture from across Canada, to reaffirm those positions at 
the meetings next week in Halifax. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Federal Farm Aid Package 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Perhaps as just a little background to the 
circumstances of this day, I think it has been widely concluded 
in Canada, certainly in this province, that farm programs in this 
country as they have existed and have been altered over the last 
number of years have not worked for Canadian producers — 
not worked. 
 
Therefore, ministers of Agriculture from across Canada, 
including our Minister of Agriculture — if I may say with the 
leadership of our Minister of Agriculture — have been working 
to build better safety net programs to last in the long term for 
Canadian producers. 
 
That said, also, Mr. Speaker, it is important to recognize that if 
our producers in Canada, our farmers, our farm families, if they 

are given a level playing field, they will compete with anybody 
on the globe. There is no doubt about that. 
 
However, our producing families across Canada, not just in 
Saskatchewan but across Canada, but particularly in 
Saskatchewan given the size of the agricultural sector in our 
province, particularly in Saskatchewan, our producing families, 
our farm families in Canada have had to face a world of unfair 
trade subsidies occasioned by those governments in Europe, the 
national governments, that have chosen to subsidize their 
farmers; occasioned by the national government in Washington 
who have chosen to subsidy their farmers. 
 
Irregardless of the discussions that have happened at the world 
trade talks at world trade levels, irregardless in fact of progress 
that was made in Doha — our minister, Attorney General, 
Minister of Justice, was at Doha representing this province and 
we saw progress — irregardless of all the progress, we’ve had 
the introduction this year of yet another American farm Bill that 
commits, and get this, Mr. Speaker, $190 billion in farm 
subsidy for American producers. 
 
Now I had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to sit across the table 
from the ambassador of the United States to Canada, Mr. 
Cellucci. I presented him with the case that we’ve brought to all 
Canadians about the unfairness of subsidy and this American 
farm Bill. Mr. Cellucci makes the following argument. His 
argument is, so long as the Europeans are going to subsidize 
their producers, America will stand behind their farm families. 
 
He agrees — I guess we all agree — that the ultimate solution is 
at the World Trade Organization. But in the interim, Mr. 
Cellucci says, President Bush and the administration of the 
United States of America will support their farm families. 
 
In that circumstance, Mr. Speaker, it is the conviction of this 
Premier, this government, and this legislature that the national 
Government of Canada must stand behind the producing farm 
families of Canada. There can be no alternative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Just for the information of members so 
that we understand the significance of these subsidies in the 
world, in the world marketplace, in the year 2000 — these 
figures are from the year 2000 — Mr. Speaker, 43 cents of 
every dollar of European wheat sales was from subsidy — 43 
cents. In the United States of America that figure was 49 cents. 
And in Canada, 17 cents. Now there is the stark difference that 
faces the farmer in Canada. A stark difference that must be 
levelled and it must be levelled by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year ago, not quite, I was asked by the premiers 
of Canada to bring this position to the attention of the federal 
government. I prepared therefore a document on behalf of all 
the premiers which pointed out the injustice of the subsidies on 
Canadian farmers, which pointed out in dramatic terms the 
requirement of our federal government to step up to the plate. 
That document has been in the hands of the federal government 
for some time. 
 
We reaffirmed that call from this legislature in a unanimous 
resolution early in this session. From this session, from this 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

legislature, we built a coalition bringing in other Western 
premiers, Prairie premiers, other Prairie opposition leaders. 
 
I took that coalition position then to Dawson City, where all of 
the Western premiers and all of the Territorial premiers 
gathered, and built in that circumstance a coalition, a consensus, 
a unanimous position. 
 
Here’s the position, Mr. Speaker: that in the issue of 
international trade injury to producers of Canada, the 
requirement to meet that injury, by Ag Canada’s own figures, is 
$1.3 billion and that the funding must come from Ottawa. 
 
Today the federal Government of Canada have said definitively 
that in the matter of trade injury, they yet expect the producing 
provinces, the producers of Canada, the regions of Canada, to 
cost share this 60/40. That’s what they’ve said today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to talk about, at Ottawa, 
they don’t want to talk about trade injury. They don’t want to 
talk about support for trade injury so they couch this in some 
other terms — bridge financing or ad hoc payment, transition 
money. Mr. Speaker, they’re not fooling this government. It’s 
support for trade injury no matter how they describe it. That’s 
what it is. And therefore it should be that package of money 
funded 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — There is, by the way, Mr. Speaker, no 
state of the union in the United States of America, there’s no 
state or province in Europe that is asked to contribute to trade 
injury subsidy — not one. Our neighbours in North Dakota, our 
neighbours in Montana, they see the support coming to their 
farm families from Washington. 
 
Can you conceive of a situation, Mr. Speaker, or members of 
this legislature, where a national government would not take 
responsibility for trade injury? 
 
Now if it is the case that the federal Government of Canada 
now suggests that the provinces of Canada, the regions of 
Canada should take financial responsibility for trade issues, 
then it is my view then we’d better have a seat at the table 
where these deals are negotiated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If they want 40 per cent of the funding, 
then we’d better have 40 per cent of the seats at the table. 
 
And further, Mr. Speaker, it is my view that if the federal 
government, as they have done this day, can unilaterally 
indicate to the provinces of Canada that we are going to be 
obliged to pay 40 per cent, that the federal cost-share split will 
be 60/40, if that could be unilaterally imposed — and if I may 
say, Mr. Speaker, then described as a partnership which is an 
interesting descriptive — if that can be unilaterally proposed on 
funding for agriculture, then our position is as follows: that 
position then must extend to other cost-shared programs. 
 
So let that principle apply to the funding of the national 
highway system. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Today, Mr. Speaker, you will know that 
in terms of funding of the national highways in this province, 
even though a great deal of taxes collected by the federal 
government from fuels in this province, virtually all of the cost 
of construction and maintenance of our national highways in 
this province is borne by the province. Virtually none is 
provided by the federal government. 
 
So if the 60/40 rule applies, let it apply to the national highways 
— 60 per cent federal, 40 per cent provincial. 
 
If the 60/40 rule is going to apply, then I say let it apply to the 
funding of health care in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, you will know that not so 
long ago funding in health care in this country was 
approximately a 50/50 split between the federal government, 
the provincial government. That has changed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today funding of health from the federal government — 
Canada-wide and in our own case — is about 15 per cent with 
the provinces, our province picking up 85 per cent. 
 
Let the rule apply. Funding for health care — 60 per cent 
federal, 40 per cent provincial. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — If a 60/40 split will be imposed on the 
province of Saskatchewan for all agricultural programs, then let 
it apply to the funding of programs for off-reserve First Nations 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now that, Mr. Speaker, used to be, 
should be, a 100 per cent federally funded responsibility given 
the treaties of the First Nations people in Canada. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, that has simply changed at the whim of the federal 
government. 
 
So let it apply here. Let it apply here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the principle of the notion that regions of a 
country most hurt by trade injury should be the taxpayers who 
are asked to fund that injury, it is simply illogical. You do not 
ask the individual who needs the transfusion to provide it. That 
is not the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me be very clear on this 
point. This province is willing, more than willing, has 
demonstrated its willingness to support financially the 
long-term safety net programs, crop insurance, NISA. We’re 
there, Mr. Speaker. We will be there. We are there, in fact, at a 
rate four times per capita the national average. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers across this province contribute to the 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

 

support of agriculture in this province at a rate four times the 
national average, at a rate twice of any other provincial 
jurisdiction in Canada. We’re there. We will be there. We want 
to be there. We want to be part of the negotiations to build the 
long-term safety net. 
 
But where we should not be, Mr. Speaker, where we should not 
be — even if all the resources were easily available — where 
we should not be is in the financing of the subsidization of 
international trade. We should not be. 
 
Now I just said, Mr. Speaker, even if all the resources were all 
available to us, we shouldn’t be there. But here is the fact: the 
resources are not available to us. We have laboured in this 
province for a decade to restore fiscal stability to the province 
and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have laboured long and hard to begin a process where we 
can lower taxation for the families of Saskatchewan, where we 
can rebuild our road infrastructure, where we can provide the 
best quality health care that we can possible provide, where we 
can expand education for our students across this province, 
where we can build a CommunityNet, high-speed Internet 
network, where we can do the things that we want to do and 
should do for the people of all Saskatchewan. 
 
To do this, we’ve had to do very, very careful financial and 
fiscal planning. The surplus projected for the province of 
Saskatchewan this year is $45,000 — 45,000, that’s how hard 
we’ve worked. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is the surplus in the national treasury, 
as revealed by the Minister of Finance, Ottawa, this week for 
this year is now $6 billion — 6 billion. And the projections 
we’re seeing in the national press as recent as this week is that it 
will grow over this year to a figure of $10 billion. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Now compare the fiscal capacity, Mr. Speaker, of levels of 
government to deal with the international trade. A province 
that’s worked hard to provide quality services, to build for the 
future, to create a new Saskatchewan on a balanced budget — 
earning us a credit rating upgrade, Mr. Speaker, but a very, very 
narrow surplus of $45,000 — and here is a national government 
with 6 billion, 10 billion and growing in their treasury. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, where did that surplus in Ottawa come 
from? It came from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. It came 
from the taxpayers of Ontario. It came from the taxpayers of 
Quebec, and PEI (Prince Edward Island), the Atlantic 
provinces, the Territories, BC (British Columbia), Alberta, 
Manitoba. 
 
As Canadians we contribute to a national treasury. We do it 
willingly for the sake of a strong nation. A strong nation then 
needs to come to the aid of those in the nation who are suffering 
as a result of the activities of other national governments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, that $10 billion surplus . . . 
that $10 billion surplus does not belong to the Prime Minister of 

Canada or the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister of 
Finance in Ottawa. It belongs to the people of Canada and 
Saskatchewan. And that money should be provided to the 
people who need it most now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, therefore I move and I 
welcome the seconding by the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member of Rosetown-Biggar, the following motion. I move: 
 

That this House: 
 
Unanimously adopts the position that the federal 
government’s farm-aid package announced today does not 
address the impact of American and European Union 
agricultural subsidies on Canadian farmers; ignores federal 
responsibility for international trade and injury to 
Canadians related to such trade; and is discriminatory to the 
farmers and taxpayers of Saskatchewan; and 
 
Unanimously reaffirms its position in calling on the federal 
government to fully fund a minimum $1.3 billion trade 
injury payment to Canadian farmers; and 
 
Calls upon the Minister of Agriculture to seek support for 
these positions at next week’s federal-provincial meeting of 
Agriculture ministers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it is with a 
great deal of pleasure, in fact I sense the importance of 
participating in the debate on this emergency motion, Mr. 
Speaker, and in fact I am pleased to second the motion that has 
been presented by the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all look at the contents of the 
motion which states that this Assembly will unanimously adopt 
the position that the federal government’s farm aid package 
announced today does not address the impact of the 
American/European Union agriculture subsidies on Canadian 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there can be no doubt of that. Just the amount of 
money itself — $5.2 billion over six years — is woefully 
inadequate in compensating Canadian producers and those 
involved in the agriculture sector from the massive, massive 
amount of US (United States) subsidies that have been passed 
through their US farm Bill. Mr. Speaker, that alone, the US 
farm Bill, would not be compensated from this package, let 
alone the European subsidies on top of that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has no problem 
whatsoever in recognizing that the package announced by the 
Prime Minister and the federal Minister of Agriculture this 
morning at a farm outside of Ottawa is certainly inadequate and 
does not meet the need that Canada faces. 
 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion goes on to say that the federal 
government is . . . or that the package ignores the federal 
responsibility for international trade and injury to Canadians 
related to such trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has been clear, crystal 
clear, Mr. Speaker, in indicating that this is a trade issue and is 
an international trade issue, and when it comes to international 
trade issues, whether it be softwood lumber, whether it would 
be steel, whether it be aircraft sales, Mr. Speaker, that these 
issues are a federal responsibility. Under our constitution and 
under our federal system, the federal government is responsible 
for the people and for the industries affected by unfair 
international trading practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are unequivocal in our insistence . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — We are unequivocal in our insistence that 
the federal government should compensate industries that are 
hurt by unfair trading practices of other countries, wherever 
they may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion goes on to say that this is 
discriminatory towards farmers and taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will agree with this, although it’s a little 
harder to nail down whether . . . the complete accuracy of this. 
We don’t know what formula is being used. If it’s the 
Fredericton formula as the Minister of Agriculture indicated it 
likely would be, obviously that formula does discriminate 
against the producers of Saskatchewan. And certainly we 
recognize that it then also discriminates against the taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion goes on to reaffirm our position on 
calling on the federal government to fully fund the $1.3 billion 
trade injury payment to Canadian farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that number was concluded as the best guess 
cost of the trade injury that we had received — this is before the 
passing of the US farm Bill — it was agreed upon by farm 
organizations, by other provinces including the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We agreed that if we’re going to have to try and nail down a 
number — in fact it might not even be a large enough number, 
Mr. Speaker — but we would agree with farm organizations 
and with the Government of Saskatchewan that we would ask 
for a $1.3 billion national injury compensation package for 
agriculture producers across Canada, of which we believed, if 
fairly distributed, Saskatchewan would get a reasonable 
package of support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then this motion goes on to call upon the Minister 
of Agriculture, and that’s our Minister of Agriculture, to seek 
support for these positions at next week’s federal/provincial 
meeting of Agriculture ministers. 
 
And we’ve heard the Premier in question period say that he’s 
going to go down or that . . . I don’t know if he’s going with the 
Minister of Agriculture — he didn’t say that — but at least 

someone is going on behalf of Saskatchewan to fight a mighty 
battle on our behalf. 
 
While we wish him well and we’re behind him, we just hope 
that he has the artillery to fight a successful battle. It’s not much 
fun going into battle and losing. And we don’t want 
Saskatchewan to lose. And so a lot of responsibility rests on the 
Minister of Agriculture’s shoulders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear, because there has been 
some question expressed by the Premier and other members of 
his government, as to the full support of the Saskatchewan Party 
in this whole process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 1 the Saskatchewan Party issued a news 
release which said the Saskatchewan Party supports emergency 
motion on the US Bill. Again the Premier introduced the 
motion; I was pleased to second the motion. We subsequently 
amended that motion. I made the amendment and the Premier 
seconded that amendment, and it was passed unanimously. 
 
In that exercise, the Saskatchewan Party supported the: 
 

. . . emergency motion calling on the Federal Minister of 
Agriculture, Federal Government House Leader (and that’s 
Mr. Goodale) and the Federal Minister of International 
Trade to visit the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly to 
hear and respond to (the) concerns about the new U.S. 
Farm Bill. 

 
I’m reading from the release, Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson said the 
Saskatchewan Party also proposed an amendment adding 
the Federal Finance Minister to the list of federal cabinet 
ministers named in the motion. 
 
“We felt that Federal Minister Paul Martin should also be 
asked to attend because he essentially controls the purse 
strings of the federal government,” . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t go on to read the entire release, but we did 
say that US legislation would have serious consequences for the 
provincial agriculture industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go on to look at a release issued the next day, 
May 2, by the Saskatchewan Party, which said the: 
 

Federal Liberal Government Lacks Interest in 
Saskatchewan’s Growing Farm Crisis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I again will quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Agriculture critic Donna Harpauer 
today said she is extremely disappointed that federal 
Liberal cabinet ministers have not accepted an invitation to 
appear before the Saskatchewan Legislature to address the 
growing farm crisis. 
 
Yesterday . . . Saskatchewan Party MLAs invited the 
federal Ministers of Finance, International Trade, 
Agriculture and the Canadian Wheat Board to come to the 
Legislature by May 24 and outline the federal 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

 

government’s response to the new US farm bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made some of the same arguments in this press 
release that I’ve just made in our . . . in a defence of our support 
of the Premier’s motion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the following day on May 3, the 
Saskatchewan Party issued a release which said that the: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Calls For Conference of Western 
Provinces on Agriculture and Softwood Lumber. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, now this was a Saskatchewan Party 
initiative. This was birthed as an idea by the official opposition 
in Saskatchewan. In the release we say: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson today called 
for Saskatchewan to host a special conference involving 
government and opposition members from all four western 
provinces to develop a united position in response to the 
US trade attacks on agriculture and softwood lumber. 

 
And the last paragraph of that release says: 
 

Today in the Legislature, Hermanson attempted to move an 
emergency motion calling for the special conference on 
agriculture and softwood lumber. Hermanson pledged to 
work with the provincial government to put together the 
conference. Unfortunately, the NDP refused to allow 
debate or voting on the emergency motion. 

 
Mr. Speaker, subsequently the Premier agreed to invite at least 
two other premiers to Saskatchewan, and that meeting was held. 
Leaders of the opposition of the three Prairie provinces attended 
that meeting here in Regina. And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and 
the Minister of Agriculture in this province can attest to the fact 
that we brought constructive ideas to the table when we 
discussed the strategy to move the federal government in 
Canada towards a trade injury compensation package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were many more initiatives that the 
Saskatchewan Party undertook. But I want to just outline one 
more news release, more recently on June 3. The release says: 
 

Hermanson Says Liberal In-Fighting Must Not Delay Farm 
Aid 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson has written 
to new federal Finance Minister John Manley to try to 
ensure that the federal Liberals’ internal problems don’t 
delay Ottawa’s response to the US farm bill. 
 
In his letter, Hermanson noted that former Finance Minister 
Paul Martin indicated his commitment to addressing the 
issue during a meeting on May 24. 
 
“During that meeting, Mr. Martin indicated that he 
understood the negative impact of the US farm bill on 
Canadian farmers and that he was committed to providing 
new financial assistance . . . I am writing today to urge you 
to follow through on the commitment made by Mr. 

Martin.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the release ended by saying: 
 

Hermanson has joined with other political and farm 
organization leaders in calling for a $1.3 billion . . . 
(agriculture) trade injury payment from the federal 
government. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to table the letter that I 
wrote to the new Finance minister, Mr. Manley, for all members 
of the House to peruse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the history. On May 1 we supported the 
emergency debate here in the legislature. On May 3 we called 
for the Western premiers to have a meeting in this province to 
plan a strategy. On May 10 we were part of that meeting and 
put forward constructive ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another meeting which I didn’t refer to in any of 
the releases was held on May 24. It was the meeting in which 
three of the federal cabinet ministers did come to Saskatoon. 
Again provincial premiers, the Deputy Premier of Alberta, and 
myself as official opposition leader of Saskatchewan, and one 
other official opposition leader, attended that meeting as long 
. . . as well as many farm organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again the Saskatchewan Party played a 
constructive role in the debate and in the dialogue that occurred 
around the tables and at the microphones of the Sheraton Hotel, 
the Sheraton Cavalier Hotel in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might add that when my opportunity came to 
question the federal ministers who were present that room, I 
indicated specifically to Mr. Pierre Pettigrew, who is the 
Minister of International Trade, that the Saskatchewan Party 
considered this to be an issue of trade, not of an agricultural 
nature, and that we expected the $1.3 billion trade injury 
program should not be pegged as an agriculture program but 
should be identified as a trade injury program. And I suggested 
the fact that it should come from his budget — international 
trade budget — rather from . . . rather than from Lyle Vanclief’s 
budget which is of course agriculture and which is so often cost 
shared. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that we could have stood a little 
more support in pressing that point in that Saskatoon meeting, 
albeit since May 24, the NDP, the Premier, and the Minister of 
Agriculture have pretty much been in charge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can report that the official opposition have not 
been requested to assist in any of the further negotiations. We 
have not been privy to the development of the package. We 
were made aware the day before the Premier decided to go to 
Ottawa that he was going to do that. Mr. Speaker, we were 
made aware that the Premier was going to raise the issue in 
Dawson City in the Yukon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, in response to repeated 
questions in this legislature, indicated that things were pretty 
much under control. He thought things were moving in the right 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in . . . back when the Premier did go to 
Dawson City and he met with the Western premiers and 
Territorial leaders, he indicated to the people of Saskatchewan 
that he had raised this issue and they were at one point and they 
were going to make a mark on Ottawa, and they were going to 
receive some positive response from their unified position. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, when Lyle Vanclief was in Rome, the 
federal Agriculture minister was in Rome and indicated that a 
cost-shared program would be coming forward soon, the 
Premier immediately decided to go to Ottawa. He said this is no 
way to run a country. Off he went to Ottawa and he promised 
that he would have a hearing from the Prime Minister and there 
would be results. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier did go to Ottawa and he came 
back, and he again responded to our questions here, in the 
Legislative Assembly. He said, amongst other things, in 
response to questions, and I quote from Hansard: 
 

Yesterday the Prime Minister did not divulge to me any 
specific numbers, but the good news is we have made 
progress from January. 

 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the Premier was sending a signal that 
Saskatchewan was going to get a better deal than we have been 
led to believe. 
 
He went on to say: 
 

The Prime Minister assured me that (the) decisions have 
not been made; that they are at the cabinet table. And we 
will continue to press the point in every way possible that 
we can. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as the official opposition, we took from the 
Premier’s comments that there was progress being made and, in 
fact, that we would get a trade injury payment. Or whether it 
was called that or something else, it would, would be some kind 
of a program that would be what we had agreed was required, a 
program that would be 100 per cent funded by the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we asked the Premier: are you sure? Do you know 
for sure that this is the way it’s going? And he would not tell 
the House otherwise. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we suggested to the Premier and to the 
Agriculture minister, let’s make sure we get this right before the 
announcement is made. It’s too late after the horse is let out of 
the barn and the door is closed to try to get the horse back in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the news this morning was not good. It was not 
good for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We live in a province where, despite the protestations of the 
Finance minister, we have a significant deficit. Mr. Speaker, 
under NDP (New Democratic Party) management — or 
mismanagement is probably the better term — we are having to 
demand huge dividends from the Crown corporations that they 
don’t have. We are drawing money from a Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund that has no money in its account. Mr. Speaker, we are 
borrowing hundreds of millions of dollars right now. We don’t 
have a $45,000 surplus. 
 
We are in the glue. We are in the red, and the province has 
simply placed us in a position where, right or wrong, Mr. 
Speaker — and I believe the federal government is wrong — 
but right or wrong, we are not in a financial situation to commit 
to 40 per cent funding of additional agriculture programs. 
That’s no point to brag upon on the other side, that they have 
mismanaged our province’s finances to the point that we are in 
this mess. 
 
Now I understand — and I haven’t had it confirmed — but I 
understand that Ralph Klein might be persuaded to go along 
with this program. And we disagree. We don’t think he should 
do that. We think that he should stick to his principles and also 
insist that this be a federally funded program. 
 
But of course Mr. Klein has the money because he’s been 
managing his province a whole lot better than the NDP have 
been managing the province of Saskatchewan. And so he can 
afford to eat a little crow and he can afford to fund 40 per cent 
of agriculture programs in Alberta. 
 
In fact, he’s gone beyond and left the federal government in the 
dust in some other areas, in regards to drought relief and 
spraying for grasshoppers. He’s been there for his industry, Mr. 
Speaker, in stark contrast — in stark contrast — to the NDP 
government in Saskatchewan. Because while situations on the 
farm have deteriorated, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the 
official opposition has to tell the truth. We have to tell it the 
way it is. 
 
We do support this motion, Mr. Speaker, because it’s the right 
thing to do. But we also have to point out that while other 
provinces have been responding positively for their agriculture 
sector, here in Saskatchewan what did we do? We dismantled 
crop insurance. We took away spot loss hail. We took away 
variable rates, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have not had 
adequate response to the need to drill wells and to provide 
irrigation equipment and pumping equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand . . . And I haven’t heard the entire 
interview on Newsworld but I believe that Lyle Vanclief, the 
federal Minister of Agriculture, today was criticizing the 
government and trying to get himself off the hook by saying, 
you know, we’re doing more for Saskatchewan farmers than 
their own government is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s an indictment on the NDP government. It’s 
an indictment on the member for Yorkton who claims he’s the 
Minister of Agriculture. And it’s an indictment on the wee 
Premier of Saskatchewan, who throws up his hands and says, 
I’ve done all I can do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have fully supported the Premier and we have 
fully supported the NDP in every initiative that they have 
launched to try to exact a trade injury payment from the federal 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

 

government. We have done all we possibly could do, and as I 
said in question period, we have done more. We have written a 
letter to John Manley. We have come to the table here in Regina 
and up in Saskatoon with constructive ideas. We have been full 
. . . shoulder to shoulder in agreement with the provincial 
government in calling for a $1.3 billion trade injury payment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier says well, 
could the Saskatchewan Party do any better? Well I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, it would be impossible to do worse than the NDP 
government has done, because they haven’t accomplished 
anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — All the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Premier have done is falsely raise the hopes of Saskatchewan 
people and let them down with a crash every time. Mr. Speaker, 
they have been cruel . . . It’s cruel and unusual punishment for 
the people of Saskatchewan, inflicted on them by their own 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to support the call for a $1.3 billion 
trade injury payment from the federal government. We continue 
to do that. But we point out to the provincial government that 
the responsibility to deliver on that rests squarely on their 
shoulders. Mr. Speaker, they are the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now it’s true, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan did 
not give them a strong endorsement in the last election. They 
didn’t win the popular vote. We know that. They had to rustle 
up an agreement with the three Liberal MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly); they had to have an unholy marriage, 
Mr. Speaker, to maintain power. We know that’s true. But 
nevertheless, they are the government. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t count on the 
provincial Liberal Party to criticize their federal cousins. The 
Karwacki party is not going to come to bat for Saskatchewan 
producers. The responsibility and actually the power and the 
jurisdiction lies squarely on the shoulders of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan and squarely on the shoulders of the member 
from Yorkton, the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not break faith with them, but we want to 
serve notice that we expect something better than we’ve 
received over the past months and years. We expect . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — We expect them to take stronger positions. 
We expect them to be firmer. 
 
And let me give you one more example before I sit down. Mr. 
Speaker, this morning the Premier called a news conference, 
and what was the first thing that I heard him say? The first thing 
he says is, well we’re making progress. He says, you know, a 
few months ago, the federal minister . . . the federal government 
said there’ll be no new money. But now there is new money. 
What a wonderful victory — oh, by the way, we’re not 
accepting any of it, because we’ve got to fund it to the tune of 
40 per cent. 

So what he’s done is he’s given the Liberals credit they don’t 
deserve, Mr. Speaker. He’s been too soft. He’s been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 
Regina Elphinstone just to allow the debate to take place 
without interruption. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — It’s the truth and the truth hurts, that 
they’ve been too soft with the federal government. They’ve 
been too soft with the Prime Minister. Maybe the Prime 
Minister will not concede, but they haven’t given their best 
effort, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a disappointment to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether the member from North 
Battleford is going to support this motion. He does some 
strange things. He does strange things in the House. Mr. 
Speaker, I hope he does on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know we can’t count on the federal Liberal government in 
Ottawa. They’ve let us down. We just pray to God that the NDP 
on the other side doesn’t let us down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What with saying that, we’re happy to support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m pleased to 
join in this debate and to say again — to say again — that I 
have the 100 per cent support of the Liberal caucus in saying 
that when it comes to international trade and trade injury, that is 
solely within the jurisdiction of the federal government. 
 
Now in terms of the announcement this morning, there are some 
good initiatives for rural Canada that we should all join in 
supporting, such as the decision to apply new monies to 
connectivity so that rural Canada will be connected to the 
broadband Internet. 
 
But I think the trade issue must be viewed as a totally separate 
issue. Agriculture and agricultural aid is, of course, a joint 
responsibility of the federal and provincial governments. But 
international trade is the responsibility of the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the US farm Bill — $178 billion passed earlier 
this year by the American Congress and signed into law by the 
US President — is entirely money from the federal level of 
government in that country. Likewise, the national governments 
of the European Union have totally funded their very high 
subsidy rate. Some of the members of the European Union, 
notably Germany, are federal systems. Only in Canada is the 
federal aid being tied to provincial participation, and the Liberal 
Party says that is wrong. 
 
Indeed, I found it somewhat bizarre that our Premier flew to 
Bismarck, North Dakota, earlier this spring to tell the Governor 
of North Dakota that he should be turning down billions of 
dollars in federal aid coming into his state. Not surprisingly, the 
Governor of North Dakota did not respond as the Premier had 
hoped. 
 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

It is also unfortunate that in the provincial budget earlier this 
year, the NDP gave the finger to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
And now they’re in the unfortunate position of having to argue, 
having to argue that the farmers whose interests, who they 
sacrificed, should now receive more aid from somebody else 
but they will receive nothing from them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when Dwain Lingenfelter and I were in cabinet 
there was at least the education tax rebate for our farm 
population. Now, unfortunately there’s no one in cabinet to 
argue for our farm interests and of course, the education tax 
rebate was abolished this year. So it is unfortunate that we don’t 
have somebody in cabinet now to argue, to argue for farm 
interests. 
 
And I think the Premier is unfortunately in a very weak position 
in saying, I in my budget, I took away farm support and the 
education tax rebate. I jacked up farmer premiums on crop 
insurance, I cut coverage, I have sacrificed farmers’ interests all 
the way down the road but I think the federal government 
should be doing more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta today has signed the new farm aid 
package. That is going to raise the question as to whether the 
Premier is going to allow this farm aid package to come through 
to the farmers of Saskatchewan or will the farmers of 
Saskatchewan be the only farmers in Canada not to receive any 
farm aid. 
 
Now we support this resolution, all of us, but I have to say that 
the farmers will still want to know, will farm aid come to all 
farmers in this country except the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now we understand the fight with Ottawa and we support the 
Premier in this. But we do say, farmers have to come first. And 
we do hope that in view of the rumours we are presently 
hearing about several members of the government caucus 
bailing as soon as the session is over, we do hope that this is not 
about the Premier needing to position himself in the event that a 
general election has to be called this fall. 
 
And we do say, and we do say that the farmers have to come 
first and farm aid must come through to the people of and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan, as it is going to come through to the 
farmers of Alberta. 
 
And we do say that the measures introduced in the provincial 
budget when Dwain Lingenfelter and I were still over there 
should be brought back, should be brought back, that we should 
not deny all farm aid in the provincial budget. And that if this 
province has done everything possible to assist its farmers, that 
will put the Premier in a stronger position to argue that Ottawa 
too needs to do its responsibility when it comes to issues like 
international trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the US farm Bill is being totally 
paid by the American federal government. We know that the 
fishery crisis in this country in Atlantic Canada, was paid for by 
the federal government. We know that international trade under 
the Constitution of Canada is a federal responsibility. We know 
that the subsidies paid by the European Union are paid by their 

participating national governments. All of these point to 
international trade. 
 
And the protection of our farmers against unfair subsidies is and 
must properly remain solely the responsibility of the federal 
government. And for that reason I stand in support of the 
resolution before us today and will proudly vote in favour of it. 
Thank you. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:18 until 15:26. 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente on the following 
recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 52 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Axworthy Nilson Junor 
Hamilton Harper Forbes 
Jones Higgins Trew 
Wartman Thomson Yates 
McCall Hermanson Kwiatkowski 
Heppner Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Brkich 
Wiberg Weekes Harpauer 
Hart Peters Huyghebaert 
Hillson   
 

Nays — nil 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I like that nemine contradicente thing too, 
Mr. Speaker. But I stand to ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Why is the member on his feet, Mr. 
Speaker? To ask leave of the House to move a motion of 
transmittal. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I move, seconded by the Opposition House 
Leader: 
 

That a transcript of the preceding debate and vote be 
forwarded to the Prime Minister of Canada, the federal 
Minister of Agriculture, and all Canadian premiers; and 
that this done . . . that this be done on behalf of the 
Legislative Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

 

(15:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 356 through 360 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 356, 357, 358, 359, and 360 
have been submitted and tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Benefits Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Members of the Legislative Assembly Benefits 
Act. The purpose of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to address 
concerns raised by the Canada Customs and Revenue Agency 
as they — commonly referred to, by the way, as Revenue 
Canada — as they pertain to compliance of the members of the 
legislative superannuation Act, 1979 with the Income Tax Act 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will be familiar with the fact that each 
year we are amending several pieces of pension legislation in 
order to comply with the Canada Income Tax Act as is 
necessary for pension plans to remain registered under federal 
law. 
 
Today the member from Canora tabled the third report of the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts. And I should point 
out that the Public Accounts Committee points out that the Fall 
1999 Report of the Provincial Auditor, Volume 2 called upon 
the Department of Finance to ensure that the payments under 
The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act 
came within the law. 
 
Also the Public Accounts Committee noted that the 2001 Spring 
Report of the Provincial Auditor and the 2001 Fall Report of the 
Provincial Auditor both called upon the government to make 
changes. The Public Accounts Committee has stated that they 
concur with the Provincial Auditor in both instances that, quote: 
 

The Department of Finance should seek changes to the 
provisions of The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Superannuation Act, 1979 to make them consistent with 
Canada’s Income Tax Act. 

 
And that is repeated twice on page 10. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that what this Bill 
does is simply to bring the members of the Legislative 
Assembly pension benefits in line with the Income Tax Act. 
And I want to make it very clear that it doesn’t make any other 
changes substantively. It does not change compensation for 
members of the Legislative Assembly. It redistributes benefits 
so that the pensions being accrued on behalf of members 

comply with the Income Tax Act of Canada. 
 
The most significant aspect of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the 
repealing of The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Superannuation Act, 1979 and transferring the members of the 
Legislative Assembly to the Public Employees Pension Plan, 
the pension plan for public servants. 
 
And I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that from now on the 
pension plan of the MLAs will be similar to the pension plan of 
public servants. It will comply with the Income Tax Act. It will 
meet the recommendations of the Provincial Auditor. It will 
meet the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of The 
Members of the Legislative Assembly Benefits Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a pleasure to respond to the minister’s second 
reading of Bill No. 78. 
 
As the minister has noted, it has been recommended by the 
Provincial Auditor for a number of years now, as the Finance 
minister has indicated from the report dated 1999, that there 
was a need for the Government of Saskatchewan, through 
legislative changes, to bring the pension plan of MLAs up to 
standards regarding compliance with the federal Income Tax 
Act. 
 
And the auditor has made those recommendations through the 
Public Accounts Committee, and on different occasions when 
the Public Accounts Committee has dealt with this, there was 
recommendation that indeed the Government of Saskatchewan 
should be encouraged to change the Act to comply with the 
federal Income Tax Act and that’s exactly what has happened in 
the Bill. 
 
As the official opposition, we have also been involved in some 
discussions with the members opposite in terms of ensuring that 
it’s understood that the Act is in fact not adding anything 
additional. It is not changing any of the pension benefits. 
 
What it is doing is putting the Saskatchewan MLA pension plan 
now under the Public Employees Pension Plan and that will be 
part of the public employees plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been changes made to how pensions 
will be obtained by members, both former and current 
members, at the time of those members reaching the point 
where they will be receiving a pension and we believe that this 
will, in fact, allow Saskatchewan now to be in compliance with 
the federal Income Tax Act. And thus we should not see, in 
fact, maybe a future recommendation from the auditor that 
would tell us to get our act together and our house in order to 
ensure that we do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this has been at least two or three years in 
coming, and we support the changes that have been put forward 
by the Minister of Finance through Bill 78. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 47 — The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate on Bill No. 47, The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had an opportunity to examine this Bill 
and had an opportunity to contact a number of the individuals 
and entities affected by this Bill. It turns out that for all intents 
and purposes the majority of the changes contained in this Act 
are changes with respect to boundaries. And in most cases, as I 
understand it, were actually changes that were requested by the 
individuals and entities affected. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of issues however 
around wildlife habitat lands that we think should probably be 
discussed in a little more detail — not the least of which is that, 
if you will remember earlier this session, there was some 
controversy around the government draining the surplus from 
the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. And in talking to 
people familiar with the purchase of wildlife habitat lands and 
in referencing the minister’s second reading speech, I think we 
understand that most of the land that is purchased is purchased 
with funds such as that and the taxes for the lands that are 
purchased are also paid out of funds such as the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
So in the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would be curious to 
know how it is that the government is going to be able to 
purchase more wildlife habitat lands as they become available, 
and further to that how it is that they would continue to pay the 
taxes on that land. These are some of the issues that we will be 
pursuing in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Another issue — and this is something that I would like to give 
notice to the minister at this time — is that we would also like 
to get a better idea of the consultation process that’s involved in 
the establishment of wildlife habitat lands. 
 
I understand that there are cases where wildlife habitat lands 
have been purchased and designated as wildlife habitat lands, 
but that surrounding property owners don’t feel they have been 
adequately consulted. And I would like to learn a little bit more 
about the process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of how it is 
that the determination is made, what type of consultation is used 
in fact to determine wildlife habitat lands, and what the effects 
may be on surrounding property owners. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think at this time, after having 
consulted with a number of the individuals and entities that will 
be affected by this Bill, and seeing that they have no major 
reservations, we can leave the rest of those questions until we 
get an opportunity to meet in Committee of the Whole. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 68 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 68 — The 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join in 
the debate dealing with Bill 68. Bill 68 will significantly change 
the mandate of the Sask Water Corporation. In short, the 
government proposes to take steps to transform Sask Water into 
yet another revenue generating Crown. 
 
I’ve always found it amazing the twists and turns that Sask 
Water has taken in an attempt to prove their services, and try to 
prove to the people of Saskatchewan that they are viable as an 
arm of this present government. 
 
We all know the track record of Sask Water is riddled with 
many cases of — unfortunately — with mismanagement, 
millions of dollars in lost taxpayers’ money, and the reluctance 
of its officials to take responsibility for Saskatchewan’s most 
vital resource, our water. 
 
And now we see with this legislation contained in Bill 68, you 
know, I think Sask Water is again shirking its responsibility to 
provide overall provincial water management. Bill 68 will 
change Sask Water, as I said, into another money-making 
Crown which will be reduced mainly to providing mostly 
technical water management consulting to Saskatchewan 
communities. And then once again this government will be in 
direct competition with private companies who are already 
providing the same technical consulting services that are 
available out there. 
 
I have spoken to many people including a lot of engineers who 
are disappointed with the fact that they will now have to 
compete with the government when they are providing their 
professional services to communities across our province. 
 
The minister has indicated that the regulatory services formerly 
offered by Sask Water will now be performed by yet another 
new Crown, the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. This new 
Crown apparently will report directly to the Environment 
minister, if I understand right from the second readings. 
 
Now it’s difficult for me to believe that these regulatory 
services will be handled any better under the environment, an 
environment ministry, given that this government doesn’t seem 
to know who is qualified to run the environment ministry over 
the last couple of weeks. 
 
Part of these regulatory services regard the dispute settlement 
process which is supposed to settle water issues which bring 
individuals in conflict against each other and sometimes include 
municipal governments, as well this government knows it’s . . . 
some of the court cases that are presently before it. 
 
Basically over the years this dispute settlement process 
repeatedly has failed to settle these cases, resulting in numerous 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

 

court actions, not to mention the level of . . . (inaudible) . . . that 
these failures created, has created between the people of the 
communities, communities with the government. 
 
So it’s difficult for me to believe that a problem with drainage 
or water management in general will be any better served by 
farming out these services to other ministries. Hopefully we 
will not see a return to the cavalier investment strategy that 
worked so badly with Sask Water going into the potato 
industry. 
 
You know, I hate to keep repeating it but when a ministry loses 
$30 million in taxpayers’ funds, it’s something that needs to be 
mentioned and reminded to this government quite often. Not to 
only mention that they did not fail to develop . . . They failed to 
develop the irrigation potential of the Lake Diefenbaker basin, 
but they left behind a lingering . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(15:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
And I thank my colleague for allowing the introduction to 
proceed. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome a number of students 
from my hometown of Ile-a-la-Crosse. In the west gallery, we 
have 34 grade 5 students and they’re being accompanied by 
their teachers, Tammy Whitney and Cary McMaster. 
 
And as well we have a number of kids I’d like to especially 
recognize. It’s of course my home community and we have a lot 
of family there. We have a baby girl Morris that’s here, and we 
also have my niece, Amy, and we also have my nephew, Peter. 
And I think I’m related to pretty well most of the kids up there. 
 
But I also want to recognize the chaperones, Mr. Chairman. 
First of all, is one of my old flames, Bernice Corrigal. We also 
have a gentlemen who I often beat in curling, Howard Morin; 
and we also have Jessie Corrigal, who we share the same birth 
date;. Laura Gardiner; and we also have as one of the 
chaperones, my younger sister, Jackie Belanger, up in the top. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming the many kids and the many miles that they’ve 
travelled today to be here and to make them feel very welcome. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to join the official 
opposition in welcoming the school children from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And if I ever got to ask him one question with 
all his relatives there, I would like to ask if he’s as good a 
hockey player that he’s been telling us he has been over the 
years. 
 
But getting back to Bill 68 here. What most people . . . basically 
all people in this province assume is one of Sask Water’s 
primary responsibility is the drinking water, is the safe drinking 
water that they’ve just come naturally to assume, and they hope 
that this province has been doing the job there. 
 
Our provincial drinking water has been in the constant virgil of 
the public eye since the, you know, the water scandals that have 
been going over the last few years. You know, Saskatchewan 
was awakened to the very real possible that our drinking water 
resources were under the threat of contamination. 
 
During this time, the government started this way and that way 
trying to deflect blame away from themselves. Sask Water at 
that time did not want take responsibility. Environment, Health 
officials denied responsibility. This government of course 
denied responsibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Indeed, the government went so far as to once again off-load 
responsibilities onto local municipal governments who had few 
resources and even less technical . . . to deal with the serious 
drinking water problem. 
 
Dealing with this Bill, there has been a letter sent to me — and I 
think it’s been sent over on the other side — from the 
Association of Professional Engineers dealing with The Water 
Corporation Act. I won’t read the whole letter but I can read 
some of it: 
 

As a professional engineer and practitioner in the area of 
water supply treatment and distribution, I’ve become aware 
of what may be a gap in the regulations under The Water 
Corporation Act which may significantly limit their 
attendant effect. 

 
And the Act . . . the part he was talking about was section 54, 
The Water Corporation Act. 
 
Now going through this new Bill 68, I haven’t seen where it 
really addresses this particular problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I know it still concerns . . . And I haven’t — I’ve been cc’d 
the answer — but I haven’t yet to see the answer yet from the 
Sask Water minister. So that’s one of the reasons yet we’ll still 
be adjourning debate on this particular Bill — to get some of 
the responses from the engineers. 
 
And I know over the . . . I mentioned before some of the 
engineers, a lot of the engineers talked to, are concerned about 
this particular Bill and what the role of Sask Water will be. 
 
And also dealing with this particular letter, it deals with 
submitting engineering estimates before a town can undertake, 
you know, an underground piping project. Now the danger can 



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

also arise when proper surveys are not conducted and damaged 
piping can potentially damage fresh drinking water being 
delivered to residents of the community. 
 
Now basically under The Water Corporation Act, and what he 
reads here is no approval is necessary for the construction, 
operation, or alteration of any underground piping associated 
with the distribution of treated water within the boundaries of a 
city, town, or village. No approval is required for the 
construction, operation, extension, or alteration of underground 
piping associated with the collection of sewage as generated 
entirely within a city . . . within the limits of a city, town, or 
village. 
 
Now why would it be that any government body could allow all 
communities to proceed on changing their water and sewage 
infrastructure without the proper steps being followed? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from 
Cumberland on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
member of Athabasca in welcoming the people from 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And to say, of course, to the students for 
Rossignol School, I know that they’re in grade 5, and I hope 
every single one of them passes onto grade 6 and has another 
good year next year. 
 
I would like to say thank you to their teachers as well. And I 
noted in the crowd when I talked to the member of Athabasca 
that one name, special name was left out, and that was 
Germaine Kenny, one of the chaperones. So we’d like to 
include her in regards to the list. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, we all know that in this legislature, 
the Wayne Gretzky of the legislature is the member from 
Athabasca, you see, but I think that the Kevin Martin of Ile a le 
Crosse may be over there with Howard Morin. So I know that 
Howard and I play a little bit of curling you know in the winter 
time, while the member from Athabasca is busy playing 
hockey. 
 
So I’d like to give special recognition again to of course 
Howard, Germaine, and all the teachers from Ile a le Crosse and 
the students from Ile a le Crosse. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act 
(continued) 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, getting back . . . just 
dealing with the question in the letter. 
 
Now why, you know basically, why would any government 
body that could allow any communities to proceed on changing 
their water and sewage infrastructure without the proper steps 
being followed you know, needs to be addressed. 
 
I would offer that this government may wish to avoid the costs 
involved in doing this important advance work. They know that 
they ultimately bear the responsibility for the infrastructure of 
this . . . of the provinces . . . of the towns which are affected. 
And you know basically it seems like they don’t want to take 
the responsibility in the critical areas. 
 
Now Sask Water apparently under Bill 68 now will have the 
ability to charge for technical expertise and water management 
advice. It doesn’t address any of the infrastructure problems 
that are facing many of the towns. They’ll only be charging 
them to tell them what their problems are now. 
 
And now it’s been, I don’t know if it’s been determined yet, but 
this new Crown — well I think it will be determined — this 
new Crown is going to be competing with private business in 
this area of water resource management. The big question is just 
how much will these communities be charged for the services 
that Sask Water now provides on a commercial basis. 
 
Will the government permit Sask Water to undercut the private 
consulting firms which already provide the same service? 
Previous Sask Water officials thought nothing of running 
individual potato growers out of business when SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) got into 
financial trouble and these growers didn’t get paid for their 
product or the services they provided. I would be extremely 
worried that Sask Water would apply these aggressive business 
tactics while trying to capture their market share of the water 
consulting industry. 
 
Now that the dispute mechanism with regards to the Water 
Appeal Board will now . . . will be . . . will now be under the 
responsibility of Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, we would 
hope that this dispute settlement process will be improved to the 
point where it’ll at least be effective in the short term. We 
cannot afford to have disagreements between individuals and 
government bodies that last for years and years with no solution 
in sight. 
 
Certainly, we need to ensure that whatever dispute mechanism 
is in place should be far more effective than we have seen in 
previous years. 
 
One of the questions that has the top . . . that is at the top of the 
debate for Bill 68 is a question of administrative costs. Will 
there be a new ministry set up for the new mandate of Sask 
Water? If so, will we have the cost of a minister office and staff, 
as well as the cost of management and the staff of the new 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority also? 
 
I would ask the government, which is constantly talking about 
fiscal responsibility, just how they figure that splitting Sask 
Water’s responsibility by forming two new Crown corporations 
has anything to do with saving money for provincial taxpayers. 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

 

This government just, you know, just seems to be determined to 
create more and more Crown corporations as the way to 
proceed with Saskatchewan’s economic troubles. Nowhere do I 
see anything take . . . taking any imagination . . . or anybody 
taking any imagination in the way of drawing in new businesses 
and bringing new people and former Saskatchewan residents 
back into our province. 
 
The forming of two new Crown corporations sends another 
message to our young people in our universities and our 
potential entrepreneurs, that the Saskatchewan government is 
waiting again to steal your ideas, your initiatives should you 
decide to set up business or use your university degree here at 
home. 
 
The people of this province have lost faith in this government’s 
ability to manage the affairs of its taxpayer and Bill 68 is just 
more proof that they’re right in this assessment. 
 
Dealing again on Bill 68, I know we’re waiting for a response 
back. We’ve sent it out, but the response so far has not been 
good. 
 
And I know there are other members that wish to address this, 
so I will right now adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

Subvote (SS01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce the officials who will assist me in the 
committee today. And I do want to draw particular attention to 
one of the officials today if I may, Mr. Chair. 
 
First of all, as per usual, the deputy minister, Bonnie Durnford 
is to my right. Seated directly behind Bonnie is the executive 
director of family and youth services, Richard Hazel. 
 
And I would want to draw to the attention of the members of 
the committee, that this may very well be Mr. Hazel’s last time 
that he’s assisting the minister in the review of estimates of 
Social Services, as he’ll be retiring at the end of next week after 
35 years of services to the people of Saskatchewan, Department 
of Social Services. And I think it would be most appropriate if 
members of the committee would express support and 
appreciation of the people of the province for his service in 
Social Services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Directly behind me is the assistant deputy 
minister, Daryl Jones, and then behind . . . Oh and to the right 
of the deputy minister is the executive director of financial 
management, Don Allen. Behind the bar, in small print, are 

Larry Chaykowski who is the executive director of housing 
operations; Craig Marchinko, director of social housing; Phil 
Walsh, executive director of income support; associate 
executive director Marilyn Hedlund; Deborah Bryck, director of 
child care; and Betty West, director of community programs in 
the community living division; and Barb MacLean, executive 
director of Saskatchewan Career and Employment Services. 
 
Mr. Chair, if the hon. member would like me to respond to a 
letter of request for information he provided to me yesterday, 
I’ll do that at this point. And I see him nodding. Yesterday, Mr. 
Chair, the Social Services critic provided a letter requesting the 
response to the number of housing units we have in the 
province. And this is due to the fact that, under the 
reorganization, housing is now under the jurisdiction of Social 
Services. Secondly, the commercial value of these units, and 
thirdly the rental rates per unit and how these rental rates are 
arrived at. 
 
And I provide to the hon. member this information: that the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is responsible for a 
portfolio of nearly 32,000 housing units which are spread 
around 348 communities around the province. Of these, 1,800 
are directly managed by the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, 18,000 are managed by local housing authorities, 
and 12,000 are delivered through management and operating 
agreements with non-profit and co-operative organizations — 
about 32,000 in total. 
 
The current replacement value of these housing assets is 
estimated to be $2.7 billion at this point in time. And the rental 
rates do vary by program. The social housing program rents 
were low — these be for low-income tenants, Mr. Chair — are 
based on the income of the tenants with a typical rent ranging 
from 222 to $342 per month. The affordable housing rents — 
these would be for low- and moderate-income tenants — are 
fixed at the lower end of the market rents and typically range in 
the area of 310 to $624 depending on the building type, the unit 
size, and geographical location. 
 
And I know as well, Mr. Chair, that it is of interest to the hon. 
member and members of the committee that the most recent 
welfare reports are out for the month of May which showed, 
I’m pleased to report to the committee, another decline — that 
Saskatchewan has now experienced 90 consecutive months in 
which our welfare numbers have declined month over month, 
month over month of the previous year. And in May of this year 
it represented province-wide a decline of 8 per cent from the 
previous year. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, having provided that information to the 
committee, I look forward to the questions of the hon. member 
and his colleagues and doing the best we can to respond to 
them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here today. 
 
I did notice, Mr. Minister, that a number of your officials — at 
least a couple of them — looks like you and I and they have the 
same barber. I just noticed that today, so we’re off on a real 
good foot right off the start. 
 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

Mr. Minister, I have some questions to do with Sask Housing, 
which you were just talking about, and I’ve had some calls with 
some concerns just lately about the rental rates. Can you 
confirm, Mr. Minister, that the rental rates for Sask Housing 
units will be increasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, there will be a graduated rent scale that will 
be introduced that will come effective October 1 of this fall. 
 
It was announced in the budget and it’s impact will be this, as I 
just . . . as I earlier said, the social housing rental rates are 
calculated as a percentage of income and so the increase is 
described in that term because that’s the formula. 
 
After October 1, on the anniversary date of the tenancy, so it’ll 
take a year nearly — well it will take a year after that date for 
everyone to become affected by it — but there will be an 
increase of 1 per cent of income. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
conferring with my colleague from Moosomin, if it’s possible 
could we get a copy of the information that you provided to him 
at the start about the types of housing and the numbers and the 
rent and that? That would certainly be helpful if you could find 
. . . or if you could do that. 
 
Mr. Minister, is the formula itself changing that sets the rental 
rates for the different categories? I notice the second category, I 
believe you said, was the affordable housing and I didn’t catch 
the name of the first group, the lower rate, income rate. Okay? 
Is the formula changing and the cap that you have in place now, 
or do you have a cap? Is there going to be a cap put in place and 
how is the new formula, the new set-up going to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s first request, I’d be happy to . . . what I will do for 
the hon. member for Moosomin is he wrote me a letter with the 
information and I’ll simply respond by letter with that 
information. I think that will provide the information that 
you’re looking for. 
 
On the social housing . . . You were asking both social housing 
and affordable housing. First of all, social housing, the formula 
is adjusting by 1 per cent so that’s the adjustment formula there. 
 
Moving to the affordable housing, which is housing targeted to 
low- and moderate-income housing, then it is . . . it is largely at 
the initiative of the local housing authorities that the rental rates 
for the affordable housing are set, and they are typically 
targeted to the low end of the housing for the market of that 
community. What happens is that each local housing authority 
will make a request for approval, if they see it appropriate to 
make an adjustment, of Sask Housing. And then if approved, 
they are required to give a three-month notice to tenants that 
there will be an adjustment in the affordable housing rental 
rates. 
 
So there won’t be something you could say would be applied 
across the province. This would be done with sensitivity to the 
local rental rates and as monitored and directed by the local 
housing authority with, ultimately then, the approval of Sask 
Housing. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’m glad to 
hear that, that . . . I’ll explain the concern. One of the concerns I 
had brought to me, Mr. Minister, was a lady from Kamsack 
who is in the affordable housing right now. She’s a widow, 
perfect situation — you know how the small apartments are, I 
think they’re like 400 square feet — perfect situation for her. 
And I believe she pays 400 a month at the present time. 
 
How she got the information, I don’t know, but it was her 
understanding that her rent may go from 400 now to 800 a 
month. And I thought that would be virtually impossible in 
small-town Saskatchewan. 
 
Is there a possibility that that could happen, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, if it is accurate that the 
circumstance that the hon. member raises of a person — and I 
think I’d prefer rather than talking about specific individuals, to 
deal with the policy — if a person is in affordable housing, if it 
is an affordable housing unit, then the maximum increase that 
can be assigned in any given year is 5 per cent. 
 
If on the other hand, if the tenant is in social housing, where the 
rental rate is a percentage of income, then it could happen that a 
doubling of income would lead to a doubling of the rental 
because it’s a percentage of income. 
 
But if the hon. member, Mr. Chair, is of the view it’s affordable 
housing and if that’s accurate, then the maximum increase 
possible in any year, in any location, would be 5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Because that 
pretty well puts away the myth that her rent could go from 400. 
Pretty sure, Mr. Minister, that’s it’s in affordable housing, her 
husband passed away, and it sounds like that’s about the area 
that she would fit in. 
 
And I guess my concern was that in small-town Saskatchewan, 
$800 a month is just not heard of, you know, for rent. And I 
think her concern was very valid that if her rent went from 400 
to 800, she might as well just move out and go get herself an 
apartment. And I guess my problem with that is the number of 
the housing units out there, possibly part of them would be 
empty if it wasn’t for people like this lady living in them at this 
point, which is a win/win in both situations for the community 
and for the lady. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, can you explain how it works when 
residents of Sask Housing pay their rent? Does that money 
come into Sask Housing and then you fund the upkeep and so 
on of these housing units? How does that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the revenues that go to Sask 
Housing Corporation are a combination of the rents paid and 
then the monies allocated by the province of Saskatchewan and 
the Government of Canada. And then from those revenues, 
budgets are allocated to the local housing authorities for their 
operations and their maintenance. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
may have answered this and I may have missed it in your 
answer. But did you mention caps, because this was one of the 
questions the lady had brought up. It was her understanding that 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

 

there was new caps being put in place and that’s where she got 
to this $800-a-month point. Is there anything to that? Or you 
know, maybe what she heard isn’t right either. I don’t know. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question — and to try and make it as clear as I can 
for the comfort of the constituent but also the general 
understanding of the public regarding the policy — there will 
be, in the area of social housing in communities where there is 
significant vacancy, there will be caps put on the maximum 
social housing, which is the percentage of income, simply in 
order to be a reasonable . . . to provide reasonable rents where 
in fact there may not be any other rentals available, and to 
enable people who may have higher incomes to simply find a 
place to live. 
 
But under any circumstance . . . And I don’t think that applies 
in this circumstance because it sounds as though the person’s, 
whose concern you raise, is affordable housing, from what you 
were saying to me. However in either social housing or 
affordable housing as it affects any . . . the maximum rents, they 
will not increase by more than 5 per cent in any given year on 
the maximum rent for the cap. 
 
So I would say that the scenario, if I understand your question 
correctly, where a . . . Because I think you were saying the 
constituent wasn’t at the . . . necessarily at the maximum now. 
So I won’t comment on that, to avoid confusion. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My colleague 
from Last Mountain has brought to my attention too that a 
community has the right to remove the caps or leave them on if 
they so wish. 
 
Is that the old way and is that changing? Or is that the way it is 
from now on, that should a community decide that they don’t 
want caps in place, they probably . . . I don’t know if they ask 
permission or whatever it is, but they can remove those caps 
and then it’s unlimited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, the way the process works then, related to a 
cap, is that the local housing authority will, if they want to have 
a change in the cap — maybe a change up, change down, 
eliminate, put one where there isn’t one — when they want to 
make a change in the cap then they make a request to Sask 
Housing and Sask Housing . . . and in order to implement the 
change it has to be approved by Sask Housing Corporation. 
 
Sask Housing will review the request and give the approval 
based on the criteria of wanting to see equitability through the 
province and within areas so that you don’t have remarkably 
different circumstances from neighbouring communities for 
example. 
 
So I think that will respond to the hon. member’s question, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would the 
situation arise where Sask Housing would go to a community 
— and I’m not sure if this is what happened in Kamsack — but 

would Sask Housing go to a community and say, we think you 
should remove that cap; so take it away, it’s gone, and there 
was no cap out there, but initiated by Sask Housing not by the 
board in the community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question: it can occur; it’s not a frequent occurrence. 
It can occur that Sask Housing would approach a local housing 
authority and ask them to look at the cap circumstance. The cap 
would be put in place if there is, if there is a chronic vacancy, in 
order to . . . in order then to make use of the units. 
 
However if the chronic vacancy is no longer there and there is 
for example a long . . . a growing waiting list of low-income 
applicants, then Sask Housing is aware of that, and the authority 
has not raised the issue, Sask Housing may come to the 
authority and work together with them to review the cap 
circumstances. 
 
This is all . . . should be looked at in the context of the objective 
of Sask Housing province-wide, is to respond to the housing 
needs, access to adequate housing, particularly for low-income 
and moderate-income citizens of Saskatchewan. And so if 
circumstances may have changed in a community and Sask 
Housing was seeing the need for the cap being different from 
what it is, then it is possible that Sask Housing would approach 
the local housing authority. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One more 
question, Mr. Minister. In the case of the lady that had 
contacted me and she’s now paying $400 a month, if I 
understood one of your answers right, the most her rent can 
change is 5 per cent in a year. So I would presume that I can 
reassure the lady that that’s the maximum that her rent can 
change from where she presently is till this time next year. Is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The answer is yes if it’s one of two 
circumstances, which I think it is. If she’s in an affordable 
housing unit, then the answer is yes — maximum 5 per cent. Or 
if she’s . . . if it is in that circumstance a cap — which I think is 
probably not the case — but if that were the case, it cannot 
move by more than 5 per cent. If it is a social housing unit, 
which is based on percentage of income, then the calculation 
there is dependent on what happens with her income. But I 
think your . . . Mr. Chair, the hon. member’s view is that it’s not 
social housing. So it would appear the answer would be yes. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My questions also deal with the housing 
authority, and I know we’ve had some discussions on that. How 
many houses on the . . . Well we’ll go back to even the question 
that was before me. How many communities . . . Like I said, 
right now I have the list of communities that have waiting lists. 
This year have you lifted the caps on any of them to deal with 
that problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
question, none that we know of unless there is a possibility that 
the housing authority removed the cap without notifying Sask 
Housing. But to the best of our knowledge the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, another question dealing with 
Sask Housing. How many houses this year, in this year’s budget 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

starting January up to now, have you moved out of . . . any 
houses out of any communities up to this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll get back to that. 
 
One other question just when I was listening to the members 
here, could you explain the difference between social housing 
and affordable housing — the pricing there and what the rent 
is? And you mentioned . . . you kept mentioning social and 
affordable housing. Can you tell me what the difference is 
between the two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, social housing is housing which is intended 
for low-income families and the rents in the social housing are 
based on a percentage of income — that’s how they get set. So 
if you want to know what the amount of rent for a given family 
would be in social housing, then you have to know what their 
income is. 
 
Affordable housing is intended to respond to the housing needs 
of low- and moderate-income families and are part of a strategy 
to ensure that families with low and moderate incomes will 
have some kind of reasonable access within the marketplace. 
And the rents in that case then are set at low end of market for 
that kind of unit in that particular community. 
 
So it would be impossible to predict, for example, a unit, you 
know, a two-bedroom unit with 800 square feet, for example, to 
say how much that would be in affordable housing. It would 
depend where it is and the condition of it and so on. And then 
the rents in that case then will be determined by the local 
housing authority and they will be at . . . they will not be 
influenced by the family income of the tenants. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A question to the 
Chair . . . through the Chair to you. What percentage of income 
do you use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, this really goes back to the I 
think the very first question asked by the hon. member for 
Saltcoats. As of October 1, the percentage of income for social 
housing is calculated on the basis of 26 per cent of household 
income. And then from that there may be some deductions for 
certain incomes that would in fact lower the rate. So the 
effective rate may in fact be lower than 26 per cent, but that’s 
. . . the calculation starts with looking at 26 per cent of 
household income. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Getting back to 
originally moving the houses, are there any right now, planned 
moves right now for this budget year, for 2002? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in this year, in the 2002 year, 
the plans are to move eight units. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — From where to where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in this year there will be . . . the 

plans are to move four units from Maymont and four units from 
Rockglen. And the communities that they’re moving to have 
not yet been announced, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Is there any more possible coming 
up or is that the ones you just know about for . . . or will . . . this 
budget year, are they done for houses being moved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, there are some other 
possibilities. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Now when you’re dealing with the 
moving, the cost of moving some of these units . . . I’ll use the 
ones that are in Kenaston as an example. They’re a single 
bedroom, just single-person units built in the ’80s I believe, 
early ’80s — they may even built in the ’70s, some of them — I 
would be very interested . . . and it’s been approached to me 
and I think to a letter even to you the cost of moving these 
houses are probably worth . . . cost more than the houses are 
worth; that to either leave them there, if you have to, if it looks 
like you can’t fill them. 
 
But they’ve had spikes. Two years ago there was a waiting list. 
I mean this year, they don’t have a . . . there’s some vacancies. I 
mean naturally the way the budget restraints are with this 
government in the last year or two, it seems like they’ve been 
really hitting hard. Like if you have a vacancy now, you . . . 
they want to move that house. Yet if you go back over the 
records, they’ve had spikes where there’s been waiting lists and 
odd years some vacancies and back up to waiting lists, back and 
forth. Especially in towns that live closer to big cities or if a 
construction job happens to come open. 
 
But if, the very last thing, if you decide that you are going to 
close these units, wouldn’t it be better to sell them to the town 
or to individuals rather than try and pick them up and move 
these houses that are 25, 30 years old? 
 
And I’ve worked for a moving company, years and years ago, 
and you start moving small, little houses like that — you get the 
cracked plaster, the windows. It gets very expensive to the work 
that you have to do once you take them back there. And plus, I 
believe, that you take the sites back, put them back originally 
like you have before, so there’s a cost of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just in response to the hon. 
member’s question and also to give it a bit of a context as well. 
The guideline that’s used to determine whether it’s practical to 
move a house from one community to another is 75 per cent of 
the cost of building anew. And so when Sask Housing makes 
the decision to move a unit from one community to another, it 
would be in that context. 
 
Sale is something that can be considered, but what we always 
have to keep in mind is the purpose for Sask Housing, the role it 
plays within the province, Mr. Chair. And although on the one 
hand, the sale can provide some revenues, it may not position 
Sask Housing to put a new unit in a community where the need 
is high. And so it’s on that basis a judgment has to be made. 
 
Just to give that some context, Mr. Chair, because quite 
honestly I think many people don’t realize the demand that 
there is on the housing system, and I have to admit I was a bit 



June 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

 

surprised when housing came to Social Services on April 1 and 
I began to understand more clearly the social housing need 
within the province. 
 
As I said in response to the member from Moosomin’s written 
question when we first began here, Sask Housing is responsible 
for some 32,000 units across the province and does it in a 
variety of ways, as I described. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Chair, in addition to that we identify that 
there are some 56,000 additional families in Saskatchewan that 
. . . who require some form of assistance in order to have 
reasonable access to reasonable housing. 
 
And so it is in this context for Sask Housing to meet its social 
obligations to the people of Saskatchewan that we must always 
be paying attention and making decisions on a specific basis — 
and recognizing that there are limited resources, as we all know, 
and that the demand is extremely high. 
 
So I reinforce again, 32,000 units in place under the authority of 
Sask Housing right now, or the involvement, but an additional 
56,000 families in Saskatchewan who are estimated to be 
needing some form of assistance. So that gives a context to the 
decision making, I think. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, getting back to the moving costs. 
Last year would you have a total cost for what was charged for 
moving any of the houses, you’d had a total bill? Could you 
give me what the total bill was for last year of any houses you 
moved? 
 
Not per house, you may not have a breakdown of that, but even 
just a lump sum. I think I have . . . how many houses were 
there? I can figure out what it costs if you don’t have that 
broken down per house. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just let me correct the statement 
I made in the previous answer when I referred to 56,000 
families. I would be more accurate to say 56,000 households 
need some support and have access to reasonable housing 
because not all of those households are necessarily families. 
 
Mr. Chair, in direct response to the hon. member’s question, I 
can only give . . . actually I can be specific to the answer, to the 
question that you didn’t ask, and have to approximate to the one 
that you did. So if I can just do it the other way around. 
 
Last year the amount spent was approximately $930,000. That 
won’t be precise but it’ll be close. But the average cost to move 
each home was $46,700. So that’s the per-home cost. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. $46,000 was the 
average cost? That seems, well, seems fairly high. But you 
could probably build units for . . . like the ones in Kenaston, I’ll 
just use an example, I’m guessing at 50, 60,000 you could 
probably build them. Especially if you’re building several units 
at a time and naturally your costs . . . you’d be buying in bulk or 
your contractors would be doing more things in bulk, your costs 
would be undercut at that. Has your department looked at that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the $46,700 includes then the 
cost related to cleanup at the removal site, transportation of the 

unit, the land, the new foundation, and refurbishing cost to 
bring the unit to an as-new condition when it’s then located. 
The equivalent new construction cost for the equivalent unit 
would be estimated at $65,000. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s some 
clarification to it because at first I just asked what the moving 
costs were. But still 46 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, well 
thank you . . . but still forty-six thousand, sixty-four, it’s about 
$14,000 difference. You know, it’s not a huge amount of 
difference. It might be even better to build in some of these 
communities and try and keep some of these houses in the other 
communities. 
 
But it goes back . . . I have one more question dealing with, 
when you do move units from a town and you clean the site all 
up, what do you do with the land back? I imagine you want the 
town to take it back, but what if the town doesn’t want to take it 
back? Some of these lots are on corners, they’re very small, 
nobody else could build . . . nobody really wants to build some 
units that small. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, not that I want to become a 
mathematics professor, but the . . . just in response to the hon. 
member’s difference about . . . difference between moving and 
building, is that the difference between 65,000 and 46,700 
would be some $17,300. So it would be a little bit more than the 
hon. member quickly estimated. 
 
Just in response to the question then, the Sask Housing works 
together with the local community. There’s no surprises here. 
Nobody can come sweeping in in the middle of the night with a 
big skyhook and lifts this thing up and leaves town. 
 
This is a process that is done in co-operation with the local 
community and worked out with the community as they 
understand the circumstances. And the large, large majority of 
time, I’m advised, then the property is turned over to the 
community. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. But with the $17,000 
difference, you also have a brand new home there too, not a 30- 
or 35-year-old home, also is one way to look at it. 
 
And the communities that I’ve talked to, I haven’t heard one 
that was happy about it or were considered in the consultation 
process. Eventually it just out of the region: we’ll make the 
decision that the units are gone and they’re gone. 
 
And with that, I guess I really don’t have a question. It’s just 
more of a comment that I hope that you will take into 
consideration some of the remarks that were made here of 
trying to . . . The government always constantly is trying to talk 
about revitalizing rural Saskatchewan. Well you just keep 
yanking one service or one thing out of there one time after 
another. I’ve just got another one, that were taking class 1A 
testing out of Outlook and Davidson. 
 
Every few months it’s always something coming out of some of 
these towns, and so . . . and as you keep taking stuff out, 
eventually you’re going to have nothing left. 
 
(16:45) 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the hon. member’s 
remarks and certainly will note them as he requests. 
 
I also must remind the members of the committee that in the 
context of response . . . (inaudible) . . . Sask Housing, that of 
course when a unit moves somewhere it’s also going to a 
community that typically has a long waiting list and then is in 
response to the needs for housing in that community. 
 
So Sask Housing is committed to working together with 
communities; the housing authorities are very important in the 
operation of the whole housing system. And our obligations are 
across the province and unfortunately we don’t have the luxury 
of only looking at it from a single community’s point of view; 
Sask Housing and through its housing authorities needs to look 
at the needs in a variety of communities. 
 
And so where I appreciate on the one hand the point the hon. 
member raises, on the other hand there’ll be another community 
somewhere that will be happy to see a new unit. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a question for 
the Minister of Social Services. It’s regarding the career 
laddering program. I had a constituent come to me who had 
been enrolled in this program; had been taken off of welfare to 
be put in the program, which was a very positive thing for her, 
and she was very encouraged by it. 
 
She also was then awarded a place of employment. The 
employer worked with the government officials to make her 
place of employment available and — but with some reluctance 
— but she finally . . . she did agree that it maybe would work 
for her because it would . . . if she got the person trained they 
would be able to fill in for holidays and so on. 
 
This girl took the career laddering program from November 19 
to April 19, just got started into the job, I believe only one 
week, and the program was cancelled. 
 
I would like to know why the program was cancelled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just in response to the 
member’s question — and unfortunately I think we’re going to 
. . . I’m advised we have to move to Royal Assent — but it 
would appear that the question is more appropriately directed to 
the Minister of Learning, to the Department of Learning. 
 
The career laddering program, if it’s discontinued, it was most 
likely a program offered either by a private vocational school or 
a regional college. And so if a training institution makes a 
decision to discontinue a laddering program then that might . . . 
it would be for their own reasons, often would relate to the 
registration within. 
 
Mr. Chair, I apologize to the hon. members who may have more 
questions. We’ll look forward to estimates continuing at another 
time. But we’re advised that the Assembly must receive Her 
Honour for Royal Assent in just a few moments. And so 
therefore I would move that the committee rise, report progress, 
and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 16:52, Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave royal assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 6 - The Horned Cattle Purchases Amendment Act, 

2002 
Bill No. 301 - The Conference of Mennonites of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 302 - The Sunnyside Nursing Home Amendment 

Act, 2002 
Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 13 - The Speech-Language Pathologists and 

Audiologists Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 37 - The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 39 - The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 42 - The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 14 - The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act, 

2002 
Bill No. 44 -  The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 50 - The Department of Agriculture and Food 

Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 51 - The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 

2002 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 7 - The Electronic Information and Documents 

Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 20 - The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 

2002 
Bill No. 25 - The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 
Bill No. 49 - The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act 
Bill No. 1 - The Ethanol Fuel Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:55. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 
 


