















































Hansard: May 13, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1365 
 May 13, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d 
like to introduce the officials from the department and from the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. My deputy minister, Steven 
Pillar, is to my right. Directly behind me is Cheryl Hanson, 
assistant deputy minister. And to Cheryl’s left is John Boyd, 
executive director, planning and policy. And back behind the 
bar we have Eric Greene, acting executive director, labour 
services; Doug Forseth, executive director, labour relations and 
mediation; and Allan Walker, executive director, occupational 
health and safety; Peter Federko, chief executive officer of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board; and Gail Kruger, 
vice-president, budget and finance, Workers’ Compensation 
Board. 
 
We’re pleased to be here this evening to answer any questions 
that the opposition may have. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and welcome 
to the minister’s officials. I would like to start out this evening 
by asking the minister about the $55.8 million operating loss. 
And I would just like the minister to explain how this operating 
loss has come about and what steps are taken to rectify that 
particular situation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, on Friday last I tabled the 
annual report of the Workers’ Compensation Board. I gave the 
financial information for the year ending December 2001. The 
primary reasons for the operating deficit that the member 
opposite inquired about is a drastic reduction in investment 
income of just under $33 million and also a $69 million 
actuarial adjustment. And a combination of those ended up with 
the $55.8 million operating deficit. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I would like to 
know . . . I understand that there is an emergency meeting 
called by the board that’s going to be taking place over the next 
two days and I assume it’s concerning Workers’ Compensation 
and this huge operating loss. Could you confirm that there will 
be a meeting held in the next two days and clarify what the 
meeting is about. The meeting is with Workers’ Compensation 
Board and the stakeholders in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite inquired 
about meetings that have been set up with stakeholders and the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. These aren’t emergency 
meetings of any type. When the financial information for the 
end of 2001 was ready, the annual report was ready, there was 
meetings set up to inform stakeholders of the issues in the 
annual report and what will be done to address those concerns. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Could you outline some of the 
issues that will be discussed at that meeting and then how you 

plan on rectifying the problems. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. The WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) had set up these meetings to 
have a more in-depth discussion with the stakeholders now that 
the annual report has been released — to go into detail on the 
report and the figures that are in there, more of a detailed 
analysis, how the $55.8 million shortfall came about, the 
concerns that are raised there. The board will give explanation 
and answer questions and . . . that the stakeholders have 
concerns with. 
 
It’s just more of an informational meeting and give explanations 
on the annual report. 
 
Also the concern of the actuarial adjustment is not understood 
well at all times and especially when it gets to be to the amount 
it is. The adjustment made this year, or last year’s report, so 
they’ll go into further explanation on that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Could you — Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the 
minister — could you explain in more detail those two items 
that you just mentioned. What are the . . . what is the 
explanation for the increase in the reserve, or not the reserve but 
the actuarial that’s in the annual report, and also, why has there 
been such a huge operating loss? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — As I touched on right at the beginning, 
the two things that have really contributed to the shortfall this 
year, or in last year’s annual report, and for the WCB was the 
actuarial adjustment and the loss of investment income, or a 
smaller return on investment income. 
 
Each year at the end of the year, an actuary reviews the claims 
and the claim costs at the WCB. And when we talk about claim 
costs, what we talk about is wage loss, medical rehabilitation, 
vocational rehabilitation, cost of therapies. And based on that 
review, the actuary calculates the amount required to fully fund 
all existing claims into the future. The benefit liability is the 
amount of money that the WCB must have on hand to pay for 
future costs of all claims that are in the system. And the 
difference between the current liability calculation and the prior 
year’s calculations is referred to as the actuarial adjustment. 
 
So that’s a brief explanation. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. It’s obvious that there needs to be 
some efficiencies and savings in the whole workers’ 
compensation system. 
 
And one thing that was pointed out by the . . . by one report, 
talked about a 48 per cent increase in administration expenses. 
Well I’ll give part of the explanation. It’s gone mainly to 
salaries. But we notice that there’s been such a high increase, a 
48 per cent increase in the administrative expenses and I said it 
goes to salaries. But these staffing increases were despite 
increased expenditures on consultants and professionals over 
and above the regular salaries. 
 
Could you explain why there has been such a high increase in 
expenditures and on . . . for consultants and professionals? 
 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, when we look at the costs of 
administration with WCB, we can refer to the Association of 
Workers’ Compensation Boards of Canada data that shows that 
the Saskatchewan WCB, their ratio of administration expenses 
to accessible payroll is lower than most WCBs in Canada. In 
the fiscal year 2001, administration expenditures, while they 
went up 1.5 million, represented only 14 per cent of WCB 
expenses. Wage-loss benefits, health care, and vocational 
rehabilitation expenses for work injuries in Saskatchewan 
accounted for 82 per cent of WCB’s expenses in 2001. 
 
WCB adjudicates 38,000 compensation claims and processes 
over 31,000 employer accounts annually. And there is an 
upswing in the annual number of work injury claims being 
reported to the WCB, including the number of long-term 
claims. And when we talk about long term, we talk about claims 
that are over a four-week duration. WCB handled 3,534 
long-term claims in 2000 — an increase of 1,000 long-term 
claims — up 33 per cent over the long-term claims in 1996, so 
that’s quite an increase in claims. WCB is receiving more 
complex soft tissue injury claims and more occupational disease 
claims, requiring additional adjudication and claim management 
staff time. So you can see all these contribute to more time 
spent delivering service to injured workers. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The information 
that I have, reports claims have . . . (inaudible) . . . claims have 
been relatively constant from 1995 to 2000, but still the board 
has had a 48 per cent increase in expenses. And I’d like a 
clarification on why there’s been so many consultants and other 
professionals outside the Workers’ Compensation that have 
been hired over this period which obviously has increased costs 
for the board. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, when we start talking about 
the costs associated with Workers’ Compensation and the 
administration fees and outside consultants, as the member 
opposite is well aware, over the last number of years WCB has 
undergone major reorganization in many ways. A lot of time 
and effort and dollars was put into upgrading support systems, 
HR (human resources), IT (information technology) systems. 
Also delivering specific services to injured workers, there has 
been an increase over the last number of years, and client 
service representatives that have been hired to deal with cases 
as they come in and to deal with them on the long term. 
 
But still in some of the comments that I made earlier when we 
were talking about administration expenditures and we look at 
the number of long-term claims, more severe claims and claims 
of a higher complexity, they take a great deal of time and effort 
to deal with. They are more complex and take up more services 
directed towards the injured worker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, all through the annual report it talks 
about efficiencies and savings. I’d just like to ask the minister 
with all the changes and the studies that’s taken place in the last 
five years, has there been any savings, and if so, where have 
they been made, and how has there been a process put in place 
to measure these savings now or in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the question from the member 

opposite looking for specific details, really all he has to do is 
look at the rates charged by the Saskatchewan WCB. We’re the 
second lowest in Canada, have remained consistently in the 
lowest while maintaining good benefits to injured workers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Also over the last three years rebates provided to employers 
amounted to $90 million from surplus, excessive surplus that 
was rebated to employers over the three-year period. And also 
we had the lowest composite duration index. That’s an index 
that measures time loss, all claims time loss. 
 
So all you have to do is look at the big picture of the WCB in 
Saskatchewan. They’re providing very good services and are 
very fiscally sound and stable. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to quote from the 
annual report. The average assessment rates for 2001: 
Saskatchewan is at 1.7 per $100 payroll and Alberta is at 1.28, 
which is lower. BC is slightly higher at 1.79. Manitoba is lower 
at 1.49. New Brunswick is at 1.64 and then the Northwest 
Territories are somewhat less than that. So Saskatchewan is still 
considerably lower . . . or considerably higher than a lot of 
provinces at this time. 
 
And I was just wondering, is the board and is the minister 
considering raising the rates to the employers this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, when the member opposite 
was quoting numbers from the 2001 annual report it is in fact 
numbers from that year, 2001. When we say that Saskatchewan 
has the second lowest rates of all Canadian provinces we are 
talking about 2002 and we are not counting in rates that are 
subsidized. And there is no intent to have any mid-term 
adjustments to the rates for 2002. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you. It’s . . . your comments about 
the second lowest rates in Canada is well unclear at best. If 
we’re looking at the 2001 annual report, you should be quoting 
from the 2001 annual report because that’s what . . . that’s the 
information everyone else has. 
 
If you’re talking about 2002, if you have other information 
about what’s going to be happening in 2002, will there be a . . . 
will we expect a greater loss as far as operating losses in 2002 
or what are you expecting for this upcoming year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member actually had . . . I guess 
referring to the 2001 annual report, and I was using 2002 
figures. I may be a little bit ahead of you, but what I guess we’ll 
have to do is just repeat them next year when we’re doing 
estimates at this same time. We’ll be using the 2002 figures 
when you’re reading from the annual report. But the 2002 rates 
are made public in October of 2001 during stakeholder 
consultations and meetings leading up to January when the new 
rates are actually set and notice is sent out. 
 
When you ask about the outlook for this year, we’re barely into 
the second quarter for this year so really, until the actuarial 
review is done in the fall or late in the fall of this year, it’s 
really too soon to guess. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to know how many 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

 

employers there are that’s in WCB and also how many 
employees are covered by WCB in the province. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I mean we’re talking 
rounded-off figures here, but we’re talking about 400,000 
employees that are covered and 32,000 employers. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I understand there’s been a survey 
done by clients of Workers’ Comp just recently. Could you 
confirm that survey and also tell us what was in the survey and 
is the result of the survey going to be made public. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I believe I’m referencing the right survey 
that you were talking about, but annually WCB does a 
stakeholder survey that takes in both employers and injured 
workers. And what it does, it asks questions on service, how 
pleased they are, and I must . . . or how satisfied they were with 
the services provided by the WCB. 
 
And there is overall and consistently a 90 per cent approval 
rating in these surveys. They are something that’s consistent . . . 
done on a yearly basis. What the results of these surveys are 
used for, they’re used for feedback in the annual stakeholder 
meetings. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I recently had a discussion with a 
injured worker that’s on workers’ comp and was asked 
questions through the survey, and two days after the survey . . . 
well I’ll just add to the discussion. She was very negative about 
how she was treated with workers’ comp and told the 
representative about her concerns with workers’ comp, and two 
days later her cheques quit coming. She was cancelled from 
workers’ comp. 
 
Now I’m just wondering . . . I hope and I assume that there’s no 
relationship between her comments about workers’ comp and 
her being denied a claim. I assume that’s not the case, but I 
would like to ask the minister: is there any safeguards in place 
to stop such a thing from happening? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — This is kind of a serious accusation. The 
survey is done on a random number, and it is highly 
confidential. There is no names used, and being it is a 
confidential survey, any of the responses given by a person 
contacted, the CSR (customer service representative) would 
have no idea that their client did a survey. But if this person has 
any questions, I would urge her to contact the board . . . him or 
her to contact the board and get clarification there. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to ask the minister . . . I 
asked how many employees are covered by Workers’ Comp in 
the last year. Could you go back . . . do you have the figures for 
last . . . back five years? Has the number of workers increased 
or decreased in the last five years that are covered by Workers’ 
Comp? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When it comes to numbers of 
employees, basically what we do at WCB, we are using an 
estimate. How we keep track of this is by payroll and dollars 
contributed on a payroll basis. And that has gone up each year 
so what we’re using is an estimation from those figures. 

Mr. Weekes: — Sorry, I also would like to know how many 
employers there have been in the last five years as well. Has 
that increased or decreased? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The number of employees over the last 
few years has been relatively constant. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Employers. Employers. Do you have the 
numbers of how many employers there have been in the last 
five years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now I should correct myself. The 
number of employers over the last number of years has 
remained relatively constant at 32,000. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Many injured workers that I talk to 
say part of their problem or their concern is they don’t have 
enough information in the pamphlets and the literature that’s 
given to them and to other employees that find themselves 
under Workers’ Comp. It’s very confusing to them and to many 
people. And I was wondering, is the board revising its written 
material for workers and the employers actually to make it more 
transparent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I know the member opposite . . . I’m 
quite familiar with this concern because it’s something that we 
also get in our constituency offices in Moose Jaw. And I know 
the board has undertaken a major project to redo brochures as 
they expire or the numbers need to be replenished. 
 
What they are doing is as each pamphlet turns over it will be 
rewritten in a plain language so that it is easier to understand — 
simple English. That’s one of the concerns that we have got is 
that they’re sometimes too hard to understand and difficult to 
follow and the board is addressing that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, my next question, I’d like to speak 
about the client service reps. I believe that they are probably 
under a lot of stress — the number of claims they have to deal 
with — but hearing from the clients or potential clients there’s 
many complaints about how they’re treated by the client service 
reps. And I was just wondering, are there any steps being taken 
to improve that relationship between the reps and the clients? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, over the last . . . probably 
year there has been a new program begun at WCB where they 
have a program of team-based management — case 
management. And one of the initial steps in this case 
management is there is a training program, and one of the 
specific issues in the training program is dealing with clients as 
customers and making that whole process easier. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Is the board going to act on the committee of 
review’s recommendation to publish an annual schedule that 
sets out a table of earnings for the purposes of calculating gross 
earning less probable deductions, and will such a chart be easily 
available to injured workers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — For the member opposite, the 
commitment has been made to have that table as readily 
available as possible. Work is ongoing to have it on the Internet, 
and for those who don’t have Internet access, it will be 
published and readily available. 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, is the board going to act on the 
committee of review’s recommendations and issue to each 
claimant an explanation of how the injured worker’s gross 
earnings were calculated and the net amount of compensation, 
basically a cheque stub with the deductions itemized? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes, the board has committed to that 
recommendation. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, every year a number of injured 
workers have their conditions complicated by a physician or a 
surgeon’s negligence, yet there still is no avenue to seek 
damages from the physician or the surgeon based on 
interpretation of the Act, and the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons recommends that this shield from litigation should not 
extend to physicians and surgeons. If a physician or a surgeon is 
negligent, for example, they should not be allowed to hide 
behind the WCB Act in which the patient is not allowed to sue. 
Why does the board’s interpretation of the Act shield the 
negligence of physicians and surgeons? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member opposite will know that 
from the backgrounder and information that went out with the 
press release when we released the committee of review, that’s 
one recommendation that the board is doing . . . I directed the 
board to do further consultation on. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. What criteria does the board use 
for determining whether or not someone is eligible for 
vocational retraining? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The Act speaks to the merits and justice 
of each case. So when you’re talking about vocational 
rehabilitation, each case is judged on its own merits. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. What financial limitations are in 
place for vocational retraining? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There is no limits or guidelines in place. 
As I said previously, each case is judged on its own merits. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Often we hear about injured workers whose 
benefits have been terminated for whatever reasons, and they 
are in the process of appealing this decision. Yet while they are 
undertaking the appeal, they have no income as WCB has 
terminated all their benefits. The committee of review also 
identified this problem. Since these decisions are generally not 
decisions that require urgent action, they could benefit from a 
sober second thought from a manager or the like before this 
decision is finalized and communicated to the injured worker. Is 
the board prepared to follow the recommendations of the 
committee of review and ensure that standard procedure before 
terminating compensation benefits will be . . . to have the 
circumstances investigated and co-signed by a manager? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I would like to assure the member 
opposite that with the new team-based case management that 
there will be second thought given to each decision. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Is the board going to introduce an independent 
appeals tribunal, and if so, when can injured workers expect this 

to be put in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The independent appeal tribunal was 
recommended just about a year ago, I think, in the Dorsey 
administrative review. 
 
Since then we’ve had the committee of review which has 
looked at different proposals and the merits of whether we 
would go to an independent appeal tribunal or an appeal 
commissioner. And through consensus of both business, 
employees, and the chairperson, they have decided that they 
would put forward a recommendation of an appeals 
commissioner. 
 
So we are looking at options and both recommendations, and 
we are currently going through some consultations and 
expecting feedback from stakeholders towards the end of this 
week to see what their views on both options. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — My next question also speaks to the other 
legislative changes that Mr. Dorsey recommendation asked for. 
And does the government plan to put forth the legislation that 
will allow a transition to a part-time independent representative 
board of directors or governors combined of labour and 
employers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, this really ties together with 
the previous question. It was May 2001 that the Dorsey 
administrative review was tabled in this House. And there was 
13 recommendations, 11 of which have been implemented or in 
the process of being implemented and the last two that needed 
legislative amendments, one being the independent tribunal and 
the other was the movement of the board to a part-time board. 
 
Since then the committee of review has gone through its 
process of consultations and stakeholder meetings. And their 
recommendation, after looking at both proposals or at the 
independent tribunal, they came forward with a consensus 
decision for an appeals commissioner that they felt that that was 
a more appropriate way to go. 
 
That was a consensus decision and, as I said previously in the 
last question, we’re currently undergoing stakeholder meetings 
and getting feedback on this and other recommendations that 
are outstanding. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. As we know, the agriculture is 
exempt from the labour standards, and I’d just like to ask the 
minister, why are they singling out the hog industry to be put 
under labour standards? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Since labour standards was initiated, 
family farming and farming in Saskatchewan has maintained 
their traditional exemption for a variety of reasons. One, that it 
is seasonal. It is an occupation that is outdoors and susceptible 
to many influences — weather, disease, to name a few. 
 
I don’t believe that we are singling out commercial hog barns; 
that the industry has done that by the way it has evolved away 
from traditional farming. Commercial hog barns are contained 
indoors. They’re not susceptible to the weather or seasons. It’s a 
year-round occupation. It is highly controlled, highly technical, 
and a very scheduled and timed industry. 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

 

So I don’t believe we are singling it out. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — During the leadership campaign for the NDP 
Party, the Premier said that he was going to introduce this 
legislation and you made an announcement some time ago at 
the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) convention that 
it was going to be introduced. 
 
I would just like to know how that all squares with your 
announcement in last year’s Throne Speech to set up a 
labour/business round table . . . and talked in glowing terms 
about consultation and co-operation and not, on a very basic 
item like this, not discuss this with the industry, just make 
announcements beforehand and not even try to consult with the 
industry before the announcements are made. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The topic of labour standards covering 
commercial hog barns has been around for quite some time. I 
remember articles being in The Western Producer probably 
starting at the end of 1998. Since then there’s been a variety of 
discussions held on the topic. 
 
After the announcements were made and there has been 
consultations . . . it was announced that this was our intent. 
Consultations have been done and the member opposite is 
correct in stating that the labour/business round table has not 
been established. We are working through that. 
 
But in the meantime what we did was hire a very reputable 
person to take on the consultation process with the producers 
and employees within the industry, and to give advice on how 
this would best be done and how it would affect the industry as 
a whole. So we are currently still undergoing consultations and 
will continue working on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as previously outlined, I now 
move the committee report progress on Labour and move to 
estimates on Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 
(20:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
evening I have with me . . . seated directly to my right is Mr. 
Gord Nystuen who is the deputy minister of Agriculture and 
Food. Next to him is the president . . . general manager of the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, Mr. Doug Matthies. Directly 
behind me is Mr. Hal Cushon who is the assistant deputy 
minister of policy and financial services. And behind my deputy 
minister is Mr. Jack Zepp who is the director of administrative 
services branch, and Mr. Ross Johnson who is the budget 
officer who is immediately to my right two chairs over. 
 
And on the back row, behind the bar, is Maryellen Carlson who 
is the acting assistant deputy minister of agriculture 

development division, Louise Greenberg who is the assistant 
deputy minister in program and services division, Greg Haase 
who is the director of lands branch, and Dave Boehm who is the 
acting director of financial programs branch. And those are my 
officials, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I welcome the 
minister and I welcome his officials here tonight. I have a few 
questions that I would like to ask on behalf of Sask Pork. 
 
My understanding is that there is a consultation process that’s 
underway right now and it was given the deadline of May 17 to 
come with a consensus as to what was going to happen as far as 
The Labour Standards Act being implemented or being imposed 
upon hog barns. 
 
And I would like to ask the minister if he had any knowledge of 
how those negotiations were going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I want to say 
that I have had involvement and participation and 
understanding and knowledge of what’s happening with the 
consultation process. 
 
As the member might or might not know, we began the work on 
this piece I believe about three months ago. We engaged the 
expertise of an individual from Saskatoon by the name of Mr. 
Tom Halpenny. What Mr. Halpenny has done is he’s met with 
the industry first, had a round of consultations and discussions 
with the industry, and then returned and reported to the 
ministries of Labour and Agriculture in terms of his process. So 
we’ve had an opportunity to see the work that he’s been 
involved in. 
 
Consistent with that process, we met with the pork industry, and 
the Minister of Labour and I met with representation from the 
large hog barn operators in the province. We met with people 
from Heartland — Neil Ketilson was the individual who 
represented their group. We met with an individual from 
Naicam, Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible) . . . Peter Voldeng. And 
also at our table . . . and then we had a third representative that 
we met with and also from the Sask Pork as well, Joanne . . . 
Joan . . . I forget her . . . She’s the representative and the Chair 
of the Sask Pork committee. 
 
So we met with them on one occasion. Then we asked Mr. 
Halpenny then to proceed to go back and have a further 
consultation with the industry. And it’s under this process that 
he’s currently working in completing his analysis of what the 
labour standards rules might look like with the industry today, 
and we’re expecting that Mr. Halpenny would have that report 
for us within the next week or two. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The next question would be: I realize that 
the government put together a committee to consult on the 
issue, and on that committee was three producers and 
supposedly three barn workers — although that didn’t quite 
happen — and three people from government, and they were 
given the job of coming up with a consensus. How many times 
have they met to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I believe they’ve met now 
twice. They may meet one more . . . or maybe three times. I’m 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

not exactly sure on the exact number of times that they’ve met, 
but I believe they’ve met twice, may have by now met on three 
occasions. And they would have been the joint committee, as 
the member indicates — labour and the management. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you give 
me the dates of those meetings because I know the Sask Pork 
industry, or Sask Pork isn’t aware of those meetings. So could 
you please give me the dates that those meetings took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what I’ll provide for the 
member is the meeting dates of which the committee has been 
meeting. But we have, I think, it’s Mr. Gerry Pfeil who’s the 
representative of the Sask Pork. He’s on the committee, so it 
will be through him and Joan Steckhan, whose name I couldn’t 
remember a couple of minutes ago, and will provide those dates 
to you. We’ll have them. We’ll just contact Mr. Halpenny and 
he can confirm the dates of which they’ve met. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If perhaps it 
comes back that there has only been one meeting, can they call 
that a consultation process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well if there’s only been one meeting that 
they’ve held to date, then you can rest assured that there’ll be 
more meetings, because there will be at least, as I understand, 
three meetings with the industry and the labour committee. So if 
they’ve only had one meeting to date you can rest assured that 
there will be more meetings because it’s that consultation 
process that we had asked Mr. Halpenny to undertake with the 
industry and labour. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The industry has 
also expressed concerns as to how this would affect the family 
farm, and they were assured by the Minister of Labour that it 
would not be affecting the family farm. However could the 
minister please provide us with a definition of what a family 
farm is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, the definition of a 
family farm would vary across the province. I mean today you 
could have a group of individuals who are from the same family 
who might be farming a large tract of land or a small tract of 
land. It would be a family farm. You could have a husband and 
wife and they could be farming a family operation or a farm and 
that would be defined as a family operation. You could have 
today a husband and wife and a couple of cousins that might be 
farming a farming operation and they could be a family farm 
operation. 
 
So you know you have a whole host of different kinds of 
descriptions I think that you might describe as family farms in 
Saskatchewan, and I could provide for the member opposite 
sort of a variety of different scenarios that would be recognized 
as family farms. And I’ll ask my officials to put together the 
various kinds of combinations that could be recognized as 
family farms in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for the answer. And I 
agree, there are many definitions of a family farm. It’s 
extremely broad. So therefore would the minister agree that we 
cannot say that this will not affect the family farm? 
 

Could we not recognize here tonight that it may affect a lot of 
family farms because a family farm may have a large intensive 
livestock or hog barn, and it may have grain fields in 
conjunction with the hog barn. It may have employees in the 
barn that may work both in the barn and in the fields. And it 
may involve three or four brothers, or a brother and a few 
cousins, and all sorts of combinations. It may be a Hutterite 
colony. 
 
So could the minister recognize that we can hardly say that this 
is not going to affect the family farm? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’d say to the members 
opposite and to the member, that when we take a look at the 
legislation — and we shouldn’t be presuming today about what 
the legislation is going to look like yet because we haven’t had 
an opportunity on this side of the House to see it either. And 
when we get an opportunity to see it, certainly the members 
opposite, the member opposite, will also get an opportunity to 
examine it as well. 
 
But clearly, the consultation process is underway right now. 
The intent, I would expect . . . If you were asking this question 
of the Minister of Labour, I would say to you that the intent of 
the legislation is intended to address the larger corporate hog 
operations in the province, ones like I might describe . . . the 
ones that the provincial government has an investment in today, 
along with Mr. Possberg. That in my view would be considered 
a large corporate hog operation where you have 5,000 
farrow-to-finish barns in a particular location of the province, 
where there are large, large corporate entities which employ 
small groups of people. It would be my view that it would be 
those kinds of businesses that the legislation would attempt to 
try to capture. 
 
But I wouldn’t presume today what that should look like. I 
think we need to see the work of Mr. Halpenny and the industry 
and the labour group. I’m anticipating that that information will 
be back before us within short order. And when it arrives, we’ll 
have an opportunity to share and discuss and debate that with 
the members opposite, and you, Madam Member. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It wasn’t the piece 
of legislation that I was suggesting was going to say that it 
won’t affect the family farm. Your own minister said that it’s 
not going to affect the family farm. 
 
We’ve gone over the definition of a family farm. So the 
question I will ask you again: do you agree with the Minister of 
Labour that this piece of legislation is not going to affect the 
family farm, keeping in mind that the definition of a family 
farm is extremely broad? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think, madam member, and, Mr. 
Chair, to the member, you could have, and I think if the 
member is suggesting here that you could have a large 
corporate entity that could be a family farm, the fact is is that 
you could have a large corporate farm that could be operated 
and managed by a family. I mean Mr. Possberg, for example, 
would be, in my view, in Saskatchewan considered a family 
that’s farming. But their farming operations are very large 
corporate entities, very large hog barns in Saskatchewan. They 
employ a variety of different people in a variety of different 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

 

locations across the province. But for all intents and purposes, 
one could argue that it’s under the umbrella of a family. 
 
And so from that perspective I think the member opposite, you 
know, makes an important recognition that you could have in 
Saskatchewan today, and in all likelihood do have a variety of 
different farmers who are farming today in the hog industry 
which are an extension of a family. But they’re also categorized 
under the structure as being large corporate farms. And so I 
expect that when the legislation gets to the table and we have an 
opportunity to debate it here, that it will be recognized that it’s 
intended only to address those large corporate entities and they 
may in fact be operated and managed by families. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — That poses another question then. Now 
we’ve sort of defined that, yes, this could affect a family farm 
because the definition of a family farm is so broad. But the 
minister brought up, okay, are we looking at an incorporated as 
versus a non-incorporated barn? Are we looking at a barn in one 
location as opposed to two or three barns located at different 
locations? 
 
It’s a very slippery slope where we’re going to start to define 
who has to bring their operation under The Labour Standards 
Act and who does not and where do you draw that line. And if 
you draw that line, what then if an operation is very close to 
that line? It would impede their desire to expand. 
 
So this is a province where we’re talking about expansion of 
intensive livestock throughout the whole province and every 
sector, and yet we’re laying down policy that that will yet again 
impede that expansion. So the definitions are very, very 
important. Is it incorporated barns versus non-incorporated 
barns? Is it barns in one location as opposed to barns in many 
locations? Is it a 600-sow barn as opposed to a 1,200-sow barn? 
Where are we going to start to define what follows under The 
Labour Standards Act and what does not? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Madam Member. 
And to you through the Chair, I want to say first and foremost 
that I know that you understand the various different structures 
in the province. In your part of the province, you and I just 
recently had an opportunity to open a very large and extensive 
hog operation at Leroy which is the Stomp farm which in my 
view would be categorized as a family operation, but we have a 
variety of different models in the province. 
 
We have — and I’ll just use a couple of the bigger ones — the 
Stomp operation of course could be viewed as a large, family, 
corporate operation. 
 
We have the Possberg which is also a large, family operation 
and has its own sort of model in terms of how people invest in it 
and how in fact shareholders are retained and/or included in the 
process which they’re talking about today. 
 
And then we have hog barns in Saskatchewan which are the 
community pork barns which individuals in various different 
locations of the province can be shareholders. And I can tell 
you that in my part of the province, from where I come, we 
have a community pork barn which is within five minutes from 

my farm. So you have a variety of different models today. 
 
And it’s exactly this kind of definition that you’re raising with 
me today that needs to be determined by the working 
committee. It will be their task and their responsibility to define 
the parameters around who is included within that framework 
and who is excluded from that framework, and today I wouldn’t 
be drawing a conclusion on it. I’d want to see the work of the 
industry and the labour and Mr. Halpenny who’s leading that 
process. And then it’s from that point that I think we would then 
get into discussion about describing what the language should 
look like and what particular models need to be included in the 
process. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that the 
people that I know in the hog industry will be more than happy 
to hear that the minister has said tonight that they will be 
participants in coming up with those definitions because 
they’ve had the feeling today that they’re going to be told what 
those definitions are, and they don’t feel that they have been 
part of the consultation process with any meaning. It has been 
somewhat presented to them more than discussed with them. 
They have felt that they have been imposed upon, and they’ve 
been told that this is what it’s going to look like, and they don’t 
feel that they’ve been part of the process. 
 
My next question . . . because as you mentioned earlier I have a 
number of intensive hog operations in my area where I live and 
you know am quite familiar with those operations and socialize 
with many of the barn workers in my area. And there is the 
Stomp Pork Farm in my area, there’s the Sinnett Pork Farm in 
my area, there’s Big Sky barns in my area. 
 
And I’m not quite as familiar — I know it’s in my constituency 
but it isn’t as close — is the Quadra barns. I have never heard 
any complaints from any of the workers, and I know a great, 
great many of them, about their hours because their hours are 
set. They’re scheduled in advance. They have quite actually . . . 
quite valuable medical packages and dental packages. They’re 
treated quite well from all of these employers. 
 
So considering that I’m socializing with this group of people on 
an ongoing basis and have for a number of years, I guess this 
particular suggestion that we need to be looking at The Labour 
Standards Act came as a surprise simply because I’m not 
finding that the workers in the industry are asking for this. 
 
So why would we make a choice? Who would ask for this 
decision? And why are we making a choice to go in this 
direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I don’t think 
that we should assume for a minute that when we’re working on 
establishing labour regulations within a particular industry that 
it necessarily spells that there’s a problem. And we shouldn’t 
assume to have this debate or this discussion in the future when 
we go to have it around the legislation that the reason why it’s 
here is because it’s a problem for somebody. 
 
When you take a look at Saskatchewan, for example, and you 
compare our labour legislation to other provinces, you’ll find 
that in many cases our labour legislation remains competitive 
and comparative to other industries. 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

Now in this province we’re of the assumption on this side of the 
House that we could have and should have in the large 
corporate barns in Saskatchewan, labour standard regulations 
that will apply to people who work in the industry. And we 
have today people from . . . certainly from the labour 
community who believe that this is a healthy process in our 
province, to have workers today who are working in this 
industry protected. And I think that minimal standards today, a 
few labour standards are not of huge consequence. 
 
Today for example, and I hear the member from . . . your 
colleague that’s sitting beside you talking about intensive 
livestock operations. I mean today we have in the beef industry, 
for example, in the feedlot industry, we already have labour 
standards in the beef industry labour side, in the feedlots, the 
large feedlots in the province on some fronts. So this isn’t a 
brand new issue for us to be debating tonight because it’s 
already there in some fronts. 
 
We have also . . . Particularly where they’re commercially 
feeding, where they’re commercially feeding today, Mr. Chair, 
we already have labour standard regulations in the beef 
industry. And so . . . and this isn’t a new issue. We shouldn’t 
today say that all of a sudden somebody woke up and said we 
should have labour standards regulations in the commercial hog 
barns in the province, because that’s not the truth. 
 
I mean, today we’ve had . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
absolutely not the case. Because we’ve had this conversation, 
Mr. Speaker, now . . . or, Mr. Chair, we’ve had this debate and 
this discussion in Saskatchewan now for some months — some 
months we’ve had this. In fact, it’s been around for a couple of 
years. 
 
And this year we proceed with the process to try to find an 
equitable situation with labour and the management sector. And 
we believe that we put a process in place today that addresses 
one segment of the agricultural industry, which is the 
commercial intensive livestock. 
 
And it’s my view, Mr. Chair, that as we move along through the 
process where we do have the industry included and a variety of 
different examples of the industry . . . We have Mr. Voldeng 
who in my view would be considered from Naicam, 
Saskatchewan, as a family farm operation today, a commercial 
operator. We have Mr. Ketilson, who is part of the larger hog 
barns operation in the province who might reflect similarity to 
Mr. Possberg and/or for that matter, Mr. Stomp. And we have 
Mr. Jerry Pfeil, who is in fact representing in my view all of the 
small hog producers and the hog industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
So you have the little guy who is part of the discussion, and 
then you have sort of the family-operated, larger corporate 
entity. And we have the larger corporate farms which are owned 
and have been owned through the Heartland process, which are 
corporate entities. 
 
So we think that we brought people together for this discussion 
that represent the industry in a generic fashion. And I await 
what the recommendations of the industry will be. But we 
shouldn’t for a minute suggest that we don’t have labour 
standards today that apply to the intensive livestock operation 
because we already have it. It is already in the beef industry 

with commercially fed feedlots. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does the minister 
believe that the representative that’s on the consultation 
committee who is a labour union leader for PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) Lanigan, does he believe that he 
is a representative within the industry, within the pork industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, as you can appreciate, it’s 
never an easy exercise when you’re going to find people to sit 
on committees, particularly when it gives the appearance that 
there’s going to be some controversy in the debate. And there 
isn’t . . . without any conclusion here, that in this particular 
piece of consultation there will be some disagreement and 
there’ll be some debate. 
 
And so we were responsible to try and find representatives who 
would serve on both committees. 
 
So we went to the industry and we said to the industry, who is it 
that you would find as being the responsible folks who could 
represent this debate? And so they provided us with the names 
of people who they have from the industry side and then we 
went to the labour community and said from the labour 
community, who is it now that we would have from the labour 
community who would represent the labour community? And 
they provided us with a list of three names from the labour 
community. 
 
And so now we have this wonderful committee of men and 
women who are working away, Mr. Chair, trying to find the 
resolution to what the labour standards regulations should look 
like for hog barn workers in the province. And I’m awaiting 
that response over the next couple of weeks. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I can 
sympathize that it’s hard to find people to work on committees. 
 
However, I wonder if he considered, you know, because we 
were talking about the labour side and if we want labour that’s 
in the industry then we should have hog barn workers. So I 
wonder if it occurred to the minister that if he picked up the 
phone, I could probably give him a list of about 60 that I know 
personally in my own area of hog barn workers, and I bet you 
out of those he could find three that would have worked on a 
committee to discuss this whole process. 
 
So with that I want to move on to a totally different topic, if I 
may. And it’s to clarify an issue that is sort of up and coming in 
our province. And so the first question that I have is, when a 
First Nations band makes an application to the province to 
purchase Crown land in order to rectify a treaty land entitlement 
agreement, what process does the province have in place to 
review this application? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I was just taking a moment to 
be sure that I had the process accurately described to me. What 
happens of course is under the framework agreement that we 
have today, a First Nations band can make a selection. And 
under that framework agreement, the province would need to 
look favourably to making that kind of an agreement under the 
framework agreement accessible to First Nations people. 
 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

 

And so that’s the way in which the process works today. I could 
provide for the member, if she wishes, a copy of the framework 
agreement that we use under the treaty land entitlement, to be 
familiar with the process fully. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I would 
appreciate a copy of that. That would be most helpful. 
 
But when the First Nations band puts forward their application, 
what is taken into consideration by yourself or your department 
before you could say that yes, this land is available or to grant 
approval or disapproval and say, no, we need to look for a 
different parcel of land? What is the things that your department 
takes into consideration to look at? 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, there would be 
a number of processes that would occur. Things like we would 
first of all canvass other departments to see whether or not there 
are any other interests. 
 
And the definition that we were just sort of discussing here 
would be things like: would there be any oil and gas interests 
that might be available on the property; would there be any 
wildlife habitat of which we would want some assurances that 
would need to be preserved; would there be any unique 
topographical characteristics within the landscape; and what 
would be the settling of any third-party issues that might be 
outstanding in relationship to a particular agreement that might 
be held with someone else. Or finally, I think, would this be 
recognized where there is special habitat or habitat for a 
particular species within the province. 
 
So those would be some of the things that would be given 
consideration if we’re being asked by a First Nations group or 
band, if they’re making a selection on a piece of Crown 
property. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So if there was oil 
or gas interests, if there was wildlife habitat or a special habitat 
of some sort, or a unique grassland or whatever, would it then 
be made not available or would it made available with 
conditions that this is protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, usually the . . . generally the 
land is made available without condition, but from time to time, 
if some of the areas of which I identified or some of the issues 
would be prevalent, then when the land is being made for sale, 
some of those conditions may in fact be retained. But generally 
speaking, the land is made available without condition. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So just to further 
clarify this just slightly, if there had to be conditions that would 
then be decided by the government, by your department, so it 
would be the land is now for sale with this condition. That 
would be your choice. It would be your decision to do so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, if we were going to allow for a 
selection, what would need to happen in that case is that there 
would have to be . . . the interests of the third parties would 
have to be settled, and it would be done through an open 
negotiation. 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So if there was oil 
or gas interests in particular, so the oil or gas company, they 
would have to do the negotiations on the settlement. They 
would have to come up with the agreement with the First 
Nations band. That would be their responsibility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, that’s correct. The member has 
articulated correctly. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — In the case of a wildlife habitat situation that 
needs to be protected, who would do the negotiations then with 
the First Nations band? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, in that instance, it would be the 
Department of Environment. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — And my final question in this direction 
would be, if there was a third-party interest — so in other 
words, someone or some group of people who were leasing 
them the Crown land for whatever purposes — if they were in a 
lease at the time, would they be responsible for doing their own 
negotiating with the First Nations band in order to maintain 
their lease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the answer would be yes; it 
would be the same process as it would be with the oil and gas 
industry. The member is correct. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — If a TLE (treaty land entitlement) 
application is put on land that is being leased at the time, is 
there any effort on behalf of the provincial government to assist 
the First Nations band to identify an alternative parcel of land 
which might . . . would be in close proximity and which would 
be vacant or available for sale, rather than put a lessee in the 
throes of negotiations mid-term within their lease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what we would do is we would 
provide, and do provide, a list of all of the lands that are 
available under lease. And so that would be the way in which 
people would know which lands would be made available, or 
are available. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would there be 
any circumstances, and what would those circumstances be, 
before your department would say that the land is simply not 
available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The practice, Mr. Chair, is that we make 
the land available and that the third parties would negotiate the 
agreements amongst themselves, which has been the practice in 
the past. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can the land be 
sold to the First Nations band in order to ratify a TLE 
framework agreement without the permission of the third-party 
interest group who was leasing the land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, they would be 
required to settle their third-party interests before that land 
would make its changeover. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the event that 
an agreement cannot be reached in the mediation process 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

between the First Nations band and the third party, how long 
are the two parties required to engage in the mediation process 
before it is accepted that the third party cannot be satisfied and 
therefore the parcel of land is no longer available for a 
settlement on a TLE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I should, Mr. Chair, to the member, I 
should say that from time to time these can be, as I expect that 
the member is aware, can be very delicate and difficult 
situations, particularly in cases where you might have someone 
or a group of individuals who might have been the lessees of a 
particular piece of property over a period of time. 
 
And so the expectation here would be that if in fact there has 
been a selection process of which . . . I expect the member is 
familiar with a process of this magnitude or this nature. Then 
what the expectation would be is that the third party would 
come together and, through a process in good faith, they would 
try to reach an understanding. If in fact through a process of 
utilization of good faith they cannot come to a resolution at the 
end of the day, then it would be the responsibility of the 
minister in charge of Agriculture and Food, which in this case 
it’s me, we would be responsible for making the final decision. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Minister, I don’t believe I heard, at any 
rate, that you gave a time period to this, meaning a time period 
that the third party of the First Nations band would have to 
remain in mediation. So basically it’s pending on ultimately if 
they cannot come to an agreement, it’s ultimately your decision 
to make the choice. 
 
Can a third party be bound to a mediation process indefinitely? 
And, although it’s unlikely, could a lessee of Crown land be 
bound in mediation for an extended period of time of their 
lease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the selections 
can be made every 18 months. Now I would not encourage for 
there to be a long, lengthy sort of annual or year-over-year 
process in terms of mediation. I think that where you have a 
situation where there’s clearly an impasse in terms of decisions 
about what would be a fair or good faith, we would want that 
mediation process to be within a reasonable time frame, and 
then a decision be reached after there’s a demonstration that 
people have in fact been in a negotiation period with exercising, 
as I said earlier, good faith. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Sir, I believe you 
mentioned 18 months; the mediation process can continue for 
18 months. And if there isn’t a consensus met between the two 
parties, the lessee and the First Nations band, then is the TLE 
framework application, then is it no longer valid? Or does it still 
apply? 
 
And then the minister at the end of 18 months has to step in and 
say that this is the way it’s going to be. Like, ultimately it is 
your decision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We can, Mr. Chair, extend the 18-month 
period for a reselection. And what we have exercised, from time 
to time, or have exercised is the engagement of a mediation 
process. 
 

As I said earlier, what would not be healthy for an exercise of 
this nature after there’s been a selection and then a reselection 
again, which has been the case in one particular example, we 
would then encourage people to come together and try to find a 
resolution on an issue of this particular nature. And in this case, 
we would provide a mediation process that might be over a 
short period of time, with the hope that we would reach an 
agreement . . . or the third parties would reach an agreement. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — When any third party is leasing Crown land 
and that lease expires, what is the provincial policy for 
renewing leases? Is there a policy that’s been in place for a 
number of years that we practise in this province? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the policy as it 
is today is that when people are within their last five years of a 
particular lease and the lease is in good standing, the lessee can 
request that the lease be extended, within the last five years of 
the agreement. And that’s been the practice that we’ve been 
using on our land lease renewals. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If a TLE has been 
filed against a parcel of land that is being leased by a third party 
and the third party’s lease agreement is due for renewal, does 
the conditions of the TLE automatically supersede the 
long-standing provincial policy that’s been in place for a 
number of years under the direction of the provincial land 
regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, when . . . as I 
described the policy, as the member had asked what process we 
use today, once we’re within the five-year period then the land 
is clearly made available for re-leasing. 
 
In the case where you have the TLE, a treaty land entitlement, 
where the request is being made by a First Nations band to 
assume a particular piece of property which is Crown land, then 
within the framework agreement we would then begin our 
negotiations or the negotiations would then begin with First 
Nations people and the third party to try and resolve what the 
content of the framework agreement permits here. 
 
And so in the case that I think the member is talking about, we 
have a process today where there’s been a request by a First 
Nations band to select a particular piece of property in the 
province. What we’ve suggested . . . it’s now been renewed or 
selected now for a second time. We now have a mediation 
process that’s involved in trying to resolve that particular issue. 
And as I said earlier, it’s our intention here to hope that the First 
Nations people and the co-operative will . . . or the co-op will 
find a amicable solution. 
 
If that is not arrived at, then there are a couple of options of 
which I expect the member will ask me next, that we have the 
option to exercise. We have the option to exercise certainly the 
return of the property, to re-lease the property again with the 
co-op, extending the lease. We have the option of exercising the 
framework agreement and having the land that is currently 
under the lease of the co-op go to the First Nations. 
 
Or we have the option of taking the property and listing it for 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

 

sale. And then the property would then be available for sale of 
which the co-op might then want to repurchase it or to purchase 
it or there may be a First Nations group who want to purchase 
the land. Or in fact it may be purchased from someone else 
within the province. And who knows? If we get to our piece of 
legislation as it relates to the farmland security Act, it may be 
purchased by somebody from outside the province. 
 
So those are other options that would be exercised at that point. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
would the government ever consider renewing a lease 
agreement with a third party if there was a TLE applied against 
the land in question and the third party would not give written 
permission for the land to be sold because an agreement could 
not be made between the third party and the First Nations band 
that satisfied the third party? So is there ever a condition where 
they could apply and would be granted a renewal of their lease 
under those conditions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, if we were to 
find ourselves in a situation like you’ve described, which in fact 
we find ourselves in a situation like you’ve described, it will be 
necessary for us to work through the mediation process that’s in 
place today. Our wish would be that there would be a resolution 
that could be arrived at between the third parties involved. 
 
If they cannot arrive at a resolution, then it will be important or 
necessary then for the ministry to exercise the three options of 
which I’ve already outlined and you’ve asked. The options are 
to renew the lease with the current leaseholders, or in fact to 
allow for the selection that’s been made by the First Nations, 
and then provide that piece of property to them with the 
appropriate kinds of settlements that would need to be made for 
the third party because there’ll be investments of a variety of 
different nature that would have been made on the property. 
And those investments would need to be recovered by the 
co-op, or the province has the option of then suggesting that the 
land would be placed for sale, of which then anyone who 
wishes would be available to purchase the property. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And my question 
would be . . . You’ve said that there’s these three choices that 
you would have. What would you be more likely to prefer? 
What would be your preference? What’s the more likely choice 
that you will make? Because the question was: would you ever 
consider renewing a lease agreement with a third party if an 
agreement hadn’t been made? Would you lean more towards 
ratifying the TLE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, what my preferred option 
would be is that the parties that are involved in that discussion 
would, at the end of the day, find a resolution on their own. If 
they’re not able to find a resolution through the mediatory 
process, then of course I would be expected to make a decision 
based on the three options that I provided. And as you can 
recognize, none of those options would be easy because if you 
were to provide the lease of the property again to the people 
who might have had it for a long period of time, you’re going to 
find one party, the other party, who will be very unhappy with 
that decision. 
 
If you’re prepared to . . . if we were prepared to provide the 

selection process to the First Nations band, clearly it would 
make the people who had had the co-op over a period of time, 
or who are lessees of the land, most unhappy. And clearly if 
you were to take the land and then put it for sale, you would 
have a bidding exercise that would occur with a variety of 
different people, and at the end of the day the property might in 
fact turn hands to somebody who isn’t even a resident of the 
area. He might be from another part of the province who might 
then decide to use the land for some other purpose or may 
decide to use it for grazing for themselves. 
 
And at the end of the day, I expect that you would not make a 
whole bunch of people happy irrespective of which decision 
you make. So the best option, in my view, would be to try to 
find a negotiated settlement amongst the parties that are 
involved in that process, and that’s my hope. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess what I’m 
trying to understand is that we often talk about process, and this 
seems to be lacking in process because we’re not looking at the 
what if. What if the process doesn’t work? What if there isn’t an 
agreement at the end of the day? 
 
So then it’s left for a one-person decision. And we could 
speculate that if either party didn’t want it to work, if that the 
First Nations band could come to the negotiation table not 
offering a fair deal, realizing that the lease would expire fairly 
shortly and then the land would become vacant, and that way 
then they would be able to step in and have the land. They 
wouldn’t have to contend with having anyone leasing the land, 
and they would have the infrastructure that was on the land. 
 
So can the minister understand where maybe this process is a 
little bit flawed because the lessee has to basically agree with 
what the First Nations proposals are, or they’re going to lose the 
land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think, as the member will 
recognize, that in Saskatchewan we have a process today in 
terms of selection and renewal of Crown land. Now this is why 
we have engaged in situations that are as delicate as the one 
we’re talking about today — a mediation process. 
 
And at the end of the day, if I’m asked because there hasn’t 
been an ability to resolve the issue when it comes back to my 
table, then clearly I’ll be examining these kinds of things. I’ll 
want to know whether or not the people who were involved in 
the negotiation processes were actually negotiating in good 
faith. And that’s why we have engaged a third party and in most 
cases would engage a third party to provide us with that kind of 
information because, as you can appreciate and understand, 
there will be a great deal of emotion in this kind of debate. 
 
From time to time there are things that get said that I think 
people would wish they might not have said. And so at the end 
of the day, it will be for us to measure the weight of the 
sincerity that people were involved in the process of deciding 
whether or not the negotiations are favourable or not to a 
transaction of either renewal or selection. 
 
And so I guess at the end of the day, I’ll be looking for the 
recommendation of the mediator in the situation that I think 
we’re both familiar with. But my hope is that the third parties 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

will be able to reach a reasonable conclusion on their own with 
the help of the mediator. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee report 
progress, some significant progress, on Department of 
Agriculture, Food, and Rural Revitalization. And then we’ll 
move to estimates on the Environment. 
 
(21:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 

Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I would 
like to introduce the officials I have here with me this evening. 
Members will already be familiar with Mr. Terry Scott, the 
deputy minister of Environment; Mr. Dave Phillips, assistant 
deputy minister of operations in Environment; Mr. Bob 
Ruggles, also assistant deputy minister in charge of programs; 
Mr. Rick Bates, director of communications services; Ms. 
Donna Johnson, acting executive director of corporate services. 
Those are the officials seated right around me. 
 
We also have other Environment officials attending this 
evening, depending on the questions that are asked: Mr. Ron 
Zukowsky, executive director of policy and assessment; Mr. 
Don MacAuley, director of parks and special places; Mr. Ross 
Barclay, manager, program development unit of the sustainable 
land management; Joe Muldoon, director of environmental 
protection; Dale Hjertaas, manager of science and policy from 
the fish and wildlife branch; and Dave Tulloch, senior financial 
manager of the fire management and forest protection branch. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, 
Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I have a couple of questions on a particular 
topic that I think I’ll spend a few minutes on, and then after that 
I have a number of colleagues who will be interested in 
pursuing some other areas with you as well. 
 
Madam Minister, could you indicate if your department has 
ever commissioned a study into the broad area of safety within 
the department and as it relates particularly to conservation 
officers and their duties? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Chair, I would like to advise the 
member from Carrot River that we have, in recent memory, 
undertaken three specific studies . . . or commissioned three 
specific studies. 
 
In 1988, we asked Dr. Garry Bell to do a study into safety 
practices in the department as it relates to enforcement duties by 
conservation officers. Again in 1996 we commissioned a 
similar study, also undertaken by Dr. Garry Bell. And then just 
this past year, we asked the law enforcement branch of the 
Department of Justice to also do a study on enforcement duties. 

That study — which I think is probably the one that you are 
most particularly interested in since it is the most recent — the 
study time took place between August and December of 2001. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
could you indicate if all three studies were made public? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — There is so much fun and frivolity going 
on here tonight. I would think that everybody is really enjoying 
themselves as we’re dealing with the Environment estimates. 
 
So let me give the member from Carrot River the answer to his 
question, and I apologize for taking a bit of time on this but I 
wanted to make sure that I had all the specific details. 
 
You asked whether or not these studies have been made public. 
And I would advise you that no they have not; they were all 
internal to the department. They were all dealing with 
recommending changes to administrative practices and policies 
regarding conservation officers. None of these, not one of these 
three studies, were FOI (freedom of information) or subject to 
freedom of information request. But, quite frankly, we would 
have no reason not to make them public. We have shared those 
studies with conservation officers and with the Occupational 
Health and Safety Committee. 
 
Of course you will understand that the last study, since it was 
just undertaken just a few months ago, has not been fully shared 
with everyone, but we have no reason not to make them public. 
They were reviews of the administrative policies and 
procedures with respect to conservation officers and obviously, 
they deal in a fairly substantive way with public policy in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam 
Minister. Would you be prepared then to make the first two, the 
1988 and the 1996 study available to the official opposition 
immediately and make the 2001 study available as quickly as is 
logically possible? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Of course. As I’ve already indicated, we 
have no reason not to share those studies with you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and 
Madam Minister. I look forward to receiving them and I will 
now allow my colleague from Estevan a few minutes. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I too 
would like to welcome your officials here this evening and I 
just have a couple questions for you. I understand that the 
village of Colgate is under a boil-water advisory and I was 
wondering if you could enlighten us to what is happening in 
regards to that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — If you’ll just bear with me for a moment I 
want to look it up because I think we have some 49 villages or 
hamlets under precautionary drinking water advisories, so I 
want to get the specific reasons for it. 
 
I would like to advise the member from Estevan that the 
Colgate precautionary drinking water advisory — it’s not a 
boil-water order, but it’s an advisory — is due to high turbidity 
in the treated water. 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

 

And I’m imaging that you’re probably going to ask me some 
follow-up questions as to what that might mean or what that 
indicates, so if you don’t mind I’ll just carry on and give you 
the answer. There’s a potential when there’s high turbidity in 
water that there could be high bacteriological content or 
protozoan content — the cryptosporidium that we’re already 
familiar with. I want to emphasize that’s only a potential. We 
have not found a problem to date. 
 
So that’s why there’s an advisory only, but we take a very 
cautious approach to drinking water, as you can imagine quite 
rightly we should. We don’t want to take any chances, and so 
because of the high turbidity, we’ve issued the precautionary 
drinking water advisory for the town of Colgate. That occurred 
some time, I believe, in the last week or so, and it will remain in 
effect until we are satisfied that the turbidity is within the 
proper ranges. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I’m going to go to the other end of the scale now, and 
I’m going to talk a little bit about sewage. And I would just like 
to know what happens to someone that has been caught 
dumping sewage illegally. And when I say caught, I mean the 
officials in the local environment department are aware of it. 
And I was just wondering what should happen to people when 
they are caught dumping sewage illegally. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to give you a complete 
answer. Unfortunately it really does depend on the 
circumstances of the spill or the illegal dumping. So certainly in 
certain circumstances there could be charges laid. But if you 
could give me more specific detail, then I can answer your 
question more fully. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll give you a 
little more detail. 
 
I had the manager of a sewage treatment plant phone me and he 
was telling me about how in a part of the city businesses have 
holding tanks for their own sewage disposal. Now the people at 
the sewage plant where this sewage is hauled keep track of who 
is hauling through their billing system. Now one company 
apparently was hauling six to seven loads of sewage per month 
and these loads are of 3,000 gallons each, and all of a sudden 
they weren’t hauling anything which leads you to the question, 
where is it going? 
 
So to make a long story short, whoever was hauling this sewage 
was dumping it in a ditch. And they were seen doing it and 
samples were gathered and tested, and this material was so 
contaminated that it was off the range of the instrument that is 
used to test these things. And I’m not an engineer but the 
gentleman told me that the sewage is given a COD test or a 
chemical oxygen demand test and he said the average for 
sewage is 600 millilitres per litre. Now this sample was above 
the 80,000 millilitre per litre that the testing device will 
measure. 
 
Now the spill hotline in Regina was contacted and the 
environmental officer in the area is aware of this, and 
Environment Canada was also notified. But according to the 

gentleman that called me, nothing ever came of this case short 
of the people that were guilty of hauling this stuff and dumping 
it in the ditch, they quit doing it when they realized people were 
aware of what was going on. 
 
So you know . . . I would just, you know, like some answers to 
you . . . from you as to why didn’t the environment people, the 
local environment people bring it to your attention or do 
something about it so that this practice wouldn’t continue. 
Because I mean as you can be aware, if they’re doing in broad 
daylight and being caught, nothing is stopping them from doing 
it in the dark hours. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — In response to the member from Estevan, 
the details as you are describing them sound very serious to me. 
So obviously, I would want more, even more detail in order to 
be able to investigate it in a fuller manner. I don’t have, 
unfortunately, the officials with me this evening that could 
answer the specifics of who answered what and follow up and 
so forth. 
 
So if we could perhaps meet outside of the session and you 
could give me the detail, I can assure you that we will indeed 
follow this up in a very aggressive and very timely manner. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I will give 
you the names of the parties involved, and I would like a 
commitment from you that you would give it your fullest 
attention. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — You certainly do have that commitment. 
We are, after all, the Department of Environment and I would 
like to point out that there is a great deal of public sensitivity 
and awareness about all aspects of the water chain. So we will 
definitely follow up on this in a very serious way and we will 
get back to you as quickly as possible. But I think that before 
we go much further on this, it’s important for me to get more 
details so that we can do an adequate and comprehensive 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
have a few questions that were posed to me by my constituents 
dealing with the Last Mountain Lake deal there that was in the 
paper and the news. So I thought I’d bring them here because I 
couldn’t answer them when they were posed to me, and I had 
quite a few calls on it. 
 
First question, I guess. When the city of Regina dumps fluent, 
treated sewage . . . or sewer . . . or water into the water system, 
a creek, do they have to apply to SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) for a permit? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The city of Regina, as I’ve tried to indicate 
last week, and I will say again, the city of Regina has a very 
complete sewage treatment system. They have not simply 
primary sewage treatment. And I won’t get into the specifics of 
what that is. But that’s the basic stuff. 
 
They have primary sewage treatment, then they have secondary 
sewage treatment which is one ladder up. And then they also 
have tertiary treatment. So it’s sort of in sewage treatment 
jargon. That’s the gold standard that the city of Regina has. The 
city of Regina cannot operate its sewage treatment plant without 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

a permit from the Department of Environment and we have 
very stringent operating criteria and conditions and they meet 
them. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I understand 
setting up the plant you would have a permit, but I was asking 
with the water, once it’s gone through their system — and I 
know they have a very good system — when that water . . . 
because not all systems, not from all cities, go into creeks or 
lakes. Some of them have set up irrigation systems, use their 
own. 
 
But when that water is moved into a system, do they have to 
apply for another permit to let you know that they’re moving it 
into the waterways? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The city of Regina, by virtue of their 
operating permit, has continual discharge. I know that some 
municipalities, some towns, hold the treated effluent in lagoons 
for some time or they use it for irrigation. That’s not the case 
with respect to the city of Regina. They have continual 
discharge. 
 
But it is important to note that they do testing on a daily basis, 
five times a week, to test what the bacteriological content is of 
that treated effluent, and they do meet the standards that are 
required for their operating permit. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the wintertime, 
does it break down . . . is the water a little higher that’s being 
treated coming out? I noticed in one of your . . . under question 
period you said there was one spike in February you said that 
you were . . . that was the only monitoring testing. But over the 
long haul, is it higher in the winter than in the summer when 
you do the day-to-day tests? Does it break down as easy when 
it’s moving out of the continuous flow into the creeks, the 
treated water? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise the member of two 
things. First of all, in the House last week when I said there was 
a spike in February, I was in error, and I was actually rather 
hoping that you would ask me a further question about it. 
 
In the rush to answer your questions, I confused briefings, and I 
was talking about something else where there had been a spike 
in something. And really what happened in February was we 
were unable to do the bacteriological testing, so there were no 
test results for February. But I do want to assure you that except 
for this rather unusual circumstance for the one month, we do, 
do regular routine testing as does the city of Regina on their 
treated effluent. 
 
The other thing that you should be aware of is that because we 
know that people like to use the water in the lakes, the two 
lakes in question, for recreational use, and the city of Regina 
does treat its effluent and treats it to a gold-quality standard, 
then it discharges it into the Wascana Creek. From the Wascana 
Creek it goes into the Qu’Appelle River, and from the 
Qu’Appelle River it is dispersed. Depending on how we control 
the water structure at Craven, it’s dispersed into Last Mountain 
Lake or further down the Qu’Appelle system and into Fishing 
Lakes. 
 

But because there are a high number of recreation users in the 
summer time, we require that the city of Regina does additional 
treatment of their sewage in the summertime, and so we require 
that they do ultraviolet disinfection and additional nutrient 
removal as well. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Madam Minister. They do the extra treating in 
the summer. The winter like this, one would understand that 
there was probably more that was released into Last Mountain 
Lake going underneath the ice. Can you do that extra treating in 
the wintertime, or can it only be done in the summer? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’d like to advise the member from Arm 
River that just as bears hibernate in the winter, and just as 
things seem to slow down for humans a lot in the wintertime . . . 
I mean, we don’t move around as much and certainly we don’t 
go swimming in the wintertime — it’s pretty hard to swim in 
frozen water — but also too do bacteria behave differently in 
cold weather as compared to warmer weather. And so the 
coliform growth in winter is extremely slow. 
 
So you have a different biological activity in the water in the 
wintertime compared to the summertime. And that’s why in the 
summertime, when we know that people will be wanting to 
swim, we know that they’ll be wanting to get out in the boats 
and fish and so forth, that’s when we require the additional 
ultraviolet treatment on the bacteria — or on the treated 
effluent, rather. 
 
But there are two different processes happening in the winter 
and in the summertime. So that basically is the answer to your 
question. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Madam Minister. My question is, 
lake also . . . the lake may not be swam in in the winter, but 
there are people ice fishing and eating fish out of there, so they 
are just as concerned as they are with the summertime. 
 
My question is, is the water safe in the winter? 
 
I’m trying to follow you there a bit. I know the bacteria and it’s 
colder, maybe . . . the lakes also don’t move as much because 
there’s also the ice on the lakes, so there isn’t much movement 
underneath in the water. So do you have more effluent water 
maybe staying at one end of the lake that may be getting moved 
around more? Have you found when you’re doing treatments 
. . . I’d like some more, basically some more information 
because what I’m doing right now is asking questions that were 
asked to me by my constituents right now. I’ve had very 
numerous calls on this, so I’m trying to find out some 
information on this whole deal so I can answer them. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — And I fully understand that. You’re fishing 
for answers here, okay. Well I want to try to give them to you 
as completely as I can. 
 
I think the concern that you’re expressing and that’s being 
expressed to you by your constituents is, is it safe to go ice 
fishing and to eat the fish that we pull out through the ice? And 
is it safe to fish in the summertime too? 
 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

 

And I want to tell you categorically fish do not accumulate 
bacteria. It’s water in and water out. So, if people are concerned 
that the fish are going to be growing the coliform bacteria that 
you are concerned about, they need not have any concern about 
that. The bacteria do not accumulate in fish. 
 
We do do testing though on the fish in that lake because 
obviously we’re concerned about the potential for mercury 
pollution, for instance. So we test regularly for mercury because 
we would not want people to be eating fish that are highly 
contaminated with mercury. But in terms of the coliform 
bacteria, people need not worry at all about eating the fish. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Madam Minister, you’d mentioned there that 
the cottage owners were worried about the low levels. When 
was water started to be diverted into Last Mountain Lake to 
start to build it up? 
 
When there was concerns about . . . Like, last year the lake was 
low. When did you basically open the dam to let water start 
flowing in or allow Sask Water the permit to allow water to go 
in there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I want to thank the member opposite for 
the questions because, quite frankly, I think there is a potential 
for people being concerned or alarmed as a result of the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) tests. 
 
And it’s important for you to know and for your constituents to 
know that the CBC tests, if they were testing treated drinking 
water and there were 17 coliform bacteria in it, we would be 
very concerned because our standard is zero coliform bacteria 
in treated water. 
 
Our standard for contact recreational water — that’s swimming 
around in it — is 200 coliform bacteria per 100 millilitre. And 
the standard for non-contact recreational use — boating and so 
forth — is 5,000. 
 
So the CBC tests clearly show that the water is safe for contact 
recreational uses. Indeed, it’s not only safe; it’s very safe when 
the standard is 200 and what we’ve got is 17 on their worst case 
test. So I really want to emphasize that point, that the water is 
safe. 
 
The water quality in Last Mountain Lake is very, very good and 
it definitely meets the recreational standards that we’ve set. And 
I would hope that you will be able to reassure your constituents, 
cottage owners, any one who is fussed about those CBC test 
results that the water is safe. Of course it’s not treated water so, 
as I said in the House last week, you would not want to be 
drinking it. But it safe to be going swimming and so forth. 
 
Now your specific question right now was about water 
diversion. Now I could easily say that’s not my department but 
I’m not going to do that. You are aware though of course that it 
is the Saskatchewan Water Corporation that does the water 
diversion. It’s not the Department of Environment. 
 
But that water diversion, that water diversion for this last year 
started in April of 2001. Now water diversion into Last 
Mountain Lake, into and out of Last Mountain Lake, because I 
know that people last week were making the point that Last 

Mountain Lake is a closed system and saying, oh dear, there’s 
this potential for all this bacteria going into the lake and then 
it’s just going to keep building up. It’s important that you assure 
your constituents that we also do release water from Last 
Mountain Lake out as well as in. Okay? 
 
But we have been doing that or Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation has been doing that for so many years that my 
officials can’t even advise me when it was first started, but it’s 
likely been going on for 40 years, at least. It’s been going on as 
long as that dam has been present at Craven, that water 
structure at Craven. Indeed the water structure at Craven is so 
old that we’re looking at replacing it pretty soon. So for 
probably about the last 40 years there has been water diversion 
from the Qu’Appelle River into Last Mountain Lake. 
 
Now the majority of the water that flows into the Qu’Appelle 
River comes from Lake Diefenbaker. It comes from Lake 
Diefenbaker, goes down through Buffalo Pound, the cities of 
Regina and Moose Jaw draw out water to treat for their drinking 
water, for their citizens, then it continues down that chain into 
the Qu’Appelle River. At the same time there’s water that flows 
from Wascana Creek into the Qu’Appelle River. 
 
So about 86 per cent of the water that flows into the Qu’Appelle 
River, which can then at Craven flow either into Last Mountain 
Lake or down into the Fishing Lakes, 86 per cent of that water 
comes from Lake Diefenbaker. So that’s water that is drawn off 
for the city of Regina and Moose Jaw to treat for drinking 
water. 
 
The remaining 14 per cent comes the from Wascana Creek. 
Now some of that water is the treated effluent from the city of 
Regina and then the rest of the water is the naturally occurring 
water in the Wascana Creek. So I can’t give you an estimate. I 
can’t break it down litre by litre. 
 
But it is important to note that the city of Regina has gold 
quality sewage treatment. Okay? Means it meets really top 
notch standards, okay. And they do constant testing. 
 
So this diversion that the CBC discovered — I think they called 
it the dirty little secret, if I remember correctly — this dirty 
little secret is something that has been going on for decades. 
There is nothing unusual except this one thing. Last year we 
had in Saskatchewan probably the driest year on record for all 
of the time that we’ve been keeping records in Saskatchewan on 
precipitation and so forth. 
 
So obviously the level of Last Mountain Lake fell quite a bit. 
Now we have a long-standing agreement and arrangement with 
the users of Last Mountain Lake to try to keep the level of the 
lake up so that it can be properly used for recreational purposes. 
Last Mountain Lake is . . . it’s got a very odd structure and the 
inflow of Last Mountain Lake is actually very low, and if we 
didn’t have this control structure at Craven probably we’d have 
a lake at certain points that’s only three feet deep. Now that’s 
not very good for recreational purposes. 
 
So there’s been this water management going on for years and 
years. The only difference is last year, because the lake level 
was so low, instead of stopping the water diversion in say 
September or so forth, because the lake level was so low we 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2002 

 

kept the water diversion going on throughout the winter. So the 
water diversion continued throughout the winter. 
 
Now because of . . . I know last week you were talking about 
chunks in the water. Now it was wonderful rhetoric and it 
certainly grabbed the public’s attention but I have to inform you 
that the chunks you’re talking about are mud, not crud. That 
mud is created by the hydraulic action of the water flowing into 
Last Mountain Lake, but it’s mud being churned up, mud and 
algae being churned up on the bottom of the lake, and it’s 
exacerbated because it’s happening during the winter. 
 
So the situation, this dirty little secret that CBC supposedly 
uncovered, while it might get lots of people tuning to their radio 
station, I think also had the very unfortunate effect of 
unnecessarily alarming people. I want you to be assured . . . 
reassured that we are . . . we do constantly test. 
 
We are very mindful of the concerns of people that they want to 
have good quality drinking water. They want to have good 
quality recreational water. And so as the Department of 
Environment we take those concerns very seriously and we do 
monitor this lake and other lakes in Saskatchewan for the water 
quality. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Madam Minister, thank you for answering the 
question about Sask Water. The reason I ask that, and at least 
another question, because there is affluent water going into that 
system. I kind of thought that Sask Water . . . does they let you 
know of all the water — because all systems, some systems 
there is no affluent water being put into them but this system 
there is — is there a kind of a policy that when water is diverted 
to a lake that normally didn’t have the affluent water in that 
system and some of that water all of a sudden goes in this lake 
or in that creek, do they let SERM know about it? 
 
And also one of the other questions is, you’d mentioned that 
lake when it was tested was 17 millimetres and that was safe. 
And what the gold standard — you always talk about the gold 
standard — when you treat it, when you test when it comes 
right out of the plant, the water treatment plant, what is the test 
of that? Did you have that broken down? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m going to try to answer your question 
because it’s . . . I understand the motivation and the impetus for 
asking the question and I do want you to have some degree of 
comfort in my answers. 
 
First of all, I want to say you seem to be making this out to be a 
highly unusual case. You have to understand that everyone is 
downstream from someone. That’s just in the nature of the way 
water flows. 
 
You also have to understand that coliform bacteria is in every 
surface water in the world. Coliform bacteria is a naturally 
occurring bacteria and every lake has coliform bacteria in it. We 
know that. What we do as a department is we set objectives for 
what level we consider to be safe and reasonable for various 
kinds of uses. As I’ve said already, for water that people are 
going to drink, treated drinking water, our level is zero coliform 
bacteria. For water that people are going to be swimming in, we 
set an objective of 200 coliform bacteria. We also set standards 
for the sewage treatment so that by the time that treated effluent 

reaches a body of water where people will be using it for 
contact recreational purposes, that it meets those objectives. 
 
Now you asked, did Sask Water consult with us about their 
water diversions and what they were doing? The answer is, no 
they didn’t because quite frankly their job is to administer the 
flows of the water and the level of the water. Our job is to 
administer the standards, the water objectives. 
 
So we are constantly monitoring — as is the city of Regina 
which is required by their permit to operate the sewage 
treatment plant — we’re constantly monitoring the coliform 
levels in the water both in the sewage, then in the treated 
effluent, then at various points in the Wascana Creek, and so 
forth down the line till we get to, in this instance, Last 
Mountain Lake where we also monitor on a regular basis to 
make sure that the coliform bacteria is not at a level that is 
unsafe for the specific use that that particular water body might 
be being put to. 
 
So I just want to assure you that by the time water, whether it 
comes from Lake Diefenbaker or treated effluent from the city 
of Regina or from Wascana Creek or Qu’Appelle River, by the 
time water enters Last Mountain Lake it is well within the 
surface water objectives for contact recreational use. 
 
As I said last week in the House, and I will say again, it is safe 
for people to swim in that lake. And if, as a result of our testing, 
we determined that the coliform level was too high, was over 
the 200 per 100 millilitre, we would definitely be issuing a 
warning to people to tell them not to swim in the lake. But it is 
safe for people to swim in Last Mountain Lake. 
 
It’s safe for them to go out in their boat, to take fish — as long 
as they bought a fishing licence, I want to emphasize that — if 
they buy the fishing licence, they can take those fish, take them 
home and fry them and eat them with complete comfort with 
respect to the coliform bacteria because, as I said, fish do not 
accumulate coliform bacteria. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Two parts of that question was the answer to 
the first part. The second part was when you test it when it 
comes right out of Regina’s water treatment plant what is the 
hundreds per coliform of that? Is it under the 200 standard? And 
what do you call a gold standard? You said there was a couple 
centres but you said they had the gold standard. Is there a level 
per parts of millilitre that you consider a gold standard, and 
when you test it, what comes out of Regina’s plant before it hits 
the creek, before it hits Last Mountain Lake, what is at the base, 
what’s the test right there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — You’ve asked a fairly complex and 
complicated question. And I’m asked to keep my answer short, 
so I’m going to try. 
 
You have to be aware that it varies from month to month and it 
varies depending on the time of the year and so forth. I can give 
you some numbers, for instance, dealing with fecal coliform 
only because I think that’s what people are concerned about. 
 
Last June the treated effluent leaving the City of Regina sewage 
treatment plant was 52. Bearing in mind that for, if somebody 
was going to go swimming in that, the standard is 200 coliform 



May 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

 

per millilitre; it was 52 at that point. When it got to Lumsden it 
was 72. That’s a bit unusual, because what usually happens is 
the fecal coliform count drops as at it goes down the Wascana 
Creek, the Qu’Appelle River, and then into Last Mountain 
Lake. 
 
In July it was 3; in August it was 2; in September it shot up to 
358. Okay, so you would obviously not want to go swimming in 
that. 
 
But by the time it gets into Last Mountain Lake, which is really 
I believe the real question you were asking is: what’s the level 
of the fecal coliform bacteria when it gets to Last Mountain 
Lake where people are going to be swimming. And it is always, 
in our testing, it meets the surface water quality non-cont . . . or 
contact recreational objectives of 200 millilitres — 200 bacteria 
per millilitre. So again I want to emphasize it’s safe to swim in 
that lake. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:02 
 


