















































Hansard: March 14, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 March 14, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 14:30. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have 
received a communication from the private secretary to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will 
open the third session of the twenty-fourth legislature at 2:30 
p.m. today, the 14th day of March, 2002. 
 
Would you please rise for the arrival of Her Honour. 
 

14:32 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 
the session with the following speech as tabled: 
 
Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Welcome to the third session of the twenty-fourth Legislature of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This year marks the Golden Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth’s 
accession to the throne of the United Kingdom and Canada. 
During her 50-year reign, Her Majesty has won our admiration 
for the stability, integrity and vision she has brought to the 
Commonwealth. The Queen has encouraged us to use the 
Jubilee as an opportunity to reflect on the ways in which our 
lives have changed over the past half century, to take stock of 
where we stand today, and to look to the future, particularly at 
how youth may contribute to our society. 
 

Dedication 
 
With this encouragement in mind, I would like to dedicate my 
remarks, and the plan of my government, to the students of 
Sacred Heart Catholic Elementary School in Regina - students 
who ably represent our future hopes and aspirations. 
 
Sacred Heart School is one of Saskatchewan’s vibrant 
community schools. 
 
The students, staff and parents of Sacred Heart School are 
successfully tackling the challenges that face their school and 
their inner city community. The school is a model of how 
innovation and determination can create opportunities and 
confidence. In fact, an international panel has recognized the 
school’s achievements. Sacred Heart School will be showcased 
at a Model Schools Conference in Washington, D.C. this June. 
Their positive spirit and enthusiasm are an inspiration to all of 
our citizens. 
 
I would like this Assembly to recognize the students of Sacred 
Heart School and their Principal, Loretta Tetreault. These are 
the young people whose lives you will influence by your 
deliberations and decisions. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge and celebrate the successful 
participation of the Saskatchewan members of the 2002 
Canadian Winter Olympics Team. The team gave all of us a 
feeling of great pride and helped to strengthen the bonds of our 
country. Members of this Assembly will be invited to join in a 
special event of tribute to our Saskatchewan Olympic athletes. 
 

Listening and learning 
 
Last summer, the Premier and his caucus traveled by bus 
throughout the province to hear the ideas, concerns and 
enthusiasm of Saskatchewan people – a process that will 
continue in 2002. 
 
The doors of the Legislature were opened to hear the views of 
Saskatchewan people with respect to renewing and improving 
our health care services. 
 
The Action Committee on the Rural Economy is currently 
completing the most in-depth consideration ever undertaken to 
explore opportunities to revitalize rural Saskatchewan. 
 
These are but three examples of how my government has been 
listening to, and learning from, the people of Saskatchewan 
during the past year. 
 
My government engaged with the people of Saskatchewan in 
discussing their ideas and aspirations. My government has 
developed a comprehensive plan and is ready to proceed with 
its implementation. 
 

Province of Opportunity 
 
Saskatchewan is able to look to the future with confidence, 
knowing the wealth of human and natural resources that we 
possess. My government’s plan will ensure these resources 
create opportunities for Saskatchewan citizens, communities 
and industry. 
 
Opportunity abounds in many sectors of our economy: 
• Diversification and value-added processing in agriculture; 
• Increased development of energy resources – including green 

energy; 
• Expansion of sustainable forestry production and 

manufacturing; 
• Growth in our cultural industries; 
• New tourism destinations and services; and 
• Mining including base metals, diamonds and other mineral 

deposits. 
 
Indeed, Saskatchewan recently surpassed British Columbia to 
become our nation’s third largest mineral producer. We are also 
Canada’s second largest producer of oil and gas. 
 
Our citizens demonstrate their determination to take advantage 
of these opportunities in many ways. 
 
Saskatchewan has led all provinces in increasing its gross 
domestic product per capita. And we continue to lead the 
country in many ways. Our manufacturing productivity is 
among the highest in Canada. We lead the way in small 
business – with more per capita than any other western 
province. We lead the way in high school graduation rates. We 
lead the way in university enrollment rates for 18 to 24 year 
olds – the highest in the western provinces and well above the 
national average. 
 
Confidence and optimism in Saskatchewan’s economic future is 
increasing on all fronts. The bond rating houses and financial 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2002 

 

institutions have repeatedly upgraded the province’s credit 
rating – nine times since 1995. 
 
The TD Bank Financial Group recently expressed confidence in 
the growth of Saskatchewan’s economy. While the Bank 
projects that real personal disposable income will fall for most 
Canadians this year, it forecasts that Saskatchewan residents 
will enjoy the nation’s largest average increase in personal 
income during 2002. 
 
Since 1999, KPMG’s international surveys have consistently 
shown that Saskatchewan’s cities are among the most 
competitive in the world. Saskatchewan’s four largest centres 
have ranked higher than the Canadian average, and are equal to, 
or better than, cities such as Winnipeg, Calgary and Vancouver. 
 
Investors and companies, from here in Saskatchewan and from 
beyond our borders, are participating in the economic renewal 
of our province. Tolko Industries is developing an Oriented 
Strand Board Plant in Meadow Lake in partnership with 
northern communities. Premium Brands has led the expansion 
of Harvest Foods’ specialty meat products factory in the 
Yorkton area. Centennial Foods has developed an ultra-modern 
food processing plant in Saskatoon. These are recent examples 
of how Saskatchewan is steadily diversifying its economy. 
These three projects alone are providing more than 500 direct 
jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The potential of our economy, combined with our central 
geographic location, the entrepreneurial spirit of our people and 
the quality of our public services, means that Saskatchewan is 
quickly becoming Canada’s province of opportunity. 
 

A commitment in a time of uncertainty 
 
However, the world, Canada, and Saskatchewan have faced 
uncertainty in recent months. Indeed, since this Assembly 
adjourned last year, the world has changed dramatically. 
 
Here at home, 2001 was one of the driest years in our history, 
with drought affecting 60 per cent of our farmland and pastures. 
International subsidies continue to impact prices for many 
agricultural commodities. Oil and natural gas prices have 
severely affected our energy sector and our province as a whole. 
Softwood lumber duties levied by the United States have 
affected our forest industry. We have felt the economic 
slowdown in the United States – the destination for about 
two-thirds of Saskatchewan’s exports. 
 
It is reasonable, therefore, to ask how the government’s 
optimism and commitment to continued social and economic 
development can be maintained at a time when revenues are 
declining for governments across Canada and beyond. 
 
My government has spent a decade restoring the fiscal stability 
and credibility of the province. During the past eight years, the 
people of Saskatchewan have paid down $3.7 billion in public 
debt. Tax-supported debt has fallen from 49 per cent to 23 per 
cent of our gross domestic product. 
 
Creation of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund has given my 
government a degree of flexibility in managing fluctuating 
revenues. However, as with other provinces, Saskatchewan 

must now face difficult choices in matching future revenues and 
expenditures. 
 
Nevertheless, my government will maintain its commitment to 
meet Saskatchewan’s immediate priorities and to expand our 
economy. 
 
This commitment will not permit unsustainable tax reductions, 
a return to massive deficits, or the sale of major Crown 
corporation assets that could jeopardize the long-term strength 
of the provincial economy. 
 
This commitment will instead require the co-operation of 
Saskatchewan people to live within our means while we seize 
our opportunities. 
 
This commitment also demands that my government remain 
dynamic and focused to implement its plan of action for 
Saskatchewan. To that end, a major reorganization of 
government will soon be undertaken. A restructured 
government will focus on the means to enhance public services, 
improve performance, apply new technologies and achieve 
savings. 
 

A plan of action for Saskatchewan 
 
My government’s plan to expand our economy and to create 
new opportunities for our young people is based on four pillars: 
 
• Investment in the economy and the environment; 
• Investment in infrastructure; 
• Provision of quality education; and 
• Healthy and self-reliant families. 
 
Investment in the Economy and the Environment 
 
Economic growth in Saskatchewan will continue to be led by 
the private sector and private investment. However, public 
policy and government initiatives can serve as a catalyst to 
investment. For that purpose, my government continues to 
reduce taxes. In 2002, an average Saskatchewan family will pay 
almost a third less provincial income tax than in 1993. The 
provincial income tax rate for small business is now 40 per cent 
lower than in 1991. 
 
My government has created an Investment Attraction Council 
to work with our business community to increase investment in 
our province and simplify the regulatory process. Armed with 
an analysis of our competitive business and taxation 
advantages, the Council will heighten awareness of 
Saskatchewan’s development potential throughout the 
investment community. 
 
In recent years, traditional farm employment has fallen 
dramatically across Canada, affected by commodity prices and 
mechanization. However, Saskatchewan is blessed with 46 per 
cent of all the arable land in Canada. While my government 
shares concerns should the drought continue, it also believes 
this land base provides the means to stimulate new growth in 
the rural regions of our province. 
 
Two key initiatives have been taken to support this objective. 
 



March 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

 

The Action Committee on the Rural Economy (ACRE) was 
created to identify and recommend options to further diversify 
the rural economy and create jobs. This Assembly will soon 
receive the final ACRE report and proposals. Those proposals 
will form the basis of my government’s action plan for rural 
revitalization. 
 
The ACRE recommendation regarding farmland ownership 
restrictions, pertaining to The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, 
will be referred to the Standing Committee on Agriculture for 
full debate during this session of the Legislature. 
 
My government is also advocating a comprehensive National 
Farm Safety Net Program. The Saskatchewan proposal, 
developed with advice from our farm leaders, calls for the 
federal government to support the following measures: 
 
• a meaningful insurance program, including both crops and 

forages; 
• a crop sector revenue deficiency program that offsets the 

impact of international subsidies; and 
• an enhanced margin-based program – targeted at our trade 

sensitive livestock sector. 
 
Saskatchewan’s known oil resources are estimated at 35 billion 
barrels, much of this in the form of heavy oil. My government 
will present a comprehensive energy development and 
conservation strategy that will build on increased heavy oil 
production and expansion in our natural gas sector. The strategy 
will also address energy efficiency and expand our ability to 
generate electricity from co-generation facilities and renewable 
energy sources including wind power. 
 
Saskatchewan is also well positioned to become a national 
leader in the production of renewable fuels such as ethanol. 
Ethanol has the potential to further diversify our agricultural 
economy and help reduce carbon dioxide emissions into the 
atmosphere. My government will introduce a Greenprint for 
Ethanol Production that will foster growth in this industry. 
 
As the federal government considers ratifying the proposed 
Kyoto protocol, my government will continue to work jointly 
with Canada to evaluate implications of the protocol for 
Saskatchewan’s environment and economy. 
 
Saskatchewan people recognize the importance of climate 
change as an environmental and economic issue. Initiatives will 
be continued to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in our 
province. A new Office of Energy Conservation will be 
established. 
 
My government’s action plan also addresses other 
environmental measures necessary to ensure sustainable 
economic growth. A number of amendments to The Forest 
Resources Management Act will be proposed to ensure that 
province-wide standards are applied to all forest operations in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Safe drinking water is an essential element of a healthy 
environment and strong economy. This year, my government 
will introduce direct actions and legislative changes to ensure 
that the citizens of Saskatchewan have a sustainable, safe and 
clean supply of drinking water. 

Research and development is necessary to promote a strong 
economy in a modern industrial society. Saskatchewan is an 
active participant in health, agricultural and industrial research 
and development. Our two universities, the Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre in Regina, Innovation Place in 
Saskatoon, a new Forestry Development Centre based in Prince 
Albert, and the Saskatchewan Research Council provide a 
significant research capacity within the province. 
 
Plans will be presented to the Assembly to significantly 
increase health research undertaken in our province. 
 
Our province’s role in research and development will soon be 
magnified by the Canadian Light Source synchrotron at the 
University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. It is the largest 
scientific project undertaken in Canada during the last 30 years. 
The synchrotron will provide researchers with leading edge 
technology to serve a national research and development 
mandate. It will be vital to academic and industrial scientists in 
many disciplines. 
 
My government will announce plans to establish a synchrotron 
institute to ensure we fully achieve the economic potential of 
related research activity within Saskatchewan. 
 
The province’s cultural community is also an important 
contributor to our economic growth. Saskatchewan writers, 
artists, performers, producers and technicians give form and 
voice to the values that define us as a people. Increasingly, they 
attract worldwide audiences and acclaim. 
 
To acknowledge the growing importance of Saskatchewan’s 
artistic community to our economy and society, The 
Saskatchewan Status of the Artist Act will be introduced. 
 
During this session, my government, together with the 
SaskFilm and Video Development Corporation, will open the 
new, $11.5 million state-of-the-art film and video sound stage 
in Regina. The sound stage will enable our province to fully 
participate in international film and video production. 
 
Drawing investment from around the world, the sound stage, as 
with the synchrotron, adds to the diverse and exciting range of 
career opportunities available within the province. They provide 
opportunities for our own young people and for those who 
choose to relocate to Saskatchewan to pursue careers made 
possible by these investments in our economy. 
 
Our Crown utility corporations represent another competitive 
advantage in support of economic growth in Saskatchewan. 
They provide quality services and offer consumer and 
commercial rates that are among the lowest in Canada. They 
also keep head offices, good jobs and profits here at home, 
supporting local suppliers and providing dividends that help 
fund essential public services. 
 
Crown corporations also provide the opportunity to partner with 
private companies in attracting investment for new and 
expanded enterprises. 
 
A modern economy, such as ours, must ensure that its workers 
and consumers are protected. 
 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2002 

 

My government will respond to the review of The Workers’ 
Compensation Act, undertaken during 2001. A number of 
recommended changes in the operations of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board will be implemented this year. Further 
changes, including those requiring legislation, will be 
determined following consultation with the Board’s 
stakeholders. 
 
Pay equity is an important principle in our contemporary 
workplace. My government has implemented that principle for 
more than 25,000 workers employed by provincial departments 
and agencies, Crown corporations, and several training 
institutions. My government will continue to encourage the 
application of pay equity in the health sector. 
 
Saskatchewan legislation must also keep pace with changing 
technology and practices in the marketplace. Amendments to 
various Acts will be proposed to address internet purchases; 
credit card information use; debt collection agency practices; 
fund-raising company licensing; and cost-of-credit disclosure 
requirements. 
 
My government will present the Assembly with a series of 
amendments to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. These 
will allow for three major improvements to services provided 
by Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 
A Safe Driver Rewards Program will provide insurance 
premium discounts to safe drivers. Improvements will be made 
to the Personal Injury Protection Plan. As well, Saskatchewan 
drivers will be given the choice of alternative insurance 
coverage that allows for judicial resolution of accident claims. 
 
Investment in Infrastructure 
 
Investment in infrastructure is important to both the economy 
and quality of life in Saskatchewan. 
 
My government is in the midst of the single largest public 
infrastructure project in our history – a $900 million, three-year 
plan to improve our highways. Members of this Assembly will 
be asked to approve plans for more than 700 kilometers of 
highway reconstruction and paving. 
 
New highway construction technologies will be used to assist in 
constructing high quality transportation corridors that will 
facilitate economic growth in the province. 
 
In partnership with many municipalities, the government is 
building better roads. 
 
Saskatchewan leads the nation in extending state-of-the-art 
telecommunication services to rural and northern citizens. 
 
The CommunityNet program will extend high-speed internet 
service to a further 460 health, education, community and 
government centres across the province – ensuring that 
Saskatchewan residents, organizations and businesses have 
access to modern internet services. As well, SaskTel will extend 
high-speed internet to homes and businesses in 191 more 
communities by 2003. 
 
High-speed internet service and the expansion of digital cellular 

telephone coverage are examples of how my government 
invests in provincial infrastructure and supports rural 
revitalization. 
 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy will also contribute to 
infrastructure renewal in the province. These corporations will 
invest $350 million in 2002 to meet the energy needs of 
consumers and industry. 
 
The renewal of municipal infrastructure will continue, assisted 
by the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program and 
Saskatchewan’s Centenary Fund. 
 
Provision of Quality Education 
 
Quality education is the third pillar in my government’s action 
plan to expand Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
During the past four years, provincial funding for kindergarten 
to Grade 12 education increased by 24 per cent. My government 
is proud to have responded to the innovation and dedication of 
our educators and the long-term needs of our youth. 
 
Saskatchewan’s community schools program is a leader in 
progressive education. In 83 community schools, parent, 
community and professional resources come together to help 
students learn and grow. 
 
The government’s new Prince of Wales Scholarships will be 
targeted to encourage Grade 11 students in community schools 
to complete high school. 
 
Building on the experience of community schools and the 
innovation of Saskatchewan educators, the Role of the School 
Task Force developed the concept of SchoolPLUS. SchoolPLUS 
will integrate education and human services to ensure that our 
schools are able to respond to the particular needs of each 
community and all of our students. My government has 
endorsed the concept of SchoolPLUS and will work with our 
province’s educators and human service agencies to ensure its 
implementation. 
 
Saskatchewan’s commitment to post-secondary education will 
also be maintained. Well over 50,000 Saskatchewan students 
will participate in classes and training programs this year 
through the province’s universities, SIAST, regional colleges 
and private vocational schools. As well, on-the-job training 
programs and the work of Saskatchewan’s Apprenticeship and 
Trade Certification Commission will continue to be key 
instruments in meeting our training needs. 
 
Of particular significance is the growing number of First 
Nations and Métis students who participate in provincial 
education and training opportunities. Saskatchewan is a national 
leader in providing training geared to Aboriginal students, often 
delivered through Aboriginal and northern training institutions. 
 
The Northern Health Sciences Access Program and the 
Northern Nursing Education Program are initiatives that will be 
valuable to increase the number of northerners trained as health 
professionals in our province. 
 
Through the development of Campus Saskatchewan, our 



March 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

 

post-secondary institutions will increase on-line and distance 
learning opportunities for Saskatchewan people. The 
government will also support increased delivery of high school 
programs via the internet. Students in rural, northern and urban 
locations will have new opportunities to access a greater range 
of programs through on-line learning. 
 
In addition to its direct investment in education, my 
government’s plan includes other initiatives to tap the vitality 
and ideas of our youth. 
 
During the next year, the Centennial Student Employment 
Program will generate unique career development opportunities 
and provide employment experience for 1,300 Saskatchewan 
young people. 
 
Young people have said to government – “give us a voice at the 
table”. In response, young people will be given opportunities 
for mentorship, training and decision-making as members of the 
Boards of our Crown Corporations and a variety of other 
agencies and commissions of the government. 
 
Healthy and Self-Reliant Families 
 
My government’s action plan for Saskatchewan recognizes that 
good health and good housing are fundamental to the quality of 
our lives. My government is also determined that the 
opportunity to participate in our economy will be extended to 
all of our citizens. 
 
Therefore, the fourth pillar of my government’s core strategy is 
to support the development of healthy and self-reliant families. 
 
One way we can do this is to ensure early childhood 
development for vulnerable children. Kids First has been 
designed and developed as a joint program that involves 
community members and professionals working together. Its 
expanded implementation will proceed this year. 
 
Building Independence is a support program that has reduced 
social assistance caseloads to the lowest level in ten years by 
increasing participation in the labour force. Building 
Independence will be expanded during the next year to give 
more families the opportunity for greater participation in our 
economy. 
 
Through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, my 
government provides affordable, quality housing to more than 
67,000 lower income residents of the province. With the 
renewed support of the Government of Canada, a new five-year 
housing initiative to construct 1,000 additional housing units in 
urban and northern areas will begin this year. 
 
One of my government’s highest priorities in its action plan for 
Saskatchewan is the provision and renewal of sustainable, 
publicly administered health care that is accessible to all. 
 
Last December, my government released The Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care, a long-term plan to improve and 
secure health care for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
This Assembly will be presented with a budget and legislative 
amendments to help implement that Plan, facilitating a practical 

approach to change, at a manageable pace. 
 
My government will implement measures to better manage 
waiting times for elective surgery, create primary health care 
teams throughout the province, increase recruitment and 
training activities, and establish a 24-hour phone line that offers 
immediate advice from a registered nurse. A program to train 
240 Emergency Medical Technicians will also begin this year. 
 
The Paramedics Act will be introduced to recognize the 
growing levels of training among emergency service 
professionals and create a self-regulatory body for their 
members. 
 
My government will introduce legislation to establish 12 new 
Regional Health Authorities and Canada’s first Health Quality 
Council – an independent advisory board that will encourage 
excellence throughout the health care system and report to the 
public on health care quality issues. 
 
As Saskatchewan begins to implement its long-term plan for 
health care, the issue of funding must be addressed. It is my 
government’s view that Canadians value their health care 
system and support the need to reinstate additional federal 
funding for health services. While administrative efficiencies 
and illness prevention programs can assist in managing costs, 
the federal government is a necessary partner in addressing this 
national priority. 
 
Healthy and self-reliant families, the provision of quality 
education, investment in infrastructure and investment in the 
economy - these are the four pillars of my government’s action 
plan for Saskatchewan. 
 

Communities of Opportunity 
 
To achieve our goal of building the province of opportunity, we 
must also assist in building communities of opportunity by 
working with municipalities, First Nations and Métis 
communities. 
 
Municipal governments have expressed interest in increasing 
their autonomy and authority to deliver quality public services 
to their communities. 
 
The cities of the province have suggested a City Act that would 
more fully recognize their evolution and independence as larger 
municipal governments. Introduction of a City Act will 
therefore be considered as the basis for discussion and 
consultation about the concept being proposed. 
 
As well, amendments to The Urban Municipality Act, The Rural 
Municipality Act, and The Northern Municipalities Act, to 
enhance the authority and accountability of local governments, 
will be introduced during this session. 
 
With the support of both the municipal sector and the business 
community, my government will introduce amendments to The 
Assessment Management Agency Act. This will enable the 
introduction of the income approach to evaluation of 
commercial property as an alternative to current assessment 
tools. 
 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 2002 

 

First Nations and Métis citizens are rapidly increasing their 
participation in the social, political and economic life of our 
province. That is the purpose of my government’s Métis and 
Off Reserve First Nations Strategy, an interdepartmental 
initiative to respond to the aspirations of Aboriginal peoples. 
 
My government is strengthening its relationship and 
co-operation with Métis people, supported by the recognition 
contained within The Métis Act, proclaimed earlier this year. 
The government will continue to promote the participation of 
Métis entrepreneurs and companies in our economy through 
initiatives such as the Clarence Campeau Fund and the Northern 
Development Fund. 
 
My government also appreciates its growing business 
partnerships with Saskatchewan First Nations. Of particular 
note is the First Nations Gaming Agreement, under which many 
business and employment opportunities have been created for 
Aboriginal residents. 
 
My government will continue to fulfill the terms of the Treaty 
Land Entitlements signed with individual First Nations and the 
Government of Canada. Self-government negotiations will also 
proceed with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, the Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and Canada. 
 
Strong Aboriginal communities will enhance Saskatchewan’s 
prospects as the province of opportunity. 
 

Justice and Security 
 
My government is committed to ensuring the safety and 
security of Saskatchewan families and communities. 
 
Last year, the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade tabled its final 
report and recommendations. The government’s legislative 
response to that report will emphasize the accountability of 
perpetrators and timely intervention on behalf of victims. 
 
Saskatchewan will participate in implementation of the 
National Sex Offender Registry. The Registry will provide for 
the mandatory registration of former sex offenders who have 
been released from incarceration in Saskatchewan or who enter 
the province. 
 
Saskatchewan will also join with other provinces and territories 
in introducing legislation to make it easier for families living in 
different regions of the country to obtain court orders for child 
maintenance. The legislation will help ensure that children 
receive the financial support to which they are entitled, 
regardless of where they live in Canada. 
 
My government has formed the Commission on First Nations 
and Métis Peoples and Justice Reform, which will soon begin 
its community-based hearings and consideration of possible 
reforms to the justice system that will benefit all citizens of the 
province. 
 
During this session of the Legislature, the resources of our 
police services will be strengthened. The government will also 
monitor and report on measures taken to reduce crimes 
committed by repeat offenders. 

Volunteers 
 
Saskatchewan communities are enriched and strengthened by 
volunteers. We continue to enjoy the highest rate of voluntarism 
in Canada. Volunteers contribute to the growth and prosperity 
of our communities. My government will soon announce the 
Premier's Volunteer Sector Initiative. Its purpose will be to 
recognize, support and build an even stronger volunteer sector 
in Saskatchewan. 
 

Conclusion – Wisdom for our Children’s Children 
 
I have spoken about the sense of uncertainty that has faced our 
economy and our world in recent months. 
 
More than one hundred years ago, great uncertainty also faced 
the First Nations of the Canadian prairies as they made Treaties 
with the Queen and the Government of Canada. The wisdom of 
those First Nation Chiefs, recorded at the time of the Treaty 
negotiations and signings, still rings true today as we consider 
the opportunities and choices that face the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One such Chief was Ahtahkakoop – Starblanket – whose life 
and people were recently documented by Saskatchewan writer 
Deanne Christensen. In 1896, Chief Ahtahkakoop counselled 
his First Nation to consider how the decisions they make today 
would impact on the generations of the future. He said to them, 
and I quote: 
 
“Let us not think of ourselves but of our children’s children. We 
hold our place among the tribes as chiefs and councillors 
because our people think we have wisdom above others 
amongst us. Then let us show our wisdom. Let us show our 
wisdom by choosing the right path now while we yet have a 
choice.” 
 
I am pleased to bring the words of Chief Ahtahkakoop to this 
House as you begin your deliberations to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan’s future generations. 
 
Let us also think about the children who are here today from 
Sacred Heart Catholic Community School and from other 
schools in our fair province. These young people represent both 
an inspiration and purpose for your work. I leave you now to 
the business of the Session, with full confidence that the 
government will favourably discharge its duties and 
responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. God Save the 
Queen. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 15:19. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office be now 



March 14, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

 

introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 
for this session will be Robin Canham, Dean Regier, Frederick 
Khonje, Michelle McNichol, Andrea Barraza, and Fabian 
Contreras. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Deputy Premier, Minister of Agriculture: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Friday, March 15, 2002. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Agriculture, Deputy Premier: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed 
under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 
adjournment motion, I have a few announcements to make. 
 
I would first of all like to thank all the guests and the members 
of the public for joining us today. 
 
A special thank you goes out to all the students who are with us 
today. In particular, a thank you to the grade 5 and 6 students 
from Francis Elementary School, the grade 10 students from 
Caronport High School, and students from Regina’s Sacred 
Heart School, and all their teachers and chaperones for 
attending today’s ceremony. 
 
Welcome also to the Carlton Comprehensive High School 
Choir from Prince Albert. I will be calling on them to sing for 
us in a few moments. 
 

I would also like to take this opportunity to recognize and thank 
the members of the judiciary who are regular participants in this 
ceremony. The opening of the legislature is one of the few 
occasions when the three elements of state — the judiciary, the 
executive, and the legislative branches — participate together in 
a public event that is an important symbol of our constitutional 
and parliamentary heritage. 
 
And I would like to thank the members of Reserve Units from 
Saskatchewan for providing us with the honour guard this 
afternoon, as well as 10 Field Regiment for the 15-gun salute. I 
also extend our thanks to Dr. Ed Lewis for playing the 
vice-regal salute during today’s ceremonies. 
 
It’s my pleasure to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the 
Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
served in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the 
Library Reading Room in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Now I would like to welcome the Carlton 
Comprehensive High School Choir from Prince Albert, under 
the direction of Brenda Bernath and accompanied by Janice 
Peake. The choir will sing two selections for us this afternoon 
— “I Believe” and “Simple Gifts.” Ladies and gentlemen, the 
Carlton Comprehensive High School Choir. 
 
(The choir sang.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all present, I would like to 
express my thank you to the Carlton Comprehensive High 
School Choir for that delightful, very fine performance. They 
will be performing again for us in the rotunda following this 
ceremony. 
 
The House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 15:26. 
 


