















































Hansard: July 10, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2769 
 July 10, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are upset 
with the government’s decision to transfer the surplus from the 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund to the General Revenue 
Fund. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to refund the $1.6 million intended for the 
Saskatchewan Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and 
discontinue its present policy of using this money for other 
government purposes. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This particular petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens of 
Regina, Indian Head, Pense, Raymore, Lumsden, and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again have 
a petition on behalf of citizens concerned with overfishing at 
Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are mostly from the community of 
Langenburg. 
 
Ms. Bakken: —Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents of Craik and Davidson and area about 
their health care. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctorial services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from the Craik and 
Davidson area and beyond. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Davidson, Kenaston, 
and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Wall: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The petitions 
continue to roll in about the hospital issue in Swift Current. The 
prayer of these petitions today reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its 65 per cent share of funding for a 
new regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the great city of 
Swift Current and the southwest Saskatchewan community of 
Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. And, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services, 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24 acute care, emergency, and doctoral 
services available as well as lab, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
the users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Craik, Girvin, 
Kenaston, and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have a petition from people who are opposed to the 
possible reduction of services to the Davidson and Craik health 
centres. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of 
services at a minimum, with 24-hour care, emergency, 
doctoral services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from the Craik and 
Davidson area and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by good people from 
Davidson, Bladworth, Loreburn, and Eston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
today from citizens concerned about a reasonably priced 
telephone service. The prayer reads: 



2770 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins and provide reliable cellular telephone coverage. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Edmonton, Martensville, Saskatoon, 
Leask, and Dalmeny. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
today I have a petition of citizens concerned about getting 
high-speed Internet. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide high-speed Internet service to the community of 
Lanigan. 

 
And the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by citizens from 
Lanigan, Guernsey, and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents who are 
concerned with the detrimental changes to this year’s crop 
insurance program. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, all come from the 
good community of Wishart. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 11, 18, 22, 146, 147, 168, 169, and no. 174. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
today to welcome once again to this Assembly a community 
leader with whom I have the opportunity to engage in 
discussions over matters of mutual concern on behalf of 
communities throughout this great province of ours. It’s Mr. 
Mike Badham, the president of the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, and the communications manager 
for SUMA, Mr. Andrew Rathwell, who are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are two guests 
seated in your gallery I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly. Joining us this 
afternoon are Bev Clark who is a former schoolteacher and now 
she is an art docent with the Norman MacKenzie Art Gallery, 
explaining the significance of Aboriginal art to students. 
 
And also joining us this afternoon is Danusia Wiazowski. 
Danusia is a Canadian history teacher from Montreal who is in 
Saskatchewan visiting friends. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seeing as 
I’ve been determined on Monday and Tuesday to introduce 
representatives from Week in Wascana summer camp, they’ve 
provided me with a little more information. 
 
And so sitting in your gallery today are leaders and campers 
from the fourth annual Week in Wascana, designed for kids 8 to 
11. And in addition to their visit to the Legislative Building, the 
campers will be spending time at Wascana Place, the Science 
Centre, the MacKenzie Art Gallery, the Centre of the Arts, and 
the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. And they’re going to create a 
time capsule for each camper to take home and save for 20 
years. 
 
This sounds like a great way to spend one week of our precious 
summer holidays, Mr. Speaker, and I ask all members to join 
me in welcoming this group of campers and group leaders. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
your gallery are two guests that I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly. Seated with my 
constituency assistant, Ms. Carol Mellnick, is a young lady, 
Lindsay Weisbrod, who is working in my office for the 
summer, Mr. Speaker. And she has a keen interest in the 
political process and is here today to observe question period 
and the Premier’s estimates that will follow. 
 
And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to help me welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to draw attention to the House, a young person sitting in your 
gallery, Maria Kurylo, who’s a legislative intern who has been 
of great assistance to me personally; and on behalf of the 
member for Regina Elphinstone, would like all members to 
welcome her today — also I’m sure the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood who was assigned to Maria, or Maria 
was assigned to him, vice versa. 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2771 

 

I was able to meet Maria early on during the Speaker’s tour in 
school program visits. So there couldn’t be a better pioneer for 
the Saskatchewan legislative intern program, and I know we’ve 
learned a lot and I hope that they have as well. 
 
So if all hon. members would welcome Maria here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, a young gentleman sitting in the west 
gallery who’s Joe McMaster. And he is entering his final year at 
the College of Commerce in Saskatoon, majoring in finance, 
and we’re very fortunate because we have him working in our 
office for this summer. 
 
So I’d like all members to welcome Joe to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Inductees to Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
August 17 in Battleford the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of 
Fame will honour baseball greats from across the province. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Larry Leflar of Bengough and the 
Nyhus family of Ceylon who will be two of the honourees that 
will be inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. 
 
Larry Leflar was raised in the Bengough area and he started 
playing baseball when he was only eight years old and played 
for some 50 years. Larry is well known as one of very few 
left-handed shortstops and is a feared left-handed hitter. In the 
words of his peers, Larry had a strong arm, great speed, and 
great hustle. Larry is still involved in promotion of baseball in 
his community today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Nyhus baseball team from Ceylon was famous 
not only for their great ability on the field but also because the 
team consisted of nine Nyhus brothers — Ben, Albin, Otto, Ed, 
Harold, Alick, Hjalmer, Ted and Fritz. The Nyhus family have 
baseball roots that date back to 1914 when the large family 
moved from Minnesota to Ceylon. They played together during 
the 1920s and 1930s. 
 
Again, congratulations to Larry Leflar and the Nyhus brothers 
and a special thank you from myself and all others across 
Saskatchewan who love the great game of baseball. We thank 
you for your contribution to the game. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon to Host Rendezvous Canada 2005 
 

Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again 
Saskatchewan has been chosen to host a national event with 
international recognition. Most particularly, once again 
Saskatoon has been chosen to host a national event with 
international recognition. 

This morning the Tourism Industry Association of Canada 
announced that they have selected Saskatoon as the host city for 
Rendezvous Canada 2005. This marks the first time that our 
great province will host Canada’s signature tourism showcase. 
 
Rendezvous Canada is an international marketplace that attracts 
thousands of people, including buyers from around the world, 
sellers from across the country, and international travel writers 
reporting on the event and the host venue. 
 
Saskatchewan’s tourism industry is an important and growing 
part of our economy, contributing nearly $1.3 billion annually. 
One of every ten workers in our province are in tourism and 
tourism-related occupations. This event will strengthen the 
industry in our province and also strengthen Saskatchewan’s 
presence as a tourism destination of choice. 
 
We are confident that Saskatoon and Saskatchewan will be 
outstanding hosts for Rendezvous Canada 2005. Our province 
boasts a range of exciting and unique natural, cultural, and 
historic tourism attractions. Hosting this major event during our 
centennial year will be a chance to showcase to the world, 
tourism, products, and hospitality that are second to none. 
 
I ask everyone to join me in congratulating Tourism 
Saskatchewan and especially Tourism Saskatoon for attracting 
such a prestigious event to our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

27th Annual Olde Tyme Fiddle Festival 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend the community of Govan hosted the 27th Annual Olde 
Tyme Fiddle Festival. Contestants ranging from ages 5 to 85 
played waltzes, jigs, and reels, in pursuit of more than $6,000 in 
prize money. 
 
Fiddle fans and contestants from across Western Canada as well 
as from a number of northern States gathered in Govan for a 
weekend of fiddling, jigging, and jamming. One of the 
highlights of the weekend was Friday night when after a short 
opening ceremony, the guest performers entertained. 
Accomplished fiddlers from across Western Canada had the 
people on their feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the audience was also treated to a medley of 
traditional Scottish and Irish selections when Paddy Duncan of 
Inverness, Scotland took to the stage. Paddy was one of the 
featured entertainers of the weekend. The evening wrapped up 
with a group from New Brunswick, Ivan Hicks and the 
Maritime Express who had the audience singing, laughing, and 
jigging. 
 
As one can well imagine, Mr. Speaker, to organize and execute 
an event such as this the entire community of Govan was 
involved. Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the 
people of Govan and especially those on the organizing 
committee for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2772 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Regina Employment Statistics 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. For the second 
month in a row Regina has had the largest job growth on the 
Prairies, boasting a whopping 5.3 per cent increase in 
employment this June. 
 
According to a StatsCanada report released by the regional 
economic development authority, the employed workforce grew 
by 5,400 jobs, Mr. Speaker. The 5.3 per cent increase in year 
over year employment growth was the best among the five 
major Prairie cities, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatoon came in 
second with a 2.1 per cent growth. For job growth, for the year 
to date, Regina took second place with a solid 3.7 per cent 
increase, followed by Saskatoon at 1.9 per cent. 
 
The president and CEO (chief executive office) of the Regina 
Regional Economic Development Authority said this growth 
was boosted by the improving provincial economy. 
Manufacturing led the way, Mr. Speaker, with 1,400 new jobs, 
followed by construction with 1,300 new jobs. And the service 
sector and private sector management jobs increased by 1,400, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our economy has returned to posting back-to-back increases in 
employment growth in May and June. StatsCanada reported a 
whopping 12,800 more people were working in the province in 
June, over this time last year, Mr. Speaker, while May grew by 
11,000 over the previous year, Mr. Speaker. An increasing and 
improving pattern, Mr. Speaker, for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan 55 Plus Summer Games 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening the 
Minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation and I had the honour 
of opening the Saskatchewan 55 Plus Summer Games in North 
Battleford. A thousand people turned out to the North 
Battleford Civic Centre to watch the competitors being led in by 
the Battleford Pipe and Drum Band. There are over 700 
competitors involved in the various events. 
 
The Battlefords are enthusiastically behind the games and the 
local business has contributed $10,000. Joyce Salie, Chair of 
the host organizing committee has assembled a volunteer team 
of 250 people working hard to make sure our visitors feel 
welcome and the games are a success. 
 
The athletes were obviously enjoying themselves at the opening 
ceremonies. They provide an excellent example to all of our 
citizens of healthy lifestyles at all stages of life. 
 
Best wishes to all competitors and volunteers in what I am 
confident will be the most successful 55 Plus Saskatchewan 
Games ever. Congratulations to all volunteers and competitors. 
Let the games begin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Summer Fun in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, now that 

we’ve just about packed up our old kit bags and can take a few 
days to plan our summer activities, I have a suggestion for all 
members and for everyone within earshot — come to 
Saskatoon. 
 
As well as some of the finest restaurants, finest parks, darkest 
and coolest watering places, and most invigorating recreational 
facilities, we have a host of events to satisfy just about anyone’s 
taste. 
 
You’ve already heard how to brush up on your Shakespeare. If 
you want something a bit more modern and off-the-wall, you 
can try the member from Nutana’s Fringe Festival celebrating 
its 10th highly successful year, July 30 to August 8. Or starting 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, the Ex, Saskatchewan’s largest single 
event. We’ve got an air show on August 14 and 15. We’ve got 
the Folkfest, August 12 to 14. 
 
And if you like our folk festival, I’m sure the member from 
Shellbrook would not mind if I suggest you keep on travelling 
up to the Ness Creek Music Festival, one of the province’s best 
and the best kept secret. 
 
And more, Mr. Speaker, much, much more. Saskatoon is the 
place to be — so come on up. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wadena Teacher Nominated 
for Governor General’s Medal of Excellence 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to inform the Assembly about a constituent of mine, Mr. 
Gary Gabel of Wadena Composite School. Some hon. members 
may remember Mr. Gabel as one of the teachers who 
participated in the social studies teachers’ institute in the 
legislature. He has been an integral part of the Wadena School 
for a number of years. 
 
This year, he has been honoured by being nominated for the 
Governor General’s Medal of Excellence in the teaching of 
Canadian Studies. This is a national award, given each year to a 
teacher of Canadian Studies. Like the Governor General’s 
Award for Student Proficiency, the teaching award is also for 
proficiency. 
 
According to Mr. Gabel, the nomination is award by itself. He 
said it should be noted that no teacher is of any value without 
the support of excellent students and staff willing to participate 
in innovation and professional development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of all the teachers in this province for 
their dedication to their students. Mr. Gabel exemplifies the role 
of the teacher. I wish him the best of luck this fall when the 
national award recipient will be announced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Summer Events in Regina 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment my 
good friend from Saskatoon Meewasin in her statement on our 
sister city of Saskatoon because we all . . . we are after all 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

 

people of co-operation and sharing. So let me say this: if you 
can’t make it all the way to the North, then we have enough 
right here in Regina to satisfy every need and every whim of the 
inquiring tourist. The summer days are long and we can fill 
them all. 
 
For openers, two bits of significant Saskatchewan history. 
Starting tonight at the Schumiatcher Theatre in the MacKenzie 
Art Gallery is the . . . running from now to August 16, The Trial 
of Louis Riel, the dramatic re-creation of Canada’s most famous 
trial. Also every other . . . every Tuesday evening at the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) Training Academy, you can 
see the traditional and very moving sunset ceremony. 
 
And starting tomorrow and running through the weekend, you 
can Rock’N the Valley at Craven. If past history is any gauge, 
Mr. Speaker, you’ll be joined by thousands. 
 
At the end of the month, Buffalo Days and the Provincial 
Exhibition begin, followed shortly by the Regina Folk Festival 
downtown, and of course the Royal Red Arabian Horse Show at 
the Exhibition grounds. 
 
Three events on the water take us to Labour Day, Mr. Speaker: 
the Lanterns on the Lake ceremony, the SaskPower Dragon 
Boat Festival, both in Wascana Centre, and our excellent 
Regina Symphony will once again be taking the classics to the 
outdoors with the Beethoven at Buffalo Pound concert on 
August 25. 
 
It’s summer — time to enjoy. We can do it here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Public Accounts for 2001-2002 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last year the Provincial Auditor signed off on Volume 
1 of the Public Accounts for 2000-2001 on June 5. These public 
accounts, Mr. Speaker, are the summary financial statements of 
the government. So presumably, the Provincial Auditor has 
already signed off for the 2001-2002 Public Accounts 
documents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government refusing to release the Public Accounts? Is it 
because they show that this Premier ran a huge deficit in his 
first year of office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want 
to talk about a record of accountability, I want to inform the 
House and I want to inform the people of the province that this 
government has been releasing the Public Accounts earlier each 
year and earlier than we’ve released them before in history . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I also want to tell that member, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government not only started having budgets 
every year — something the members opposite unbelievably 
didn’t do, Mr. Speaker — but we introduced mid-year financial 
reports to make it clear to the people of the province every six 
months how the province was doing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going further. We’re going to be 
releasing quarterly financial statements about how the 
province’s finances are. 
 
When it comes to accountability, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor has said we have one of the finest sets of books in the 
country. That’s our record. We’re accountable. We’ll be 
releasing the Public Accounts earlier than they ever did, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that the minister 
didn’t answer the question. 
 
The signatures on this document last year from the former 
deputy minister, Mr. Boothe, and Mr. Wendel, the auditor, are 
June of 2001. 
 
Now it is our understanding that Volume 1 of the Public 
Accounts for this March 31 have been printed and are ready to 
be released. The summary financial statement for that current 
year will show a large deficit for the year 2001-2002 which is 
probably why the NDP haven’t wanted to release this document 
while we’re in session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that the Public Accounts 
are printed and ready to be released? And what is the size of the 
deficit from the summary financial statements for March 31, 
2002? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is well-known, as was stated at the time 
of the budget, that on a cash basis or a summary financial basis, 
we will be in a deficit for the year ending March 31, 2002. 
That’s a well-known fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Recognize the . . . 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, it is well known that we are 
drawing on our savings in order to balance the budget in the 
General Revenue Fund. That’s not something that was ever 
hidden, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Savings, I might add, we certainly would not have had to draw 
on had those members opposite had their way. Because what 
were they advocating a year ago, Mr. Speaker? They were 
advocating that every last cent of the savings of the people of 
Saskatchewan should be spent at that time and more so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we did was to do some careful planning so that in difficult 
times when many people thought we would not be able to put a 
budget together, Mr. Speaker, that we would have some 



2774 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

reserves to draw on. That’s what we’ve done so that we don’t 
have to raise taxes as had been advocated by the member from 
Weyburn and the member from Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at the summary financial statements 
that are presented by the Provincial Auditor, you will see that 
Roy Romanow ran seven consecutive surplus budgets. But now 
we have a new Premier, and in his first year of office he has 
plunged Saskatchewan back into debt and deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the figures for 2001-2002 fiscal year are 
now in. How large of a deficit did this Premier run in his first 
year of office as the Premier of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, just to 
demonstrate how ridiculous the opposition really is, let us think 
back to when Roy Romanow was premier of this province. 
Today they say Roy Romanow could do no wrong. When he 
was here, they said he could do no right. Because there’s no 
consistency over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I would say to the people of the province is this, Mr. 
Speaker. We can take the word of the Finance critic from the 
opposition who says we’re not running the finances of the 
province properly, or we can believe Moody’s of New York 
who looked at the budget and did what, Mr. Speaker? Gave the 
province a credit rating upgrade back to straight As. Or we can 
listen to the investment dealers of Canada, Mr. Speaker, who 
say the finances are being run in a responsible and prudent 
matter. 
 
So who’s right? The credit rating agencies or the investment 
dealers, or the critic opposite, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Investments by SaskTel 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Minister of 
Finance just said that we should take the word of bond rating 
agencies, Mr. Speaker, that’s what he just said. 
 
My question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. The Dominion Bond Rating Service, 
Mr. Speaker, has some real concerns about SaskTel’s plan to 
risk 270 million tax dollars to get into cable TV and to invest 
another 80 million in telephony in Australia. 
 
And according to the Dominion Bond Rating Service, SaskTel’s 
$270 million plan will, to quote: 
 

. . . roll-out of new services . . . outside of its existing 
territories could negatively impact profitability. 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this bond 
rating service has looked at SaskTel’s plan to invest 270 million 
in cable TV and in Australia. And they say, quote: 
 

. . . (it’ll) negatively impact (their) profitability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every time we’ve got up in this House and 
questioned this government, this NDP government’s investment 
outside the province through SaskTel, that minister stood up 
and said, well it’s to bring profits back to Saskatchewan. 
 
So who’s right, Mr. Speaker? The Dominion Bond Rating 
Service who say these projects will negatively impact 
profitability or the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks a good 
question: who’s right? 
 
I want to quote from news talk radio, John Gormley, where the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Rosetown says the 
following: 
 

Well the challenge with crown corporations is to decide 
what role they play in the 21st century . . . I think (in 
quotations) we (should) have to create a new generation of 
crown, it might not be quite in the shape it is now . . . to 
release the shackle, so they can expand beyond the 
boundaries of the province (of Saskatchewan). 

 
I ask the question, who’s right? That member, Mr. Speaker, or 
that member, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a moment ago the Minister of 
Finance was talking all about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a moment ago the 
Minister of Finance was telling this Assembly that we should 
take the word of bond rating services. That’s what he said. 
 
Here is what the Dominion Bond Rating Service had to say 
about SaskTel’s plan to set up a cable television business and 
also to invest $80 million in Australia. They said, not only will 
it drive SaskTel’s profits down, Mr. Speaker, but it will drive 
up the debt of SaskTel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. The member who has 
the floor should not have to yell just to get above the din. So I 
would ask members to . . . just to calm down and offer a little 
listening while the member who has been recognized is on his 
feet. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Bond Rating Service 
says the NDP’s plan will drive profits down and provincial debt 
up by 75 million. Here’s what . . . They also go on to say that 
SaskTel’s challenges also include competing in an environment 
of slow economic growth, falling population, and a small 
private sector community, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’re 
saying about NDP Saskatchewan. 
 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

 

The question to the minister is this: why has the NDP 
government approved a $270 million investment in cable TV in 
Australia when it’ll drive up debt at SaskTel and negatively 
impact profitability at the Crown? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite and 
when they were government years back said that our Crown 
corporations should operate in a more competitive environment; 
they should become competitive. Now they’re competitive, Mr. 
Speaker, and they don’t like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that SaskTel employs over 3,600 people 
in our province. They offer services. They provide choices for 
the people of Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan can 
choose, not from SaskTel. If they don’t want to get the services 
from SaskTel they can get many of those services from the 
private sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel has, I suggest — and I’ve said many times in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker — SaskTel has shown a very strong 
track record, Mr. Speaker. They have provided choice. They 
have provided choice for the people of Saskatchewan, and I 
suggest as well to the members opposite and to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that they will continue to show a 
strong track record here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Land Property Tax Rebate Program 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
farm families were extremely disappointed during this session 
to learn that the NDP were cancelling the provincial farm land 
property tax rebate program. But what they were even more 
disappointed to learn was that over $5 million committed by the 
NDP to this program was not spent on agriculture assistance but 
it has been returned to the general revenue. Yet the minister 
confirmed last night that approximately 1,000 farm families 
were denied the property tax rebate for the last year of the 
program because their applications were received after the 
deadline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the financial difficulties that Saskatchewan 
farm families are experiencing due to drought, to low 
commodity prices, and to trade challenges, why did the NDP 
not approve these applications and distribute the $5 million that 
has already been committed to the program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It’s most interesting the question that the 
member asked, because just two speakers before that the 
member from Canora stands up and says that what we should 
have in this House and what we should have for the people of 
Saskatchewan is a greater accountability. 
 
And so what we do with the program, Mr. Speaker, with the 
property tax rebate program is we establish a timetable. We 
establish a date for which . . . in which applicants must submit 
their information, Mr. Speaker. Then we extend the date. We 
advertise it across the province so that producers would have 

full knowledge of when they can apply, what their benefits 
might be. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it conforms with the accounting practices of 
this province, of which the Provincial Auditor asks us to 
participate in and that we meet regularly on all fronts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, if she supports the accounting 
practices and principles that the member from Canora-Pelly 
speaks about, then she should also support the practices that 
we’ve established for the property tax rebate program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, last night the minister said that 
they had to follow a specific timeline and that the program had 
to end according to that timeline. But I find it kind of amazing, 
Mr. Speaker, that the NDP Finance minister certainly wasn’t 
concerned about following timelines to pass the interim supply 
Bill in June. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — He explained to this House, Mr. Speaker, 
that it simply wasn’t a big deal that the school boards might 
have to go borrow money to meet their commitments. And yet, 
the farm families are cut off much needed assistance this year 
due to some timeline that the Minister of Agriculture has 
dreamed up. 
 
It’s also funny, Mr. Speaker, that in the first year of the program 
the timeline was extended considerably; yet this year farm 
families are being told that they’re out of luck, we can’t 
possibly extend the timeline. Now $5 million that was 
committed to the property tax rebate program will not go to 
those farm families who were counting on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has cut crop insurance this year. They’ve 
cut agriculture spending in total. Why are they also cutting the 
farm families out of the property tax rebate that they have 
committed to? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What Saskatchewan people and rural 
Saskatchewan people and farmers in this province are amazed 
and, as my colleague from Regina says, are dazed about is that 
we have an opposition party now — it’s been around — a mix 
and match of a combination of men and women, Mr. Speaker, 
from three various different or four various different parties 
who over the last three and a half years who say they represent 
Saskatchewan rural communities haven’t come up with one 
suggestion, one idea as it respects rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Not one idea or one plan. Not one scrap of paper today 
that talks about what we should be doing in rural Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
Saskatchewan people and rural Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker, are amazed and dazed all right because they have an 
opposition party and a rural group of men and women today 
who are totally disconnected from what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan today — totally disconnected, Mr. Speaker. 



2776 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that Minister of 
Agriculture has come up with excuse after excuse after excuse, 
even though they have cut the Agriculture budget, they 
increased the premiums to the crop insurance, they cut the spot 
loss hail. They have totally ignored the livestock producers of 
this province when they’ve been pleading desperately that they 
need help. 
 
So it is time for that minister to stand up in this House and 
announce something for the producers of this province. It’s time 
to do what the member from Regina Qu’Appelle said, let’s do 
the right thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, you just need to read and 
look at what the people of Saskatchewan and the media have 
been printing now for the better part of a year and a half. The 
people who have been working for Saskatchewan producers, the 
people who have been working for Saskatchewan farmers, the 
people who have been leading the parade on the agricultural 
file, Mr. Speaker, has been this Premier. 
 
This Premier’s been leading the campaign for agricultural 
policy in Saskatchewan and across Canada. And what do we 
hear from the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker? Not one 
word from the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
The man who represents rural Saskatchewan today and the team 
of men and women who say they represent rural Saskatchewan 
today have been absolutely mute, Mr. Speaker. The only guy 
who said anything about agricultural policy in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, was Mr. Boyd, and he’s gone back to his farm, 
Mr. Speaker, preparing to be the next leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party in the next little while, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Progress Made During Session 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP isn’t 
getting much right these days. In fact this session is going to be 
remembered for what the NDP didn’t do. 
 
They didn’t balance the budget. They didn’t get the Crown 
corporations under control. They didn’t address the farm crisis. 
They didn’t even get that ethanol deal put together. They didn’t 
hire the 500 nurses. They didn’t hire the 200 police officers, and 
they didn’t stop the loss of population out of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Most of all, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government 
under this Premier did not provide any clear leadership for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Why hasn’t the Premier and the NDP done something in this 
session? Why is it such a failure? Why have they failed to show 
leadership for the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much. I tell you what we 
didn’t get, we didn’t get in this speak . . . in this session, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll tell you what we didn’t get. We didn’t get one new 
idea from the opposition . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what we didn’t 
get done in this province, we didn’t get one clear position on 
current issues out of the opposition, not one. And it’s becoming 
very clear today that what we didn’t get was a clear 
understanding on who was actually leading the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now is it the member from Swift 
Current? Is it the former member from Kindersley? Or is it the 
member from Rosetown? It’s not clear who’s in charge. Or is it 
the member . . . no, it’s not the member from Wood Mountain. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know the members of the opposition . . . 
I’m sure that the members of the opposition want to hear what 
did get accomplished for the people of Saskatchewan and this 
province. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very pleased to stand up in my 
next answer and talk about the things that made this a good 
session for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would say to 
the Premier everything is fine on this side. What we’re 
concerned about is the fact that his power has been usurped by 
Frank Hart, the president of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Speaker, we looked at the things that the NDP didn’t do. 
But let’s look at what they were preoccupied with, what they 
did do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they attacked the farmers of Saskatchewan by 
cutting crop insurance, and by cancelling the property tax 
rebate. They attacked seniors by trying to impose horrendous 
long-term care fees on them. Mr. Speaker, we forced them to 
back down on that . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, the Premier 
and his Finance Minister have plunged the province of 
Saskatchewan back into deficit and debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during this session the government has been 
investigating, at taxpayers’ expense, their own incompetence. 
Mr. Speaker, they were forced to investigate an harassment 
scandal. They were forced to investigate why one of their 
ministers misinformed the House. And for the first time in 20 
years history in Saskatchewan, they were in charge when the 
population of this province went below 1 million people. That’s 
what they did do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what kind of a record is that? Why did the Premier 
spend the entire session doing those sorts of terrible things? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I know the . . . I know that the Leader of 
the Opposition and members of the opposition are very anxious 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

 

to hear what I’m about to say. Mr. Speaker, the top 10 list on 
why this has been a good session for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Number one, dramatic turnaround in jobs in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . 12,800 in June. Number two, stood 
up . . . stood up for Saskatchewan farm families and producers 
in . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Number three, stood up for working 
people in the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Four . . . Just at two. Number three, 
we’re standing up for working people in this province on 
minimum wage increase, renovations to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and labour standards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Number four . . . Number four, leading 
in innovation. The most progressive ethanol strategy in the 
nation of Canada, in the continent of the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’re building the 
highways. We’re fixing the roads. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’re building a province 
that’s safer for our children on the city streets of Regina, 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’re investing in 
education. Record levels . . . (inaudible) . . . education and 
health. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Record levels of expenditure in health. 
Number nine, new partnership with municipalities, a brand new 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Number ten, a balanced budget and the 
10th consecutive credit upgrade from Moody’s of New York. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I could go to the top 20, 
but let me just go to number 11, Mr. Speaker. And in addition 
to all this good news, our Roughriders beat the Calgary 
Stampeders. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve talked about 
what the NDP didn’t do — they should have but they didn’t. 
I’ve talked about what the NDP did do — that was a disaster. 
 
Now I want to talk about what the NDP should do. They should 
end the incompetence. They should end the mismanagement. 
They should call an election in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is time for a 
government in this province that offers hope instead of despair. 
A government that offers a plan for growth instead of a plan for 
decline. A government that has vision rather than 
incompetence. Mr. Speaker, it is time for the Saskatchewan 
Party instead of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has run out of gas. They have no vision. 
They have no plan and they have no mandate. 
 
Will the Premier stand up in this House and call an election so 
the people of Saskatchewan can elect a new government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been in this session now 78 days. By my quick 
calculations, Mr. Speaker, that means we have spent 1,950 
minutes in question periods. That totals to 32.5 hours in 
question periods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you average 12 to 15 questions a question 
period, that results in 936 to 1,170 questions answered by this 
government. Mr. Speaker, not one question from that opposition 
pertaining to highways and transportation in Saskatchewan. Not 
one question. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what does that tell you about this 
opposition? Well I know what it tells me about the opposition. 
They’re so out of touch with the very people they would 
pretend to represent that they don’t want an election because the 
half of them won’t be back here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking of the highways of this province which 
are now being fixed, I very much look forward in the next 
several days and weeks with my colleagues boarding a bus, Mr. 
Speaker, to visit the communities of this province. And I want 
to tell the members opposite, I am coming to your town . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member from 
Canora-Pelly on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would 
request leave to make a personal statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



2778 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Heimlich Manoeuvre Used in Legislature 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. And I want to thank 
the colleagues opposite in that when you hear what I have to 
say this afternoon you’ll understand why we need to 
acknowledge what occurred today in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a good news story. It’s a very good news 
story. And I want to talk about an incident that happened in the 
cafeteria downstairs during noon hour. 
 
I am privileged to stand and acknowledge two people, Mr. 
Speaker. The one person is Ruth Balaski from the financial 
services who was very quick to understand the problem that 
was being encountered by one of the employees here in this 
building while enjoying lunch. And the other person, Mr. 
Speaker, is a colleague on our side of the House, the member 
for Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Balaski understood that the person was choking and went 
to Mr. Wakefield and brought this to his attention. And as a 
result of knowing what to do when someone was choking, he 
took matters into his own hands, including the person who was 
choking, and applied a manoeuvre to the person, causing the 
food that was causing her to choke to be dislodged and as a 
result may have saved her life or at least saved a very, very 
dangerous situation from developing. 
 
So I think on behalf of all members, I want to thank Ruth 
Balaski and especially I want to thank the member for 
Lloydminster for reacting the way he did and doing this very 
heroic deed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand today on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 445 and 446. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 445 and 446 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Premier to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the same group of officials 
that served us yesterday: Mr. Dan Perrins, deputy minister to 
the Premier; Ms. Bonita Cairns, director of administration and 

information services; and Mr. Jim Nichol, who is the acting 
director of senior management services and executive assistant 
to the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 
to welcome the Premier and his officials here today. 
 
Mr. Premier, during the last decade and before that, the NDP 
while in opposition were always calling for timely by-elections. 
In fact, you were part of a government, Mr. Premier, that 
brought forward legislation to make sure that by-elections were 
done in a timely manner; that they were done within a, 
supposedly, a six-month period of time. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, we’ve had a resignation from this Assembly 
on April 3, and from what I understand from The Executive 
Council Act it says in there that the by-elections . . . a 
by-election to fill a vacancy in the Assembly shall be held 
within six months after the seat becomes vacant. 
 
I wonder if you can explain to us, because there does seem to be 
some question around this issue, Mr. Premier, what is your 
interpretation of that section. When does it mean the election 
has to be called? When does it mean the actual voting day has 
to be held? Is it held six months . . . within six months of the 
date of resignation? Is it called within six months of the date of 
resignation? When does this election actually have to take 
place? 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the observation 
made by the member from Cannington that it was in fact our 
government that put in place the legislation to ensure timely 
by-elections. And I think he will recall when his party was in 
government that we would go for a period of years when 
by-elections were outstanding. 
 
And I think in fact it was a Kindersley by-election that has the 
longest record for not being called. So I appreciate his 
observation that we have put this right by putting it into 
legislation. 
 
My understanding, Mr. Chair, is that the election must be held, 
must be held within the six months as prescribed by the 
legislation. Therefore the election must be called, the 
by-election must be called at such a timely date to ensure that 
the by-election is completed before the end of six months from 
the resignation of the member. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. So that means 
that the election has to be held on or before October 3 this 
coming year for the Kindersley by-election, based on the 
resignation on October 3 — April 3, sorry, excuse me. 
 
Mr. Premier, just one point of clarification on your statement. It 
wasn’t this party that didn’t call the elections, the by-elections, 
Mr. Premier; it was the previous administration to your own 
that failed to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, does that mean, since this is already July, that we 
may very well be having another election during harvest time in 
this province? I would have thought that perhaps your party 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

 

would have learned what happens when you hold elections 
during the harvest time from the ’99 general election, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
So are you going to be calling the election so that it’s held 
during harvest again? Because if you call it in September for 
even October 3, it’s harvest time, Mr. Premier. Are you going to 
call it before then? 
 
You’ve had the opportunity to make that decision. You could 
have called the by-election for in June. You could have called it 
for in July. So Mr. Premier, are we having another fall 
by-election in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, obviously the timing of this 
by-election was not completely in control of the government. It 
was the member opposite who chose to resign, opening the 
opportunity. 
 
Now the member opposite, I guess, has been lobbying me to 
call this by-election throughout the session; he and his 
colleagues have been lobbying me throughout the session. I 
found it very interesting that members of the Saskatchewan 
Party were calling on me to call a by-election in Kindersley 
right in the middle of seeding. Now I found that an interesting 
observation. 
 
Now we can . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well but I’m 
pointing out to the member from Canora that in fact his 
members were calling upon me to call the by-election in the 
middle of seeding, and he can’t deny it. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that we’re going to be as sensitive 
as we possibly can in calling this by-election to avoid the 
situation around harvest. It would appear, Mr. Chair, 
particularly in the west side of the province, particularly given 
some of the drought conditions, that we may in fact be into a 
very early harvest season on that side of the province. 
 
The timing requires that the . . . it requires that the election will 
be held prior to early October. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Premier, you just mentioned 
that in the Kindersley area, quite often, they have an early 
harvest. Well, Mr. Premier, that translates into early seeding. 
 
They were done seeding in the Kindersley area before May 15. 
You . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they were; yes, they 
were. You could have called the election at that time and had a 
June election, Mr. Premier. You chose not to. That was your 
decision. 
 
So it’s your decision then to have this by-election in harvest 
again. Mr. Premier, I’m sure the results will be equal to the 
results in 1999 when your party was decimated across rural 
Saskatchewan because you held the election in harvest time. 
 
Mr. Premier, I hear that there is rumours of a number of other 
seats that may become vacant. If that happens, Mr. Premier, if 
the seats . . . And I’ll mention some of those that are rumoured: 
Saskatoon Eastview, Saskatoon Southeast, Regina Sherwood, 
Saskatoon Nutana, even Melville, Mr. Premier, and Saskatoon 
Fairview as well. 

Now, Mr. Premier, if those seats become available, will you be 
calling the by-elections together or will you have staggered 
by-elections all the way throughout the winter, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I am not so worried about 
having to call by-elections for the seats that the member just 
mentioned. I’m more worried about having to call a by-election 
in Weyburn, perhaps in Lloydminster, Shellbrook. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is we’re not going to deal here in 
speculation. We’re not going to deal in speculation. The facts of 
the matter are these: the member of Kindersley resigned his 
seat; within six months of the date of his resignation, a 
by-election will be held in Kindersley. 
 
I understand how much the party opposite misses the member 
from Kindersley. It’s obvious almost on a daily basis to this 
side of the House how they miss the member from Kindersley. 
 
I’ve just been handed, Mr. Chair . . . And I’m sure some of . . . 
some of those who view these proceedings would be interested 
in this, given the discussion about by-elections. When the 
member from Cannington and some of his colleagues were 
supportive and a part of the former Devine administration, there 
was a by-election needed to be held in Souris-Cannington. The 
seat was vacant 15 months. 
 
There was a by-election necessary in Turtleford when Colin 
Maxwell resigned his seat there. That was . . . seat was vacant 
for almost 16 months. 
 
Now Mr. Graham Taylor resigned his seat in Indian 
Head-Wolseley. That seat was left vacant by that political party 
in government for 21 months. 
 
And in the constituency of which we speak, the constituency of 
Kindersley, when Bob Andrew resigned his seat, that seat was 
left vacant 22 months. 
 
Now that’s the kind of respect this group of men and women, 
when they supported that former government or were part of 
that former government, had for the electoral process. I repeat 
the facts — from the date that the member from Kindersley 
resigned, we have six months to call an election. It will be 
called and held within six months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Premier, I raised the issue and we 
happen to support that very Bill, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Committee 
Member, Mr. Premier. When that Bill passed, we supported it 
in the House . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You had no choice. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes we had a . . . the member from 
Athabasca said you didn’t . . . we didn’t have a choice. 
 
Mr. Chairman, every member in this House has a choice. 
Whenever they stand on their feet, whenever they vote in this 
House, they are making a choice. They may choose, as that 
member does, to follow the party line every time. But they 
make that choice, Mr. Chairman, every time they stand in this 



2780 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

House and every time they stand on their feet and speak in this 
House. And in fact is, Mr. Chairman, they make a choice when 
they fail to rise to their feet and say something in this House. 
They choose to be silent and not speak out on behalf of their 
constituents, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, we support that legislation and we 
believe that it needs to be followed the way it was laid out in 
determination. But also consideration needs to be given to the 
timing of by-elections, on how they impact in those local 
constituencies. Calling a by-election during harvest time does 
not allow the maximum number of constituents to participate in 
democracy. You stifle their expression by calling it at that kind 
of a time — just as, Mr. Premier, you stifle it by calling it in 
seeding time as well. 
 
There are other times in which people have more opportunity to 
participate. If you were to call a by-election in Regina, 
Saskatoon, or indeed any place across this province in July, for 
let’s say somewheres around the end of July, the long weekend 
in August, you’re going to diminish the number of people that 
have an opportunity to participate. And so when you’re calling 
by-elections, Mr. Premier, you need to be aware of the 
circumstances in those constituencies and take it into account. 
 
On another issue, though, Mr. Premier, I’ve noticed that in a 
recent order in council, no. 418/2002, that you granted a 
three-month extension to the Constituency Boundaries 
Commission. Mr. Premier, what was the reason for this 
extension? You’ve already said that you’ve given direction to 
the boundary commission that their determinations would be 
made based on 58 ridings that are currently held in this province 
and so it’s a matter of making adjustments to the boundaries of 
each of those to reflect the population changes. It’s not like 
you’re going in and completely redrawing the whole map of 
Saskatchewan. So what was the reasons that the commission 
needed the three-month extension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the answer here is very 
simple. In fact no reasons were provided. A request was made 
by the Electoral Boundaries Commission for an extension. 
When the request is made, we have no option — nor would I 
desire an option — to turn that request down. The request was 
granted. It was a simple request for an extension without reason 
given. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. It seems kind 
of odd though that they would just simply come to you and say, 
we need three months more. They provided no explanations 
whatsoever. Odd. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, once the commission tables its final report 
with the new boundaries map, what is the procedures after that? 
When does it become public information? When do the 
members, current MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), those who seek to be MLAs in the future, when do 
they find out when the map is available, what the boundaries 
will be, where all the seats are? 
 
When does . . . What happens after they release their final 
report and when does that map become the official document 
that the election will be run on? 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we’ll get the exact, precise 
wording from legislation, and the timelines, but I’ll speak to my 
understanding. 
 
The commission had an initial three-month period to do their 
work, during which they have the option to request an extension 
which they have requested which offers to the work another 
three months. However they are not obliged to use the entire 
three months. Therefore the commission can provide to the 
public and this legislature their initial report when they have it 
prepared and are ready to do so. 
 
Once that initial report is available, there is a period of time in 
which the public is given to react to their . . . to the report. They 
will, I expect, have some process of public hearings or 
opportunity for the political parties and constituency 
organizations and the public to speak to the proposed changes. 
They then will, as a result of that, draft their final report, which 
is then provided to we as legislators. 
 
Without the Act in front of me, I can’t quote the exact wording 
of the Act, but the Act then requires that once that final report is 
delivered to the legislators, at the first available opportunity in 
the legislature, we are to bring this before the legislature and 
pass it into law or defeat or amend it as the legislature would 
see fit. 
 
That timetable would suggest to me that we may have the 
potential . . . we may see the report over the course of the 
summer — again I don’t know — but potentially we could see 
the report over the course of the summer. Potentially then the 
public process could carry on, and potentially we could have a 
final report available to us sometime this fall, which then would 
open the door if it seemed appropriate to recall the legislature 
and deal with that Act later this fall. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Now, Mr. Premier, perhaps we can deal 
with the fall issue in a bit here. 
 
But you say that the opportunity will be available to individuals 
to make presentations to the Boundary Commission. Are there 
any limits? Is this any organization, any individual, 
municipalities? What about MLAs? Can they make . . . can 
MLAs make presentations to the Boundary Commission before 
the determination is done? Because that legislation will in fact 
be coming back for consideration by those MLAs in this House. 
How long does that process take, Mr. Premier, and who can 
make presentations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we’re going to get a copy of 
the Act so we can quote directly from the legislation. 
 
My understanding is that it’s a three-month period for . . . that is 
available to the commission. Again, I don’t think they’re 
required to take the entire three months, but it’s a three-month 
period available to the commission. 
 
In terms of the access to their public hearing process, I’m not 
certain that that’s described in legislation. I expect it will be 
determined somewhat by the commission and by the justice 
who leads the commission. 
 
If memory serves, through the last process there was quite a 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

 

wide availability to the public. Whether it would be individuals, 
political parties, municipalities, community organizations, I 
think the public hearings, as I recall them, were quite wide open 
to the public. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, 
you talked about possibilities of a fall session. What are the 
timelines for the commission’s report coming back that would 
facilitate the . . . a fall session? Obviously, the official 
opposition, the Saskatchewan Party, has been calling for fall 
sessions for the last three years. We would certainly applaud the 
fact of having a fall session. 
 
(14:45) 
 
What are the timelines involved in your mind that would allow 
for a fall session to happen? What kind of timelines for the 
report from the Boundaries Commission would be need to 
facilitate that? If the Boundaries Commission is allowed three 
months, they’ve just got a three-month extension, so that takes 
them . . . what? Into July, August, September. So when after . . . 
That was three months extension for their current work. Then 
they can take three months, I’m gathering from your comments, 
to do the public review process. Well that would take them into 
the end of the year. Obviously that’s not going to work for a fall 
session. 
 
So what kind of a time frame, in your mind, would the 
commission have to provide; when is that final report presented 
that would allow for or facilitate a fall session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I have before me now The 
Constituency Boundaries Act. And I’ll try and quote from it for 
the member, and I think this may help us all to clarify the 
timelines and the issues. 
 
In terms of the hearing process, the legislation indicates that: 
 

A commission may hold hearings at the times and places 
that it considers appropriate to conduct its business. 

 
A commission shall notify Saskatchewan residents of the 
time and place of each of its hearings by advertising in a 
newspaper having general circulation in that part of 
Saskatchewan where the hearing will be held at least 30 
days before the hearing. 

 
And to include — I won’t bother reading this part — but 
they’re required to include in their advertisement a map and the 
detail of the constituencies in that area. 
 
You asked some questions about who can or could be invited to 
make a presentation to the hearings. The legislation reads as 
follows: 
 

Every person who wishes to make a presentation to the 
commission at a hearing pursuant to section 17 or 20 shall 
notify the secretary to the commission in writing of the 
following: 
 

(a) the name and address of the person . . . 
 
(b) the concise summary of the presentation; 

(c) the political, financial or other interest of the person 
making the presentation. 

 
And so it would appear from the legislation that it’s a very wide 
open, it’s a very wide-open process. 
 
Now as indicated by the legislation, as I indicated earlier, the 
commission is obliged to provide an interim report three months 
after the date of the commission’s establishment unless an 
extension is requested — which extension has been requested 
— and therefore provides for another three months. However, 
again I repeat that it’s not necessary for the commission to take 
the whole three months. 
 
After the interim report is completed, the legislation indicates 
that a final report must be completed, which final report should 
be completed six months after the date of establishment of the 
commission. 
 
Again, again, there is provision for extension. Then the 
legislation requires . . . once the final report is completed, there 
are two situations. One is that the Assembly is in session, or 
one, the Assembly is not in session. 
 
Presuming that the Legislative Assembly is not in session when 
this report’s finished, it is submitted to the Speaker, the Speaker 
submits it to the Clerk of the legislature within 15 days, it’s then 
delivered to each member of the Legislative Assembly, and 
then must be adopted by the legislature at its earliest 
opportunity. 
 
When I look at the timelines involved here, when we talk about 
the fall session, I think we all understand that could describe a 
session that even takes us into the month of December. 
 
If — and this is if, we’re working here in hypotheticals — but if 
the commission were to finish its interim work and provide that 
work let’s say by the end of July, undertake then a three-month 
period of hearings, August, September, October, and then 
shortly thereafter finish its final work, that potentially could 
have available to the members of the legislature, the final 
report, late in October, even early November, which I believe 
then would give us the opportunity to do what we would 
describe as a fall session. At least a potential to do that before 
Christmas. 
 
If in the alternative the commission takes its entire three-month 
extension, that would put their interim report I think into 
September. And then with the necessary public hearing time, 
that would push us well down into November or December, 
which would likely therefore not offer us the opportunity in a 
fall session to put the boundaries into place. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Premier, for that 
explanation, although I would disagree somewhat with the 
timeline you just described at the end. 
 
If, let’s say, the commission does make its presentation, final 
report, on the part they’ve done now by the end of July, if they 
take the three months though for the public hearings process, 
that would push you back to the end of October. It would be 
possible, I believe, that they could then do their necessary work 
plus present it to the Speaker, the 15 days, and still be done by 



2782 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

the beginning of December for a fall session. 
 
It would still work in that manner. But I think maybe your time 
frame . . . again who knows what this commission may do, but 
the possibility would be there. 
 
Mr. Premier, is it your — since you are the one who makes 
these decisions — is it your intention to carry out the next 
election, assuming it’s not this fall because the commission 
would not be . . . have made its reports in all likelihood, unless 
again we go to a December election or something — is it your 
intention to carry out the next general election under the new 
commission boundaries if they were to be presented and let’s 
say passed this fall in December, late November/ December? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The answer, if all of the ifs are true, that 
the new constituency boundaries had been put into law by 
legislation, then of course the next election will be on the new 
constituency boundaries. There would be no alternative and 
there would be no desire to do anything but run on the new 
boundaries. 
 
Where we would have, I think, a more challenging 
circumstance is if in fact the commission’s work had been done, 
finished, and the final report is out, we had not established the 
new boundaries by law. Then I think if an election were held it 
would have to be held on existing boundaries. 
 
My hope is that we can see the completion of this work, we can 
deal with it as a legislature, and that in fact the new boundaries 
will serve as the boundaries for the next general provincial 
election. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. If the 
commission has finished its report in time to carry on . . . to 
have a fall session, is it your intention then to have that fall 
session? Or is it still just a possibility that there would be a fall 
session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — As we speak today, Mr. Chair, I would 
describe it as a possibility. I’ve not made any firm decision 
about that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Premier, once the new Boundaries 
Act becomes law, in practical terms could a general election be 
held right away? Let’s say December 15 the law is passed. 
Could an election be called on the 16th? In practical terms. I 
know in theory it can be. But in practical terms would the new 
boundaries be available? What’s the time frame it’s going to 
take to actually accomplish getting all of the mechanisms in 
place, everything that needs to be done, to actually utilize the 
new boundaries once the Act is passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I guess, Mr. Chair, almost anything is 
possible. As the member indicates, under the law a new election 
could be held. He raises, I think, a very important question that 
would face, would face constituencies across the province in 
terms of the practicalities of an election following very hard on 
a change in boundaries. 
 
I think we all understand that our political organizations of 
whatever stripe we are have processes of nominating 
candidates, identifying candidates and organizations, and that 

time is required to do some of that in the aftermath of a 
boundary redistribution. These matters of course will all have to 
come to play in any decision made regarding the call of an 
election. 
 
I remind the member opposite that by tradition in Saskatchewan 
we run on more or less four-year election cycles with some 
departure from that on occasion, but more or less four-year 
election cycles. But the law provides for a five-year cycle and 
so we’re not obliged by law to go to election until 2004. 
 
So there will be time, in my view, that we can complete the 
work of the Electoral Boundaries Commission and allow 
enough practical time to have it function. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I think it’s 
very important that all of the sitting MLAs and all of the people 
across this province who are potential MLAs find out what the 
boundaries will be, what the election will be run under as soon 
as possible. 
 
Because, Mr. Premier, people are trying to make decisions 
today, tomorrow, and into the future as to what their potential 
and possible careers might be. So for them it’s important to 
know what is happening with the electoral map. 
 
Is it on the near term are we going with the old map; a little 
further out are we going with a new map? I think it’s fair and 
it’s important to be fair to everyone, the sitting MLAs on either 
side of the House and anyone who may be interested in seeking 
to run in election, to know what the boundaries are going to be 
at the earliest opportunity. 
 
So I would certainly encourage you, Mr. Premier, to bring 
forward the Boundaries Commission Act whenever it can be 
done so that everybody knows what is happening. Either make a 
statement that we’re going to run under the old boundaries or 
bring forward the Act in a fall session so that people know 
what’s happening in that area. 
 
I think it’s critical that people be given a fair opportunity to put 
their names forward in any and all of the constituencies that 
might be available. So, Mr. Premier, I would certainly want to 
encourage you to do that. 
 
We’re ready to run whether it’s the old boundaries or the new 
boundaries. We just want to know when, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in many ways I agree entirely 
with the member of Cannington. We are all in the same boat; 
we all know the complications that are created by a 
redistribution. 
 
I would want to say, from my point of view and from 
government’s point of view, that the redistribution is a matter of 
law. It’s kicked into place, it’s put in place by the census of 
Canada; it’s legislated activity. 
 
There is no desire or no way that any premier, any government, 
or in fact any member of the legislature should or could be 
influencing the process of the commission and its work. They 
will make the appropriate decisions as they see fit and we will 
have to, as best as we can, adjust our timelines in this 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

 

legislature. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and again I would 
like to welcome the Premier’s officials into the legislature. And 
we look forward to another few issues that we’d like to discuss 
under this series of estimate opportunities. 
 
Obviously it was very interesting yesterday to observe that the 
Premier, in spite of the fact that the estimate process is 
supposed to be the opposition asking the government questions 
and receiving answers, was more an issue where the opposition 
and myself as Leader of the Opposition asked the questions and 
the Premier, instead of consulting with his officials and asking 
what the specific answers might be, did the unusual thing of 
consulting with his cabinet colleagues as to how they might not 
answer the question. And it appeared the advice that he usually 
got was, well rather than answering that question because the 
answer’s not very good, why don’t you just ask the Leader of 
the Opposition what he would do. 
 
So I would say, Mr. Premier, I would say, Mr. Premier, that in 
the right forum I will certainly be very clear as to what the 
Saskatchewan Party will do. We will do that in the leader’s 
debate when you call the election. We will do that in the 
election campaign, and we will do that on other occasions as we 
have between elections. We will make it very clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan what we intend to do. 
 
But we would ask the Premier in this forum, in the legislature 
where the taxpayers are investing their dollars to get answers 
from the Premier, that he would comply and actually provide 
answers. 
 
Mr. Chair, I quoted from some articles yesterday and I’m going 
to quote another brand new article that I just received today. It’s 
from the Biggar Independent, an editorial July 8. And it’s 
regarding the bus tour which I know the Premier plans to 
commence immediately upon the completion of the session. 
And the editorial says: 
 

Stay a little longer, find out a little more. The bus carrying 
Premier, Cabinet Ministers and MLAs is rolling out of 
Regina and into the rural communities again this year. 
 
Last year the Premier’s Dialogue with Saskatchewan 
whirlwind tour was just that — a whirlwind. 
 
He blew into prairie towns, shook a few hands, and then 
left. When he came to Biggar he barely even came into 
town stopping at the Fire Hall, a mere block into the town 
and certainly not into the heart of Biggar. 
 
From there the passengers dispersed to various points. 
 
Hopefully this year the Premier and his entourage will take 
more time. Maybe they could sit down and actually listen 
to what the voters have to say. Maybe they could actually 
listen to Town Council and RM Council. Maybe they could 
actually meet and listen to health care and education 
boards. 
 
Perhaps the timing could be a little better this year. The 
tour is supposed to start in July which is a good sign. At 

least it won’t conflict with harvest. 
 

(15:00) 
 
But we found . . . I will resume my quote: 
 

At least we found out now that it’s likely the Kindersley 
by-election will occur in harvest simply because the 
Premier failed to call the by-election in June when he 
should have called it. 

 
And nevertheless, and I go on to quote: 
 

With some better organization and advance notice, people 
would have time to prepare briefs. Then the MLAs would 
have some constructive feedback when making decisions in 
Regina, much better than bebopping into town, hopping off 
the bus, turning a shovelful of sod, eating a doughnut, and 
then leaving. 
 

So, Mr. Premier, that is the advice on your bus tour from my 
constituents in the Rosetown-Biggar constituency. 
 
Before we get into some of the areas that I was dealing with 
yesterday, I want to just do some housekeeping stuff and 
actually ask a few questions that deal with Executive Council 
itself. Mr. Premier, regarding government restructuring, how 
many positions were eliminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
gets up and asks why yesterday I was not required to consult 
with many of the officials. Well he demonstrated immediately 
why. He gets up and starts a political rant. It’s exactly how he 
started yesterday and he starts it again today. He wants to talk 
about the bus tour; he doesn’t want the specific information 
about government. He wants to talk about the bus tour. 
 
Well he wants to be careful or I’ll start talking about the bus 
tour. I’ll start talking about his trips out to rural Saskatchewan, 
and the three and four and the zero people that shows up at his 
meeting. 
 
I’ll start talking about the Bill that he has before the House 
today. He talks about going out with a by-election that may 
occur during a harvest season in Kindersley. This is extremely 
surprising that we have a Bill, right in the House today, 
promoted by the Leader of the Opposition, introduced by the 
Leader of the Opposition — what does this Bill provide for? It 
would provide that the next provincial election in Saskatchewan 
would fall right in the middle of harvest — by law. By law. 
Right . . . read . . . Read your own Bill. Read your own Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, if the member opposite wants specific 
information about government programs, about issues facing 
government, we’ll be very provide . . . very happy to provide 
the answer. If he wants to stand up in estimates and do a 
political rant every day, then we’ll do that too. 
 
Now at the end of his little rant today he asked a very specific 
question. I’m very pleased to provide a very specific answer. As 
a result of the reorganization of government which occurred this 
spring, the total decrease in full-time equivalent positions in the 
Government of Saskatchewan will be 348.6. 



2784 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? Order. Why is 
the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With leave to 
introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you and I thank the members opposite 
for allowing me to introduce the guests. I spotted in the gallery 
someone who was . . . a woman that knew my family very well 
from Saskatoon. 
 
And I would want to introduce today some guests who have 
come to us from Melville, from Regina, and also from Calgary. 
I know that they’d be interested that we’re in the middle of the 
estimates for Executive Council, that the Premier and the 
Leader of the Opposition would be entertaining questions and 
answers back and forth. 
 
I’d like to welcome, on behalf of all members of the Assembly, 
Sonia Pacholek — and maybe they could stand when I 
introduce them, we’ll be able to see them — Mary Schick, Sofie 
Kozakawich, John and Jackie Ogryzlo, Helen Grexa, Eileen 
Ballman, and Anne Cherneski. 
 
I welcome them to the Assembly and ask all members to also 
join me in giving them a warm welcome to proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And certainly we 
also would welcome our guests. 
 
Mr. Premier, my next question is how many of the eliminated 
positions were vacant at the time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as the member I think will 
remember, we had put a freeze on the hiring in government for 
a period of time before the budget and therefore had created 
some opportunity through vacancy management, which I think 
is a . . . is the correct way to manage these kinds of 
circumstances. 
 
So at the time of the restructuring, following the budget, there 
were 201 positions vacant. That would be 64 per cent of the 
positions in Executive . . . the government that were reduced as 
a result of the reorganization; 113 positions, or 36 per cent, 
were encumbered. 
 
If I may say, if the member is interested, of the 201 vacancies, 
151 were . . . 152 were in-scope and 49 were out-of-scope 
positions. Of the 113 encumbered positions, 78 were in-scope 

and 35 were out-of-scope. There were also some employees in 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) and 
SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) that were 
affected by the reorganizations. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, how many people 
were paid severance and what was the total amount of 
severance paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, that information is not 
available to us today in the House, given that the process of 
contractual obligations and bumping has been taking place over 
the weeks. That is only now coming to conclusion, and 
therefore the numbers and terms of severance and the value of 
severance being paid is not known to us. I commit to the Leader 
of the Opposition that as soon as those figures are available to 
the Executive Council, we’ll provide them to him. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Okay, I would then ask the Premier when 
he does that to also provide a list of the people to whom the 
severance was paid, and what the anticipating savings will be 
this . . . Actually this is another question to the Premier: what is 
the anticipated savings in this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we commit to provide the 
information to the leader that he’s asked for, and in this fiscal 
year our budgeted expectation, our estimate of savings, is $16.1 
million. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — To the Premier: what were the dates of the 
hiring freeze and how many people were hired during the hiring 
freeze? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the freeze began in early 
February. It lasted for approximately seven weeks. We don’t 
have here the exact numbers of those who in fact were hired 
during the hiring freeze. And I want to understand . . . and I said 
at the time and the Minister of Finance said at the time, and I 
repeat again today — it was never intended to be an absolute 
hiring freeze where in fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
the member says, oh, as if he’s learned something. I said it very 
publicly the day we announced the freeze . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member from Indian Head said I 
didn’t. I can show him the news release. 
 
Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is if, for instance, at the Valley 
View Centre in Moose Jaw, if nursing staff was required, they 
were not prevented from hiring that kind of staff. I said that the 
day of the hiring freeze. So there will be those who were in fact 
hired during that period of time to do extremely essential 
front-line work. That’s the fact of the matter. If we’re going to 
be criticized by that by this opposition, well let them go ahead 
and criticize. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well the . . . To the Premier, we actually 
have a list of eight people that were hired during the hiring 
freeze. Four of those people, four of those people were hired to 
the Department of Municipal Affairs and of course in the 
budget the Department of Municipal Affairs was eliminated. 
What kind of planning goes into hiring four people during a 
hiring freeze into a department that’s going to be eliminated in a 
few weeks? What sense is there in that? 
 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2785 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I expect, Mr. Chair, that the Leader 
of the Opposition will immediately provide us the names and 
the positions so we can respond to the question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well I’d be happy to, Mr. Chair. The . . . 
In Labour department, Greg Leake, communications director, 
hired March 4; Terry McKay, occupational health officer, 
March 1; SPMC, Heather Golding, a postal clerk, March 19; 
Economic Development, Dave Kutcher, senior project leader, 
March 4. 
 
Now here’s the interesting ones. Municipal Affairs, a 
department about to be eliminated by this government — Larry 
Steeves, Larry Steeves, associate deputy minister, hired on 
March 1; Kim Jetmundson, support services coordinator, hired 
March 10; Jun Ma, information resource management 
specialist, hired March 10; and Gloria Hunstad, administrative 
support, hired March 4 into a department that was about to be 
eliminated and rolled into another department. How does the 
Premier account for that kind of mismanagement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 
Leader of the Opposition that the Department of Municipal 
Government was not eliminated. The functions of that 
department continue today in a reorganized fashion in a 
government department now known as Government Relations. 
Why would we do that, Mr. Chair? Well I’ll tell you why we 
formed a Department of Government Relations. It is to build a 
better partnership, a better relationship, with other levels of 
government — municipal, federal, Aboriginal. 
 
And what is the proof of the good work that that department has 
already done, including Mr. Steeves, who was hired to serve as 
an associate deputy? It is to produce what we’ve just passed 
through this House — The Cities Act. That’s what we’re doing 
here, Mr. Chair. 
 
If he wants to send the list over, there will be I am certain, 
appropriate explanation for each of those. Some of them may 
have well been hired in advance of the freeze being put on, 
some will have been hired to do essential work, some will have 
been put in place to complete work underway. The fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Chair, that through the freeze and through the 
reorganization process, we have been able to eliminate 348.6 
FTEs (full-time equivalents) in the public service of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now that is, Mr. Chair, a reduction in this public service to 
what has been often noted across Canada as the smallest, 
leanest per capita government in Canada. This public service of 
Saskatchewan does valuable, valuable work. We value the work 
they do. We didn’t walk into this restructuring notion with this 
is an effort to hack and slash and cut the civil service — the 
kind of proposals that we’re hearing from over there. 
 
We don’t go out like the member for Weyburn in public and 
just say people should be fired. We follow the due process. We 
respect the public service. We use contractual obligations, we 
don’t write off contracts and that sort of thing. But we do know 
as well that as we govern, we need to govern to the best level of 
efficiency as we can by providing the best level of public 
services, realizing the best of our public service, Mr. Chair. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, to the Premier: there are a lot 
of other signs of mismanagement and incompetence right here 
in Executive Council. And there are some rather strange 
numbers. In the globals that were provided, could the Premier 
tell us why he pays more money to Kathy Langlois, a special 
advisor in the North Battleford Water Inquiry — someone who 
never even went to North Battleford, and apparently has been 
globe-hopping around the world, going to conferences that have 
very little to do with water quality — why is he paying her 
$9,248 a month, just about $1000 more than he pays his own 
chief of staff? That doesn’t make any sense at all. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a . . . Mr. Chair, it’s 
become very, very apparent over the course of this session, the 
attitude that the leader and the Saskatchewan Party takes to 
valuable public servants in this province. They will go the 
extent of attacking individuals who have no capacity in this 
legislature to defend themselves. They will go to the extent of 
naming individuals, attacking individuals. It’s not just in this 
instance, it’s in many instances. It extends to the most senior of 
public servants, it extends to public servants on the front line 
that the member of Weyburn will stand up and say right in 
public that they should be fired without due process. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition asks about the salary levels of 
Ms. Langlois and my chief of staff. Ms. Langlois, I repeat, as I 
have often said in public and in this legislature, has done 
extremely valuable work for the public service, for the people 
of Saskatchewan. She is a career public servant, Mr. Chair, a 
career public servant. No one can suggest that Ms. Langlois has 
somehow by political effect achieved her role in government. 
 
She’s a career civil servant. She’s worked for the people of 
Saskatchewan for many, many years. She is an extremely 
competent public servant. She has risen through the ranks. She 
has achieved a level of status in the public service that provides 
for her that level of salary which is appropriate at her level. 
Indeed in many other governments or in fact in the private 
sector she would probably command a higher level of salary. 
 
I provide for the chief of staff to myself what I believe is a 
salary level that’s commensurate with her position. I’m sure, 
Mr. Chair, if in fact through Executive Council I was paying 
more to my chief of staff than we were paying to senior public 
servants, I would be criticized for that. So we’re criticized either 
way. What I say is we value these public servants and we 
appreciate the work they do. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well it tells us a lot about a Premier who 
values a public servant’s work who got into a great deal of 
difficulty in Liquor and Gaming, disgraced the government in 
the Liquor and Gaming portfolio, then is given a position to do 
with water quality in the province and doesn’t even fulfill those 
duties, Mr. Premier. And you would pay that person more than 
you pay your own chief of staff for not even providing good 
service to the province of Saskatchewan is rather beyond belief. 
 
But now, Mr. Premier, you obviously know that we are finding 
a lot of obvious flaws in your government, but so is your own 



2786 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

people, your own colleagues. In fact your own former sitting 
member, who now is . . . has left politics, Janice MacKinnon 
has questioned the restructuring of your government. Just the 
other day on the radio she says that it’s not exactly . . . I quote, 
Mr. Premier: 
 

It’s not exactly clear to me what the priorities of the 
government are. I think that’s part of what the concern of 
the public would be. 

 
Now, Mr. Premier, you can say, you can make allegations that 
I’m playing politics. That’s fair debate in this legislature. I think 
I’m presenting the facts and I think you’re dodging the 
questions, but you’re entitled to a different opinion. 
 
But when your former colleague, the former minister of 
Finance, the former minister of Economic Development, 
questions the budget of this province, questions the way the 
budget was put together — that it might be deceiving the people 
of Saskatchewan — and questions the reorganization of 
government that it’s flawed, that’s a very serious allegation. 
 
How do you as the Premier counter the concerns expressed by 
your former colleague, Janice MacKinnon, about your failure to 
properly reorganize government and about your hiding the 
deficit by creative accounting through your Finance minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as the Minister of Finance 
pointed out earlier, when Mr. Romanow occupied this chair 
there was absolutely nothing that Mr. Romanow could do right. 
Now they say that Mr. Romanow did everything right. 
 
When Ms. MacKinnon occupied the office of the minister of 
Finance, that group of men and women said there was 
absolutely nothing Ms. MacKinnon could do right. And now 
she . . . she is the person who is getting everything right. 
 
Let’s talk about, first of all, the budget. Let’s talk about the 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan. I want to remind again 
the Leader of the Opposition that budgets that are developed by 
this government, by any government in Canada, are subjected to 
the most intense scrutiny, not in this legislature but by the bond 
rating agencies of Canada and North America . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now you heard about that, right? 
 
Well then why don’t you stand up and congratulate the 
government for delivering a budget so fiscally responsible, so 
correct for the times that Moody’s investment house of New 
York City, this continent’s — this continent’s — leading 
investment house, who knows I suspect more about the budget 
of Saskatchewan than any member sitting over there. Moody’s 
investment house of New York City has read the budget, 
studied the budget, studied the fiscal management of this 
government and what did they do, Mr. Chair? They gave a 
credit rating upgrade to this province — only one of three in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They looked at the budget of 
Saskatchewan and took our credit rating from Aa3 to A1. A1, 

one of the best credit ratings in Canada. They did that on the 
basis of this budget. 
 
Now I’ll listen to the Leader of the Opposition and I’ll listen to 
the Leader of the Liberal Party and I’ll listen to the critics, but I 
tell you who I’m going to pay attention to. I am going to pay 
attention to Moody’s of New York City. And I believe when 
people are looking at this province as a place to invest, as a 
place to do business, as a place to raise a family, they look at 
Moody’s of New York and not the opinions of the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Now in terms of the reorganization of this government, I will 
repeat — if the Leader of the Opposition and members of the 
Sask Party want to accept it or not, that’s fine — but the fact of 
the matter is the reorganization that we undertook of 
government this spring has been observed by outside observers 
as the largest reorganization of government, the largest 
restructuring of government undertaken in this province in 30 
years. 
 
Mr. Chair, we did this not first of all and not primarily as an 
exercise in saving money or cutting public servants knowing 
that some efficiencies could be achieved and knowing that it 
would mean we would require fewer public servants. That was 
not the first motivation. The first motivation was to reshape 
government in such a fashion that it better meets the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, that it better is shaped to move this 
province into the 21st century and that’s what we’ve 
accomplished in this reorganization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, if, as the Leader of the 
Opposition proposes, the only reason to reorganize government 
is to hack and slash and cut money, well that’s not rocket 
science. That’s very easy. You send out a bunch of layoffs. And 
we’ve seen it done. We’ve seen it done by right-wing 
governments all over Canada. We’re seeing it being done in 
British Columbia. This is not rocket science if your goal is 
simply to hack, slash, and save money, and rid yourself of 
public service. That’s easy to do. 
 
What takes more thinking, what takes more effort by public 
service, by political leadership, is to reshape government that it 
better suits the needs of the times. That’s what we’ve done here, 
Mr. Chair. I don’t need to go through it, I hope, with the 
opposition, but I would if they want, to look at the entire 
package of reorganization as it occurred in this province. 
 
Let’s take one example. We have taken what was known as the 
Department of Economic Development and combined it with 
the former Department of Energy and Mines to create a 
Department of Industry and Resources — much better position 
to deal with the economic opportunities of our province, to deal 
with those who want to invest in our province. And we’re 
seeing the results. We’re seeing the results. When I pick up 
headlines — I quoted them yesterday — talking about the jobs 
keep coming, more jobs in Saskatchewan. On and on it goes. 
 
I can, if the Leader of the Opposition wants me to go further, 
describe all of the reorganization and what it is intended to do 
and what it’s doing and what it will do in the future. 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2787 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you. Mr. Chair, obviously the 
Premier did not respond to Janice MacKinnon’s criticism unless 
he was labelling her as some kind of a right-wing nut. Perhaps 
he was calling his former colleague that. I’m not sure what he 
was trying to intimate. 
 
He obviously didn’t pay attention in question period today 
when we quoted from the Dominion Bond Rating agency which 
expressed real concern about Saskatchewan’s slow growth and 
loss of population, and the fact that SaskTel’s bad investments 
may be hurting the fiscal situation of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Why is the Premier missing the points of criticism from the 
Dominion Bond Rating agency and from his own former 
colleague, Janice MacKinnon, who questions the Finance 
minister and questions the Premier on the issues of the budget 
and the reorganization of the government? 
 
Yesterday when we were cut off of estimates to go to other 
business, I was asking the Premier some questions about 
gaming. I asked him questions about the 25-year agreement and 
we didn’t quite conclude that. 
 
We know there’s been a police investigation that has been 
completed in regard to concerns about the actions of SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) and the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. We understand 
that investigation is complete and in the hands of the 
Department of Justice. When will the Premier demand that that 
investigation be released? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is a troubling question 
from the Leader of the Opposition. Now he wants the Premier 
of the province, he asks the Premier of the province to interfere 
in the Department of Justice. He is demanding that I go to 
Justice and ask questions about when reports are intended to be 
released. Next thing he’ll be asking me about when 
prosecutions are going to be done or who’s going to be 
prosecuted. 
 
Mr. Chair, I will categorically — categorically — not do what 
the Leader of the Opposition suggests. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well obviously the Premier and his 
government have used tactics to stall the release of the report. 
It’s obviously correct for the report to be released but they have 
changed the prosecutor involved. They have taken, they have 
taken initiatives to prevent the public from hearing what is in 
the report. 
 
It’s not unusual for the Premier to ask for reports to be released. 
Why won’t the Premier do it in this case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, to suggest that the 
Premier of the province, that any premier should influence a 
Department of Justice in the work that it does or in the release 
of its reports is bordering on scandalous. 
 
Is the Leader of the Opposition in the legislature this afternoon 
suggesting that officials in the Department of Justice or Crown 
prosecutors or other Justice officials in this province should be 
at the whim of political mastery? Is that what he is suggesting? 

An Hon. Member: — Is that what he’d do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Is that what he’d do is the better 
question. You’ll notice, by the way, Mr. Chair, that he wants 
me to influence the course of justice and reports of the 
Department of Justice when it comes to matters of First Nations 
gaming. I noticed that, Mr. Chair, I noticed that. 
 
Now I think the Leader of the Opposition would be well 
advised to stand now in his place and withdraw that line of 
questioning and indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that he 
would have no intention, no intention as Leader of the 
Opposition of trying to influence Justice or the prosecutions 
branch of Justice. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Let me rephrase the question then for the 
Premier, let me rephrase. If the Minister of Industry would 
settle down. If the ministry of Industry would quit yelling from 
his seat, I would rephrase the question for the Premier. When 
will the Premier release the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well now he tried to backtrack a little bit 
and maybe that’s appropriate. The fact of the matter is, it is not 
the Premier’s report to release. The report is in the hands of the 
Department of Justice. And this Premier will not . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now you see the member from Rosthern, who 
pretends to be a Justice critic, who pretends to be a Justice critic 
suggests . . . now he suggests that I should influence the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Chair, this is extremely dangerous. This is an extremely 
dangerous opposition if it is the view of the Justice critic, who 
should ought to know better, that a Premier of the province 
should be lobbied in the legislature by the Leader of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition and the critic of Justice to influence 
the course of events in the Department of Justice around reports 
dealing with legal affairs and potential prosecutions. 
 
Now I think now the Leader of the Opposition better get up and 
apologize also for his critic of Justice. Or perhaps they want to 
venture out into the public along with the member from 
Moosomin and demand that the Department of Justice be 
influenced by the political leadership of this province. 
 
Just go ahead and do that. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, perhaps the Premier doesn’t 
understand his position . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chairman, to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, you are the Chair of Executive Council. The Minister 
of Justice sits on Executive Council. When the report is made, 
is given to the Minister of Justice who is part of Executive 
Council, which you chair, you have the opportunity — and I 
would say the responsibility — to release that report. 
 
So I would ask the Premier, does he intend to — as the 
president of Executive Council — to release the report or is he 
going to keep it hidden? 
 



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, perhaps it’s lack of 
understanding, although I can’t believe this, but perhaps it’s 
lack of understanding. This kind of report goes directly to 
prosecutions. It goes directly to prosecutions and prosecutions 
branch will make decisions. Those decisions will not be ever, so 
long as I’m Premier here, at the cabinet table of the Government 
of Saskatchewan. They will not be debated at the cabinet table 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I fear, I fear as a result of this conversation today, that would 
not be the case if the Saskatchewan Party and the member for 
Rosetown were occupying government in this province. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat, in the matters of prosecution, in the 
matters of RCMP work, in the matters of Justice reports to 
prosecutions, they will not be influenced by this Premier. I will 
accept no advice for the Leader of the Opposition or the critic of 
Justice to influence these decisions. They will follow their 
course of events. And I am fully confident in our prosecutions 
branch in the Department of Justice and the policing services of 
this Saskatchewan to do the investigations and make the right 
decisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well it’s very 
unfortunate that the Premier seemed determined to keep as 
much information from the public as he possibly can. He’s not 
prepared to co-operate. He’s not prepared, he’s not prepared to 
ensure that those who are innocent are cleared of any doubt. 
And those who, of course, should be prosecuted will be handled 
in due course by the justice system. We know that that’s the 
case. 
 
I want to go on, Mr. Chair, to CIC because time is slipping 
away. Under your leadership, Mr. Premier, out-of-province 
investments have been initiated by the Crown corporations. I 
want to know, is that in agreement with your philosophy that 
the Crown corporations should invest Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
dollars outside of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
We have seen more and more of these ventures become money 
losers. As I have mentioned at many times, yesterday, and 
we’ve mentioned today that the people of Saskatchewan have 
lost money in your Australian investment; we have lost money 
in your investment in various dot-coms; we have . . . outside of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, do you subscribe to this latest activity by the 
Crown corporations investing our dollars outside of the 
province of Saskatchewan in risky ventures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
wants to debate or discuss the matter of Crown investments 
outside of the borders of Saskatchewan. I think it almost goes 
without saying that I have supported and continue to support 
those investments of our Crowns outside of Saskatchewan 
which have provided significant returns to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m pleased, I am pleased that the Leader of the Opposition 

has declared his support for this very same activity. 
 
On public radio in this province on March 13 this year, the 
Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote him: 
 

These Crowns want to grow and they’re restricted by the 
status quo. I don’t think we’d dismantle the Crowns but I 
think we’d create a new generation of Crown. It might not 
be quite the shape it is now . . . (inaudible) . . . ought to 
release the shackle so they can expand beyond the 
boundaries of this province. 

 
The Leader of the Opposition apparently is supportive of our 
Crown corporations doing work, securing assets, and bringing 
home profit from outside the province. 
 
Now this is another quote from the Leader of the Opposition, 
again on the same radio program, where he says: 
 

We’re talking about what role the Crowns will play in the 
future, and I think even the key people in the Crown 
corporations would tell you that the current set-up is not 
good for their growth. 
 
I mean (and he illustrates) SaskTel, SaskPower are not 
structured in a way that they can grow well outside of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
So the answer to the member’s question is, yes, I support the 
investments of our Crown corporations outside of 
Saskatchewan when those investments return dividends, return 
profit, return assets to the people of Saskatchewan, when those 
investments strengthen the Crowns so that we can have the 
Crowns maintain the good level of service they provide to our 
people, the return to the General Revenue Fund, and 
competitive, if not the best rates for public utilities and services 
anywhere in Canada. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well I think it’s clear, Mr. Premier, that 
we have a vision for the Crown corporations that would see 
them have a chance to expand and be profitable. 
 
Mr. Premier, I stand by those comments when I say that the 
Crowns are not performing well now. That’s what I said in my 
comments, and you read those comments into the record here at 
the legislature. I appreciate the fact that you concur with me that 
the Crowns are not performing well in their out-of-province 
investments. 
 
We have a list of some of the investments of SaskTel. And 
when you look at the recent investments under your watch, Mr. 
Premier, it’s an absolute disaster. You’re losing taxpayers’ 
dollars. Obviously we have to change things. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is looking at ways of restructuring the 
Crowns so that the public portion focuses on their core 
responsibilities of providing telephone service and power to the 
people of Saskatchewan, providing natural gas to their 
customers here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But your government has put in place a management structure 
under the Crowns that’s not able to compete in the global 
economy and they’re losing taxpayers’ dollars by the bundle 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

 

full. 
 
We have your investment in Australia. It hasn’t returned a 
penny and lost a lot of money. You’re playing on the Australian 
stock market and your shares have dropped to 17 cents a share, 
and at the current . . . at this current time you have lost 5 million 
Saskatchewan dollars on the Australian stock market. 
 
I can’t understand what your thinking is that you would be 
satisfied with the Crowns as they are structured now investing 
our dollars without the proper business plans in place, without 
the proper people at the helms of these organizations, losing our 
dollars left, right, and centre. And as the Dominion Bond Rating 
agency has said, SaskTel rates may be going up as a result of 
your terrible investments through SaskTel out of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The net losses are mounting. We just have listed through this 
session of the legislature numerous occasions where you have 
squandered Saskatchewan money that needed to be invested in 
our province in activities outside the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
How can you defend this horrible mismanagement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, let’s use, let’s use SaskTel as 
an example here. Day after day after day in this legislature — 
and fair enough — members of the opposition petition this 
government for improvements in cellular service in their own 
constituencies. They labour on every day for improvements to 
cellular service in their own constituencies. Now note this first 
of all, Mr. Chair. 
 
Here’s the party that would privatize SaskTel. Then who would 
they lobby? Do they lobby AT&T for better cellular service in 
their own constituencies? No. Do they lobby Bell? No. They 
have the opportunity to lobby because of a publicly owned 
telephone corporation in Saskatchewan — the last, if I may say, 
in Canada, in the United States. 
 
We’re bringing cell service across this province because we 
have a SaskTel, and they would privatize cell. I’d like to know 
how you get cell service in their half of the constituencies. 
 
We’re being able to put CommunityNet, high-speed Internet 
service into communities across this province, across this 
province, in a way that no other province in Canada is able to 
do. Mr. Chair, you’ll be interested to know many of our rural 
communities today, you have high-speed Internet service that 
won’t be available in suburbs of Calgary, Montreal, or New 
York City because we have a publicly owned telephone 
company. 
 
Now how is this company, Mr. Chair, to continue to provide the 
cellular service that the members opposite lobby for? How is it 
to continue to provide the high-speed Internet services that are 
so welcomed in rural Saskatchewan, education, and business, 
and health care? How can they do it without an investment 
policy that returns dividends to the corporation and then to the 
people? 
 
Now how could they do it? How would they do it when they 

sell it off? Just how do they plan on doing it when they sell it 
off? 
 
Now he talks about keeping core services. Well I guess I’d like 
him to define . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, I’d like the Leader of the 
Opposition to define what he precisely means by the keeping of 
the core services, which he would intend to do as government. 
 
Now I guess in the telephone example, core services means the 
actual telephone connections within the province. And he would 
sell off the security system branch, he would sell off the cellular 
telephone branch; what he would do is sell off every part of 
SaskTel that returns revenues. 
 
Now I can you, Mr. Chair, what that’s going to do to the rates 
for the people of Saskatchewan; that’s what it’s going to do for 
the rates of people living in rural Saskatchewan. They will 
skyrocket. Mr. Chair, that’s exactly what they will do. 
 
Mr. Chair, the investments that SaskTel has made 
internationally have brought home millions, tens of millions of 
dollars, to the corporation, to the people of Saskatchewan. They 
have on occasion lost investment overseas, but they have 
returned in many fold benefit to the province because of these 
investments — never mind the employment of people in 
communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
They complain, often complain, about the security wing, the 
monitoring, the SecurTek of SaskTel, but they don’t say much 
about that in the city of Yorkton where 50 jobs are provided 
through this investment, through this activity. They just don’t 
say much when they’re asking on one hand for cellular 
coverage, they’re not on the other hand talking about the 
sell-off of the Crowns. 
 
Now I think that it is again time, Mr. Chair, that the Leader of 
the Opposition stood in his place in the legislature to explain 
very precisely to the people of Saskatchewan exactly what is 
the policy for privatization of the Saskatchewan Party. Because 
in the last election I well recall he went about the province 
saying that before any privatization there would be a 
referendum. They would go to the people. 
 
Now somehow, somewhere, that commitment has disappeared. 
And now I read quotes of the Leader of the Opposition and the 
critic from Swift Current and other members of the 
Saskatchewan Party talking about, they would make the 
decisions about the appropriate privatizations, which Crowns 
they would sell off. 
 
Now I hear them talking about, well they’re going to maintain 
the core services of the Crowns. The closer they think they’re 
getting to power, the closer they think they’re getting to holding 
the benches of government, the warmer they get to selling off 
the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well just because of that position, just because of the notion 
that they in power will start selling off our Crowns, that’s the 
reason they won’t be the government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Well if the 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Premier is so confident, why doesn’t he call the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — If the Premier thinks he can win an 
election, he should call it. If he has . . . If he really believes 
what he says, he should call the election. But quite frankly, the 
Premier, the Premier who was not elected in the last general 
election, who had to come in the side door through a 
by-election in a safe riding, has not mustered the courage to go 
to the people. 
 
He could have done that and said he needed a mandate last year. 
He was afraid to go to the people of Saskatchewan. He could 
have called an election this year. He’s afraid to call an election 
because he knows he’s going to lose. 
 
And the member from Yorkton knows that he’s on the way out. 
The member from Meadow Lake knows that he’s on the way 
out. And the member for Prince Albert Northcote — all front 
bench members here — know that they’re gone when the 
Premier calls the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the Premier suggests 
. . . claims that he supports this out-of-province investment by 
the Crown corporations. 
 
Well this is what the Dominion Bond Rating company says 
about Crown investments outside of Saskatchewan. They say 
that . . . first of all they look at Saskatchewan and say that 
because the Saskatchewan marketplace has the fundamentals of 
slow economic growth — this is the Dominion Bond Rating 
agency, this is not the official opposition — we in 
Saskatchewan have slow economic growth, few major markets, 
low population density, falling population base, and lack of a 
sizeable business community that all add to significant barriers 
to any competitors entering the province. 
 
They say that the province balance sheet will be impacted by 
capital expenditure levels increasing to over $270 million in 
2002 by SaskTel. This capital expenditure will be used to, 
number one — listen, Mr. Premier, listen — fund the launch of 
a digital interactive video product to compete with cable, 
something that other telcos are running as far away from as they 
can because it’s nothing but a money-loser. But you’re willing 
to squander Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money on this fiasco. 
And, number two, fund a broadband initiative in Newcastle, 
Australia. 
 
You are moving the Crowns away from serving Saskatchewan 
people by not even questionable but by downright foolish 
investments by your Crown corporations out of the province 
and within the province in the private sector where they have no 
business whatsoever. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And the Premier refers to SecurTek and says, look how happy 
Yorkton is with SecurTek. Well it so happens that people that 
were involved in the security business in Yorkton have been run 
out of business because you, Mr. Premier, and the minister 

responsible for SaskTel, the minister from Meadow Lake, 
interfered in the private sector by buying SecurTek. The only 
company that is happy is the company that was purchased by 
SaskTel and must have got a wonderful deal. We probably paid 
more than we should have because they’re the only ones that 
seem to be happy. 
 
Mr. Premier, not only have you fouled up the core Crown 
corporations like SaskTel with crazy investments but you have 
moved into other areas, and your predecessors have done the 
same, where they had no business. 
 
And we talked about . . . you talked about . . . we . . . you’ve 
said some nice things about Roy Romanow. Well what we’ve 
said about Roy Romanow in praise is that he balanced the 
budget. We can’t say that about you, Mr. Premier, because 
you’re running deficits. 
 
But we certainly did criticize Mr. Romanow for the fiascos that 
he oversaw such as SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company). I think you remember that, Mr. 
Premier, and Channel Lake. In fact we roasted Roy Romanow 
so badly over those kind of issues that he lost the popular vote 
in the last election. 
 
We’re going to roast you over the fact that you are squandering 
taxpayers’ money with crazy Crown ventures where they have 
no business investing our dollars. And we’re going to roast you 
because you are putting the province deeper in debt. You are 
mortgaging our children’s future. And not only will we roast 
you but the people will thoroughly roast you when you do 
muster up enough courage to call the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The latest mess, Mr. Premier, in case you 
haven’t been paying attention is the way you have messed up 
the potential for an ethanol industry here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. What a gong show. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party comes out with a well-thought-out 
ethanol policy six months prior to this legislature sitting, where 
we talk about mandating ethanol, where we talk about taking 
the fuel tax off of the ethanol portion of gasoline, and where we 
go even farther and talk about reducing the corporate capital tax 
so an ethanol industry will invest in Saskatchewan. 
 
We introduced the plan. What does the member for Regina 
South do? The member from Regina South pretty much mimics 
what we’ve said, said it’s a good thing, and says, that’s my 
position. The member from Regina South said, don’t worry 
Saskatchewan Party, we won’t allow the Crown corporations to 
interfere in an ethanol industry; this is a private sector 
development area. The member from Regina South said that 
very clearly. 
 
Right afterwards, right afterwards the member who’s yelling 
across the way, the member from Prince Albert Northcote, 
announces that the Government of Saskatchewan through CIC 
is not even going to offer to take an equity position in an 
ethanol industry but is going to demand that it be included in 
every ethanol project in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

 

They’re going to put together an exclusive arrangement with 
Broe industries — exclusive arrangement with Broe industries. 
They’re going to corner the domestic market for Broe and 
they’re not going to provide that same opportunity for other 
ethanol opportunities here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What happens? They decide they’re going to play the old Grant 
Devine game. They’re going to pick winners and losers. It was 
just like Fair Share Saskatchewan. Mr. Premier, what you 
agreed to was the exact replica of Fair Share Saskatchewan 
except you were interfering in what should have been private 
sector investments instead of moving government offices to 
selected communities. 
 
What did you do, Mr. Premier? You allowed your minister to 
pick four communities that were going to have some kind of 
exclusive arrangement to the exclusion of other communities 
that were putting together an agreement to . . . an arrangement 
to establish ethanol plants in their communities. The result was 
that you took a lot of heat, Mr. Premier, for this mess and you 
went back to Broe industries and said, ah, kind of changed our 
mind about the exclusivity; I think we’re going to allow . . . 
we’re also going to invest with other communities. 
 
Weyburn wants an ethanol industry and should have every 
opportunity to establish an ethanol industry. But Weyburn 
wasn’t on your list with Broe industries and so you had a big 
problem because you haven’t got the riding of Weyburn. You 
want to win that riding. You’re not going to get it because 
you’ve messed this up. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, how can you account for the major screw-up 
on ethanol. We should have been leading the pack on ethanol 
development in Saskatchewan. Instead we have muddled this up 
so badly that Manitoba is moving ahead of us again. We should 
have had the first opportunity to attract an ethanol expansion 
and we’ve messed it up because your government interfered by 
demanding that it be involved, it call the shots, it picked the 
communities that the ethanol industry would be established in. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you apologize for this screw-up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m going to be very, very 
happy to debate the point that the member makes. He may want 
to correct his English in the House but . . . 
 
We heard another little diatribe there from the Leader of the 
Opposition on Crowns. 
 
Now here is, Mr. Chair . . . I’m looking right at the member 
who’s going to be interested in this quote. This is from the 
Humboldt Journal, the Humboldt Journal. Note the date, June 
27, 2002. This by my estimation is just days ago. It is 
announced in the Humboldt Journal, through a combination of 
the member for Thunder Creek and the member for Humboldt 
the following: 
 

The only Crown corporations (according to the 
Saskatchewan Party) that should exist are the four main 
utilities, the Sask Party believes. Should they be brought to 
power, the Sask Party plans to sell off the other . . . 

Now isn’t it interesting? I was making the observation earlier 
that at the last election they were talking about the need to have 
a referendum. That lasted about a year. Then they started 
talking about, well they’ll be selective and they’ll choose. Now 
we started talking about getting rid of the core functions. And 
now in the Humboldt Journal of just days ago, the member of 
Humboldt and her colleague, the member of Thunder Creek 
says: 
 

The only Crown corporations that should exist are the four 
main utilities. 

 
That I assume means power, energy, tel, and SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). The rest are to be sold. 
It says right here in the Humboldt Journal the rest are to be 
sold. 
 
Will the Leader of the Opposition stand in his place today and 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan why it is he wants to sell 
off STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company), the bus 
company that serves rural Saskatchewan? Or if it’s not his plan 
to sell STC, why is it his member from Humboldt and his 
member for Thunder Creek are in Humboldt speaking to 
citizens, talking about selling off all the Crowns? 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan deserve an answer from the 
Leader of the Opposition. He began his round of comments 
around the ethanol thing, around the ethanol issue, by 
describing this as a gong show. Well if the gong show exists 
over here, we don’t know any longer what the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party is on most anything — on Crowns, on 
Justice, on and on it goes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just 
calm down, I’m going to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Chair, the member of the legislature from Rosetown-Biggar 
launches into criticisms of our Crowns and the work they do 
internationally. By that, he criticizes some of the most advanced 
thinkers, the best workers in the world, in demand. Does he not 
understand that when our telecommunications corporation, 
SaskTel, did the Chunnel, did all of the communications in the 
Chunnel, that it was the same people that today are going into 
SaskTel International that are in demand across the world? 
 
He tells us we shouldn’t invest outside the province. Does he 
not know that SaskEnergy’s work that’s going on in the 
Maritimes is in demand by the Maritimes, that Canadians 
coast-to-coast, that the international community look to the 
people of Saskatchewan to look to the employees of our Crown 
corporations as the best in the world. Why does he want to 
criticize and belittle them? 
 
So he says we can’t invest outside the province. Now in terms 
of ethanol he said we should not, cannot invest in ethanol. We 
should not, cannot invest within the province. Again I ask the 
member to stand and describe very concisely the policy of the 
Saskatchewan Party when it comes to the ethanol. 
 
Is it the policy of the Saskatchewan Party that there should be 
no public equity or investment in an ethanol industry? Is that 
the position? Is it the position of the Saskatchewan Party that 
investors from outside of Canada, the Broe group, should they 
not be involved in ethanol production in Saskatchewan? Is it the 
policy of the Saskatchewan Party that investors from outside of 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

this province and Canada should not be involved, Canadian 
alcohol or others? Is it the view of the Saskatchewan Party that 
the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Commercial Alcohol. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Commercial Alcohol, the member from 
Swift Current corrects me, Commercial Alcohol. 
 
Is it the policy of the Saskatchewan Party, let’s get it on the 
plate today, let’s get it on the floor, let’s not be hiding anymore. 
Because the policy of this government is we are willing to work 
with private investors if that is the right thing to do, the good 
business case, you will see this government be willing to invest 
some public equity in the development of ethanol. 
 
Is it the policy of the Saskatchewan Party? Let’s get it on the 
floor; let’s have the debate. Is it the policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party that there should be no public equity, zero public dollars, 
in the development of ethanol in the province? 
 
And while you’re at it please tell us why you want to sell off the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I quite 
like it when the Premier is asking me questions. I feel like I’m 
being prepared for what’s going to happen very soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And I’m very excited, Mr. Chair, because 
I actually have the answers for the Premier. And I know I don’t 
have to provide them because taxpayers are expecting the 
Premier to answer the questions. But since he can’t answer the 
questions and would rather ask them, let me answer some of 
these questions, and let’s start with SaskTel. 
 
He says, he says what would we do about SaskTel, and he’s 
talking about the wonderful investments that have been made. 
Well he talks about the Chunnel, and if I’m not mistaken the 
Chunnel involvement was through Leicester Cable, and if I’m 
not mistaken that was an initiative that occurred prior to the 
Romanow government taking office, if I’m not mistaken. 
 
Another item on the plus column for SaskTel, is ISM 
Westbridge. That was another initiative that took place prior to 
the Romanow government coming to office. 
 
Now if you look, if you look at the net gains and . . . if you look 
at the net gains as reported by the minister, he says that SaskTel 
has made $37.4 million on its Saturn/Austar investment. Well 
that was prior to shares nose-diving on the Australian stock 
market to 17 cents. That’s inaccurate. In fact now the province 
hasn’t made $37 million, it has lost $6 million. 
 
Now there are some losses on the other side. There’s the NST 
loss of $16 million. There’s the Clickabid loss of $1.9 million. 
There is the Retx loss. And the losses far exceed any gains, 
particularly any gains under either the Romanow or the 
Premier’s administrations. 
 

Now if the Premier will listen, I will tell him what our policy is 
on STC, because obviously he hasn’t read it on the Internet — 
the Premier must not be very high tech — nor did he go and 
listen to my colleague, the MLA from Swift Current, when he 
presented our policy on the Crowns, including STC, at the 
Regina Chamber of Commerce. Obviously the Premier is not 
very well-connected or he wouldn’t have asked such a silly 
question. 
 
We have said yes. The four core Crowns . . . Have patience, Mr. 
Premier, have patience. The four core Crowns we plan to 
maintain. We have said specifically in the case of STC, we have 
said specifically in the case of STC that we would maintain it 
but we would provide it as opportunities for private sector to 
take over if they will provide the same service. Now we have 
many instances where in fact there is better service under the 
private sector than there is under STC. 
 
So we are going to protect the routes but we’re going to allow 
the private sector to take it over. Now that will generate tax 
dollars instead of taxpayer losses as we currently experience 
under STC. Now that’s a pretty smart policy unlike the NDP 
who aren’t able to come up with anything that’s brilliant 
whatsoever. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, there are a lot of other Crowns — and we’re 
not talking about Treasury Board Crowns; I hope the Premier 
realizes we’re talking about CIC Crowns — that are not core 
Crowns . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . So yes, that’s right. That 
leaves the casino out. The MLAs over on the other side just 
don’t understand this. Well, Mr. Premier, I hope you understand 
it. We’re not talking about Treasury Board Crowns, we’re 
talking about CIC Crowns. 
 
(16:00) 
 
We are looking at Crowns such as . . . we are looking at 
privatization such as occurred with the potash industry. Would 
the Premier tell the people of Saskatchewan, would the Premier 
— now I hope the Premier will answer at least one question this 
afternoon. I hope he has it in him. He hasn’t answered much of 
anything. Does the Premier think Saskatchewan is better off 
after having privatized the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, or would he prefer to see it remain a 
nationalized Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, some summers ago, some of 
us occupied this legislature and spent a considerable amount of 
time discussing the privatization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan — a good bit of time. I don’t really think the 
Leader of the Opposition wants me to rehearse the speech that I 
gave during that debate, or we’re going to be here a long time. 
 
Now it is refreshing to hear the Leader of the Opposition at 
least beginning to, at least beginning to let be known to the 
people of Saskatchewan what they intend to do. He has now, he 
has now committed that they will maintain the four big Crowns. 
Now he hasn’t committed they’re going to maintain all of the 
functions or the aspects of those Crowns, but he’s maintained in 
this House that the rest are going — the rest are going. 
 
Now he indicates that with STC — believe this or not — he’s 
willing to privatize it into the private sector, certain runs. Well I 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

 

can predict what’s going to happen here. If he were ever given 
the chance to be administering STC, the private bus lines, 
probably Greyhound or some other carrier will have the 
profitable routes. They’ll have the profitable routes right away. 
Now what about all those routes that we do subsidize, we 
subsidize with some pride. What about all the routes into rural 
Saskatchewan that we subsidize, providing transportation often 
to seniors and students, providing the delivery of parts. 
 
Now he says that he’s going to sell off the profitable aspects, 
likely to a national carrier. And what’s going to happen to the 
rest? Well, Mr. Chair, I know what will happen to the rest — it 
will disappear. And the service of STC that we’ve known for so 
many years, that we are willing to subsidize — that we are 
willing to subsidize — will disappear, will disappear. That’s 
what we heard today. 
 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You know, the member 
from Swift Current, the member from Swift Current should take 
advantage of the opportunity and get on his feet and make those 
kind of accusations on his feet. Just why doesn’t he . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . yes, you should pay attention. You 
should get on your feet and make those kind of accusations. 
 
We need clarity, Mr. Chair. The people of Saskatchewan 
deserve clarity from this opposition. They’re now standing up 
in Humboldt and they’re saying that they’re going to privatize, 
sell off all of the other Crowns except the four . . . what they 
describe as the four main utilities. They’re going to sell off all 
the Crowns. 
 
Well I think what I see, Mr. Speaker, happening here is much 
fodder — much fodder —for a very, very good provincial 
debate about the future of the Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Chair, again we saw disrespect 
from the Premier who refused to answer my question about 
PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.). He didn’t even 
refer to it, didn’t even allude to it, didn’t even come close. He 
was afraid to answer my question. I answered his questions 
even though I’m the Leader of the Opposition. He’s the Premier 
of Saskatchewan. When I ask him a question, he refuses to 
answer it. Can you imagine that? What kind of a weak Premier 
are we dealing with here? 
 
Now we talked about STC and I hope the Premier sits up 
straight in his seat and listens to this. He has no confidence 
whatsoever in rural Saskatchewan. He suggested the only 
profitable routes that STC maintains would be taken over by 
Greyhound, if I quote him correctly. I’m very close. 
 
Well I will tell the Premier that STC abandoned its route from 
Swift Current to Leader. They abandoned the route. It was 
picked up by the private sector and I’m sure Greyhound didn’t 
want it. It was picked up by the private sector, by small 
business. It’s been run for 20 years and it’s been making a 
profit. Six days a week, the bus goes from Swift Current to 
Leader where STC walked away, said we’ll have nothing to do 
with it. And the private sector, a small-business enterprise, has 
provided reliable service for 20 years for those people. 
 

But the Premier doesn’t believe in small business. He doesn’t 
believe in rural Saskatchewan. He has no confidence in 
Saskatchewan people. He’s willing to throw up his arms and 
think it’s only Greyhound would provide service where STC 
doesn’t. Well the Premier, like usual, is dead wrong. 
 
Now I’ve answered his question again. So I’m going to ask my 
question again and I hope he has the courage to answer it. Does 
he think it was the right thing for the Government of 
Saskatchewan to privatize the potash industry or would he still 
prefer it to be a nationalized industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the rhetoric of the Leader 
of the Opposition gets more and more agitated as we go through 
this process. 
 
As the . . . as the member should know, I think, when PCS was 
a Crown corporation, it was not a nationalized potash industry. 
It was one player in a large potash industry in this province. 
 
And I know what his friends did when they were sitting in 
government — and they were his friends. He can deny it. He 
can pretend he didn’t know Grant Devine. But the fact of the 
matter, he’s close friends to the works of them. When they sat 
over here . . . and when they sat over here and privatized the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, you know what? 
 
Well the member from, what is the place; Canora . . . Invermay. 
The member of Invermay, he says he knew Allan Blakeney as 
well. Well he should have listened to Al Blakeney. That’s what 
he should have done and he wouldn’t have found himself where 
he is today, in the wrong place. 
 
What I’ll tell you we wouldn’t do, ever, ever, is take a public 
asset like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, sell it off at 
fire-sale prices to our friends and then you know, what do . . . 
you know what was done, kept the debt. The province kept the 
debt, sold the asset at fire-sale prices. We would never do that 
— never do it. 
 
Now, the Saskatchewan Party today indicates they’re all 
prepared, ready to go, on the privatization of STC. All to go. 
Now this is interesting because they advanced this theory once 
before. They advanced it, I’m told, here in 1998. It was reported 
in the Regina Leader-Post with a great big headline 
accompanying that says, “Sask Party attacks STC.” It’s a 
headline. 
 
And exactly what the leader said today he said then. He said, 
we should look at alternate ways of providing transportation in 
rural Saskatchewan. That’s what he said then, and that’s what 
he says today. Well, I wonder if he remembers what the then 
president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities had to say about his new plan. Well here it is: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party is on the wrong side of the road on 
this one, said Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, President Sinclair Harrison (— on the 
wrong road on this one). 

 
Keeping STC afloat is a matter of providing equal access to 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

rural citizens who need to visit cities for services like 
medical specialists or diagnostic equipment in bigger 
hospitals. (Mr. Harrison said) 
 
Rural municipalities don’t expect a hospital in every centre, 
but residents want to be able to get to a hospital by bus if 
they have no other means of transportation. Rural citizens 
deserve the same help to pay for bus service as city 
dwellers get, he added. 
 
“Traditionally cities subsidize public transportation from 
the public purse. We expect STC to operate prudently but 
to say that private operators could replace STC right now, 
that’s not the case.” 

 
Now I think, I’m going to take the view of Mr. Sinclair 
Harrison in regard to the future of STC, in regard to 
understanding rural Saskatchewan over the opinion and the 
position of the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to my 
colleagues in the opposition and to all members. Mr. Chair, it is 
my pleasure . . . you may recall a few days ago I gave a 
statement in the House about a constituent of mine in Ottawa 
who is the Chief Page of the Senate there. And it’s my pleasure 
to introduce this afternoon, and I can’t quite see by your . . . if 
she’s here. It’s Melanie Bratkoski accompanied by her mother, 
Mrs. Bratkoski. 
 
Certainly I’d like to have all fellow members welcome these 
two constituents of mine here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And of course I 
would also like to welcome the guest and we certainly 
appreciate the fine work that Pages do both here and down in 
Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Premier, your . . . We certainly proved our point on the 
STC situation because we gave a concrete example of where 
service is better now as provided by the private sector than it 

was under STC who abandoned it. Now I would also argue that 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan employs more people 
and pays them better than they would . . . did and would have 
under Crown ownership. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, there is a role for government. But there is 
also a role . . . place where government should get out of the 
way. And when it comes to Crown corporations that are 
involved in the private sector, that is clearly an area that has 
inhibited the growth and has prevented investment from coming 
to Saskatchewan. It is part of the reason why our standard of 
living in Saskatchewan is not as high as it should be. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, I have a news article here from the 
Times-Herald in Moose Jaw, and of course that’s the Premier’s 
hometown. And it reminds me of a commitment made by his 
predecessor, Mr. Romanow, when he said that under an NDP 
government food banks would be eliminated. They were going 
to provide such good social policy and have such a good social 
safety net in Saskatchewan that food banks wouldn’t be 
required any longer. 
 
Well as it so turns out, there is a food bank still in his 
hometown of Moose Jaw. And what the headline in the local 
paper says is, “Local food bank usage up.” Up, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Premier, the situation now is worse than it used to be if the local 
food bank usage is up in Moose Jaw. 
 
And I will quote from the article. It says: 
 

“There are supposed to be less people on the welfare rolls 
in Saskatchewan but we haven’t seen a decrease in people 
using the food bank,” . . . 
 
Saskatchewan’s food banks assisted the highest percentage 
of children in the country in 2001 at about 48 per cent of 
recipients. 
 
“That’s certainly the case here. Half the people we feed are 
children, and that number hasn’t changed much at all in the 
last 10 years.” . . . 
 
In 2001, 65 per cent of the people using food banks 
received social assistance, 12 per cent were working poor, 
and 7 per cent received disability support. 

 
Mr. Premier, you and your predecessor, Mr. Romanow — and 
you were part of his government — made a commitment to 
reduce poverty in Saskatchewan. You made a commitment to 
eliminate food banks in this province, yet the usage of food 
banks has increased and poverty, particularly in inner cities, has 
never been more rampant. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have in the past door-knocked in your riding, and 
I have seen first-hand the living conditions of many of your 
constituents. Not all, but many of your constituents living in 
your riding. 
 
Mr. Premier, both you and your predecessor, Mr. Romanow, 
represented the Riversdale riding. And just recently I even had 
the opportunity to do a ride along with the Saskatoon City 
Police and we spent a majority — and it was their call — we 
spent a majority of the time that we were doing this ride along 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

 

in your riding because it so happened that that’s where most of 
the problems were. 
 
There are social issues in Saskatchewan that need to be dealt 
with. There is poverty; there are children that are hungry; there 
is still child prostitution. There is high unacceptable rates of 
crime in your riding, and in your predecessor, Mr. Romanow’s 
riding. And between the two of you, the most two influential 
people in Saskatchewan, you have had 11 years — and that’s a 
long time, that’s half the . . . over half the life of a child — you 
have had 11 years to make some progress, and I dare say it is 
worse today in Riversdale; it is worse today in Regina 
Elphinstone and many inner-city ridings. And in fact food bank 
usage is higher today, including in your home city of Moose 
Jaw, than it’s ever been. 
 
When it comes to providing the most basic essentials of food 
and security to people of Saskatchewan that don’t have a 
fighting chance, you have failed. What’s your excuse to those 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar. I don’t know if he’s had any 
similar kind of experience, but I’m very proud to stand in this 
legislature today and say that I was one of the founding 
directors of that food bank in Moose Jaw which he talks about. 
I’m not sure how much time he’s spent on the boards of 
directors of food banks or in the organizations, but I’m telling 
you I’m very proud to have been one of the founding directors 
of that food bank. 
 
(16:15) 
 
I am very proud to have served as a part of a government that 
allowed me to serve as a minister of Social Services when this 
government introduced a program we described as building 
independence, a program that we put in place about four years 
ago now — 1998, thereabouts. I am very proud of the work of 
the Department of Social Services; the work of the current 
minister, the member from Moose Jaw North, in Social 
Services; the former minister, the minister from Regina 
Victoria; the work that we have been able to do on behalf of the 
families and the children who live in poverty in this province, 
fewer of them living in poverty today than four years ago. 
 
Since 1998, Mr. Chair, more than 6,000 families in the province 
of Saskatchewan have left social assistance — 6,000 families. 
That means there are 13,000 children no longer reliant on social 
assistance in this province who have escaped the poverty trap. 
 
For 89 straight months under this government’s administration, 
for 89 — 90 now, it’s 90 in June — 90 straight months, the 
caseload in social assistance has fallen. In this very session, in 
this very session, this legislature acting together has passed 
further steps to protect the children on the streets of my 
constituency, on the streets of other constituencies in Saskatoon 
and other cities in the province, to protect those children. 
 
For the Leader of the Opposition to stand up and say that we’ve 
done nothing is a very, very inaccurate observation. We are one 
of two provinces in Canada, and this does not include Alberta 
or British Columbia or Ontario, we are one of two provinces in 
Canada that has lowered the child poverty rate — one of two. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — In 1999, Mr. Chair, we were the only 
province in Canada to lower the child poverty rate. 
 
We have story after story in our recent newspapers talking 
about the fewer families on welfare. We have stories talking 
about the new fund for child care, for families in this province; 
stories that talk about the welfare numbers being down, 
headlines that say Saskatchewan has fewer poorer children; the 
Campaign 2000 report on child poverty in Canada highlighting 
the work that’s being done in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have so much more to do. So much more to do, 
not just in my constituency but the constituency represented by 
the Leader of the Opposition. So much more to do in every 
constituency in dealing with the family poverty issues that exist 
for the challenges against some of our young people. 
 
And so before I sit down, I want the Leader of the Opposition to 
stand in his place and therefore explain, given this line of 
questioning, why it is that in his policy, in his party policy, he 
would chop between 25 to $50 million from the Department of 
Social Services. Why would he want to take from that agency 
of government, from that department of government, from those 
functions of government which most are intended to work with 
families in this province, particularly families living in poverty? 
Why in the world would his policy be to take 25 to $50 million 
from that department? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, I’m very, very happy to answer 
that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — A Saskatchewan Party government would 
be able to reduce that funding because we would be creating 
jobs for people and . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . increasing the workforce, unlike your 
Minister of Social Services who has cut $10 million from Social 
Services and, at the same time, we have seen a loss of jobs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the NDP, the tax base is shrinking. The Premier shakes 
his head. He disagrees with Statistics Canada that says we’re 
losing people. He disagrees with Statistics Canada that says 
there are fewer people working now than there were in 1999. 
I’m afraid the Premier is just not prepared to face up to the 
facts. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has a plan for growth in this province 
that will grow our province by 100,000 people. So we’ll employ 
people. We’ll be able to take people off the welfare rolls and 
employ more of them. Many, many, many people on social 
services are there because they can’t get a job. They’re looking 
for a job and the NDP have been unable to provide that job for 
them. 
 
We have a plan that will restore self-sufficiency to people who 
are looking for a better life in Saskatchewan. Under the NDP — 



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

under the NDP — we have the lowest basic personal exemption 
of I think just about any province in Canada. This province 
wants to tax low-income people as quickly as it possible . . . 
possibly can. What is the result? People are leaving 
Saskatchewan and moving to Alberta. 
 
You know what I just heard today? Fascinating piece of 
information. The Premier’s former communication director, Mr. 
James Millar, has left employment in Saskatchewan and gone to 
where? He’s gone to Alberta and apparently he is making more 
money in Alberta than he and his wife could make, when you 
consider taxes, when they were both working in Saskatchewan 
and she hasn’t found a job yet. 
 
This is the reality that the Premier doesn’t realize. People that 
are low-income people that are trying to make a better life for 
themselves are amongst the people that are leaving 
Saskatchewan and going somewhere else because we have the 
lowest basic personal exemption in the Prairies, because we 
have the highest crime rates in Canada in our inner cities. 
 
The Premier didn’t comment on that, but he likes to talk about 
per capita things. In his riding the crime rate has a higher per 
capita than in Toronto and in Vancouver. And what does he do? 
He fails in the commitment to hire 200 additional police 
officers to protect the people in his very own riding, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Premier, the Premier, the Premier . . . I asked, I asked the 
Premier a question and he refuses to answer. And so I answer 
his question and then he asks me for another question. The 
Premier is acting strangely to say the least. I have to be careful 
what I say. 
 
Mr. Chair, under the Premier’s government our GDP shrunk in 
2001, and when your GDP shrinks — that’s gross domestic 
product — when that shrinks it puts more people into poverty, it 
increases the use in food banks, it increases the crime rates, and 
it increases the emigration of people out of the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what’s happening because he has no plan 
for growth for this province. 
 
Mr. Chair, we are looking at the province of Saskatchewan 
being under 1 million people, according to Statistics Canada, 
for the first time in 20 years. Members are chirping, wrong. But 
Statistics Canada after the 1999 census had us at over 1 million 
people; 2001 census comes out, Saskatchewan dips below 1 
million people for the first time in 20 years. We’re going 
backwards. 
 
The question to the Premier is: in light of the fact that our 
demographic deficit is becoming more and more young 
working people, people that are leaving Saskatchewan upon 
graduation, what is his government proposing to keep young 
graduates and young families from leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan? The province is crying for an answer to this 
question, and he hasn’t come up with a single answer to that 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the answers from this 
government will be a whole lot more substantive than a bunch 
of rhetoric to try to snow Saskatchewan. That’s the fact of the 
matter. Just let me . . . let’s just take a look, just let’s take a look 
on what we have done in terms of taxation on families in this 

province, 1992 to 2002, in the last decade. 
 
In 1993 a Saskatchewan family with an average of $50,000 
income, in 1993 were paying the second highest taxes in 
Canada. Today it’s the fifth lowest in all of Canada. Our sales 
tax rate down a full third, 33 per cent, since 1993. 
 
Now I knew this would provoke the member from Estevan. I 
knew the member from Estevan would be provoked about this 
because yes, in fact when we came to government in 1991, in 
fact we had to raise the sales tax. You know why? Because the 
government at that time, the people of Saskatchewan, the 
province of Saskatchewan was plainly on the verge of 
bankruptcy because of the government she worked for. And 
now she’s back. So she ought to be very careful about referring 
us back to the early ’90s. 
 
We are today, Mr. Chair, one of only two provinces in Canada, 
only one of two in Canada that doesn’t have a high-income 
surtax, a payroll tax, or a health care premium. 
 
Mr. Chair, the non-refundable tax credits — and this is 
important to the discussion that the Leader of the Opposition is 
having — in this province as a result of activity of this 
government, non-refundable tax credits means that the first 
$20,000 of income for an average Saskatchewan family is 
exempt from income tax. By changes that we have made to the 
income tax system in this province we have removed entirely 
from the tax rolls, entirely from the provincial tax rolls, 55,000 
low-income families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We have, under extreme duress and great 
odds because of what was done by that party when they were in 
government, we’ve taken this province from a position of high 
taxation on families to a very, very competitive position in 
Canada. That, Mr. Chair, is an incentive for people to invest, 
remain, and work in Saskatchewan. 
 
It is amazing that this group of men and women will, in this 
House, vote against every measure that would seek to attract 
people to Saskatchewan or keep people in Saskatchewan. They 
say to us, in this session — they’ve said to me in these 
estimates, for instance — that we should not be investing in 
educational capital or educational facilities for our young 
people, the very tools that will be available to our young people 
that they can stay and be educated in Saskatchewan. They say 
. . . they criticize us for doing that. 
 
They criticize us for the new investments we’re making in 
health care to improve the quality of life in this province. And 
watch later this day, watch — mark my words — they’ll vote 
against every good initiative in this budget. Mark my words. 
That’s what they’ll do. 
 
They are denying, they are denying the progress that’s made, 
Mr. Chair. Do they deny, do they deny that in the month of May 
the number of new jobs in this province is 11,800? Do they 
deny it? In the month of June, 12,000, 12,800 jobs, almost 
13,000 new jobs. Are these in the opposition leader’s mind not 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people? Are these not 
opportunities for Saskatchewan young people? 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2797 

 

Now they have, they have tried to portray the decline in 
employment that we have witnessed over the last 18 months as 
directly result of this government. Well will they now then 
stand in the House and give this government full credit for 
every job that is created? Is that the logic? Is that the logic? 
Because you will blame us, you’ll blame government . . . In 
your negativity daily you’ll blame government for every job 
loss. Will you therefore give credit to government for every job 
gained? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have managed the affairs of the province of 
Saskatchewan we’ve received credit rating upgrades, we’re 
seeing new employment, we’re seeing new investment, we’re 
seeing celebrations in the capital city of those who are returning 
to Saskatchewan, who are coming to Saskatchewan for the first 
time. We’re going to take the tack that we’ve continually taken 
in government and that’s a futuristic, optimistic tack as opposed 
to the doom and gloom and the negativism that again is 
emerging from the benches opposite. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Again the 
Premier is living in a fantasy world but the facts speak 
differently. You know the Premier, just a few minutes ago, gave 
the impression that somehow his government was maintaining 
funding in Social Services and the Saskatchewan Party would 
reduce spending by an unreasonable amount in spite of the fact 
that the . . . in spite of the fact the Saskatchewan Party said that 
we would create jobs; we would create jobs so that those people 
would not need the support of Social Services. 
 
Now let me read for the Premier what he has done — because I 
don’t think he knows — in the current budget. This is income 
support, (SS03), sub-programs. Saskatchewan assistance plan in 
2001-2002, $254.52 million. This budget, with job losses, the 
Premier has cut funding in the Saskatchewan assistance plan by 
$15 million, to $239.724 million. But that’s not where it ends. 
Drop down four lines in the budget, income support, (SS03), 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit, and last year it was $32 million, 
this year $21.6 million. 
 
The Premier’s government has slashed $25 million from Social 
Services and we have fewer jobs. We have more people leaving 
the province. We have more poverty. We have more use for the 
food banks. What a cruel, uncaring government. 
 
If the Premier had created jobs and taken people off the welfare 
rolls and employed them rather than scaring them off to 
Alberta, he’d have something to crow about. But he has failed 
and he has failed miserably. The Premier is the leader of a 
government that promised to create 30,000 jobs in 
Saskatchewan before the next election. Well, Mr. Chair, we are 
still not even with where we sat when the election in 1999 
occurred. We have fewer jobs in Saskatchewan now than we 
did in 1999. 
 
But then this Premier made a new commitment. Not only did he 
inherit the promise of Roy Romanow to create 30,000 jobs — 
of which he has not yet created one — he also promised to 
create 10,000 forestry jobs. Well, Mr. Chair, we know that right 
now we are seeing layoffs in the forestry industry. In fact there 
may be fewer people working in forestry rather than more. We 
are seeing huge problems in northern Saskatchewan when it 
comes to employment opportunities. 

What is the Premier’s answer to his failure to keep his word and 
his government’s failure to keep their promise to create 30,000 
jobs province wide and to create 10,000 jobs in the forestry 
industry? Two targets that are absolutely impossible for them to 
meet in their wildest dreams. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s surprising that 
when the social assistance caseloads are going up in the 
province, they criticize us. When the social assistance caseloads 
are going down in the province, they criticize us. I understand 
they believe their role in life is to criticize. Well that is their role 
in life and it’s the role they’re going to occupy for many, many 
years. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition refers to the (SS03) 
budget of income support in the Department of Social Services. 
Now if the Saskatchewan Party had been paying attention over 
the last number of years, they would know that when we began 
the building independence program and instituted in this 
province, first in Canada, the child benefit, we then took that 
idea, we took that program and turned it into a national 
program. We took that program, we turned it into a national 
program, the first new social program in Canada in 40 years. A 
Saskatchewan idea taken nationally. 
 
When we began that program and convinced the federal 
government to become partners in that program, they agreed to 
phase in funding. We wanted the benefits to accrue immediately 
to Saskatchewan children and Saskatchewan families, and 
therefore we put the share of the province’s money right in, 
upfront, and the share of the federal government’s money in 
right upfront, so the program could begin to assist 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
With good negotiation by this province with the federal 
government, it was agreed at that time that in fact the federal 
share then would come in over years and the provincial share 
would diminish. 
 
What we see in this budget is the provincial share of the child 
benefit program diminishing — as we announced it, as we 
planned it, and as we, if I may say, negotiated very well with 
the federal government to see that this happened. 
 
That’s point number one. The Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 
say anything about that detail. He just says we’ve cut the 
budget. And then, Mr. Chair, does the Leader of the Opposition 
not understand when the welfare social assistance caseload has 
dropped every month for 90 consecutive months under the 
administration of this government, drops every month for 90 
consecutive months, it is therefore some good news that the 
budget for social assistance is falling? That’s good news. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, what he will not point out, first he does not 
admit that the budget for social assistance will fall if there are 
fewer caseloads. He does not admit that the phase out of the 
child benefit that we put in and negotiated out is there. He 
doesn’t admit that. But he sure doesn’t want to turn the page in 
the Department of Social Services budget. He won’t turn the 
page and talk about, for instance, family services of the 
Department of Social Services. Those services which, quote: 
 

Protects children from abuse and neglect, supports families 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

and communities in caring for children, assists people (in) 
facing family violence and provides adoption services. 

 
He doesn’t point out to the House that the budget for that work 
is increased by $4 million in this House. He doesn’t want to 
point that out. 
 
Does he want to point out that regional services — the billing of 
financial assistance to people in need, career services, 
employment programs through a provincial network of offices 
— does he point out that the budget for that work in the 
Department of Social Services has gone up another $3 million? 
Does he point that out? No. 
 
Does he point out, for instance, that the budget of the office of 
disability issues has increased in this budget? No. He doesn’t 
point that out. 
 
Community living budget increase in this budget. 
 
You know, if the Leader of the Opposition is going to get up 
and talk about the budget of the Department of Social Services, 
he should do it honestly. He should reflect the truth and he 
should reflect the success that we’re having in Social Services 
in reducing the caseload in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And by the way, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker . . . while 
I’m on my feet, Mr. Chair, it was that Leader of the Opposition 
and that party last year that royally criticized this government 
when we added new resources to the Department of Social 
Services to provide more child protection workers. They 
criticized us day after day after day. They criticize the public 
service even today. They criticize the work we did yesterday. 
 
I ask the Leader of the Opposition is it still his view, is it still 
his view, as it was last year, that we ought to be criticized for 
adding new public servants in the Department of Social 
Services, new child protection workers? Does he still agree that 
he should criticize us for that work last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Can always tell when we hit a vulnerable 
point, because the members opposite begin to yell and they 
become totally illogical. 
 
The fact is that the Social Services budget has been reduced and 
that the population has dropped and there are fewer jobs, the tax 
base is shrinking. These are all symptoms of a province that’s 
going the wrong direction. The quality of life in Saskatchewan 
is not what it should be under this Premier’s leadership. 
 
Mr. Chairman, everywhere I go in Saskatchewan; whether it be 
Saskatoon, whether it be Regina, whether it be in my riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar, or any other riding in the province of 
Saskatchewan, people are telling me that they’re drawing a 
conclusion about the current Premier and his government. And 
the description that I hear over and over and over again is that 
this is a weak, weak government. It is a government with no 
vision. It is a government with no solutions to our problems. It 
is a government preoccupied with its own internal problems. 
 
Mr. Chair, the NDP government has always had wrong ideas 

when it comes to economic development and growing the 
province of Saskatchewan. Even in its heyday under Mr. 
Romanow, the NDP were not able to stimulate economic 
growth. Even in Mr. Romanow’s heyday, our numbers were not 
impressive in the least. Even when Canada as a nation saw 
unprecedented growth, Saskatchewan lagged behind. 
 
And you’ve got to admit, Mr. Premier, there were some pretty 
impressive people in Mr. Romanow’s team. Mr. Romanow 
himself was a skilled politician — very established nationally 
and had a high profile. Mr. Romanow is gone. Mr. Romanow’s 
Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon, has gone. She’s not on the 
team any more. 
 
Others have left. Ned Shillington has left your team. Dwain 
Lingenfelter, the former deputy premier, has left the team. In 
fact he’s not only left the team, he’s left the province and 
moved to Alberta. Before that, Mr. Anguish left the team. Mr. 
Anguish too has left Saskatchewan. Another former deputy 
premier, Mr. Tchorzewski, has retired. 
 
Mr. Chair, it is obvious to the people of Saskatchewan that the 
key people in the Romanow government are gone. And so, Mr. 
Chair, they’re looking to see who are the replacements. Who is 
running this province? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, they had a look at the 
member, the MLA for Regina Coronation Park. He got into 
cabinet for a little while. He couldn’t cut it and the Premier 
removed him from cabinet. 
 
We had the MLA for Regina South, an MLA that is very verbal 
here in the legislature. He was given a fairly responsible cabinet 
post. He was unable to deliver, and the member for Regina 
South was demoted and he has a portfolio he doesn’t even like. 
 
Mr. Chair, the MLA for Regina Wascana Plains was removed 
from cabinet because she mishandled the Liquor and Gaming 
portfolio. 
 
The MLA for Saskatoon Southeast tried to get into cabinet for 
10 years — never measured up according to Mr. Romanow. But 
our current Premier decided to give her a try. She ran into 
trouble. He dismissed her from cabinet, brought her back in, she 
ran into trouble again, she was removed. There was an 
investigation that cost the taxpayers $25,000 of which not even 
the person who placed the allegations against the member had a 
chance to see, the report, and subsequently the MLA from 
Saskatoon Southeast has a news conference, embarrassed the 
Premier and he had to dismiss her from cabinet again. 
 
Mr. Chair, the government put this coalition together. They had 
the member from North Battleford in their cabinet. He got 
disillusioned with the government; he left and he joined the 
Karwacki party. He’s the only member actually of the Karwacki 
party. 
 
The MLA from Saskatoon Idylwyld wasn’t prepared to answer 
to Frank Hart as the Premier instead of our acting Premier. And 
she said I’m not prepared to be bossed by Mr. Hart and told 
what I can and cannot do in the portfolio of Economic 
Development. And so Janice MacKinnon resigned her seat, left 
this government because she saw that this government was on 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

 

the way down. She has subsequently pointed out accounting 
irregularities by the Minister of Finance and she is so upset by 
the incompetence of this government that she speaks out on 
these issues. 
 
The MLA for Saskatoon Fairview, the Justice minister, goes on 
the evening news and says, I’m contemplating leaving this 
government. Cabinet ministers just don’t do that. Cabinet 
ministers just don’t go out and publicly say, my goodness I’m 
so concerned about what’s happening here, I’m thinking about 
leaving this government. 
 
The MLA for Saskatoon Eastview has been doing the same 
thing. I understand that if a better job comes along, she will 
hand in her resignation. Now here’s another MLA that the 
current Premier put into his cabinet. She couldn’t perform, she 
didn’t measure up, and he had to dismiss her from cabinet. He 
made the mistake of promising her the Chair. He didn’t even 
have the support of his own colleagues and he wasn’t able to 
deliver on that commitment. And so the member from Eastview 
no longer has a cabinet position and doesn’t sit as Speaker of 
our House. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The MLA for Cumberland is getting tired of this bunch and he 
says . . . he thinks he may go back to school, he wants to renew 
his education. So he’s considering abandoning ship. 
 
The MLA for Saskatoon Nutana is contemplating retirement. 
She has left the cabinet. We’re not quite sure whether she was 
dismissed by the Premier or whether she left of her own 
volition. But again, one of the more experienced members on 
the other side, one whom we disagree with a great deal but 
nevertheless had experience, is out of cabinet and may be 
leaving this NDP government. 
 
The MLA for Regina Victoria we understand is contemplating 
retirement. I think he sees the ship sinking as well. 
 
The MLA for Prince Albert, the Minister of Industry, is 
contemplating leaving politics. He’s the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Now there’s a few that haven’t suggested they’re leaving, but 
there’s the minister responsible for the Crown Investment 
Corporation, the MLA for Meadow Lake. He’s the MLA that 
doesn’t even know what his department is doing, and he doesn’t 
even know how he was briefed. And as a result that his lack of 
knowledge, the MLA, the minister, has to have a review, an 
inquiry commission, that cost the taxpayers again thousands and 
thousands of dollars simply because he as a minister is either 
incompetent or his staff is incompetent or perhaps they’re even 
all incompetent, Mr. Chair. 
 
The MLA who has the Agriculture portfolio, the MLA from 
Yorkton, has not been able to deliver on one commitment to 
Agriculture. He has failed in delivering crop insurance. He has 
weakened crop insurance. He doesn’t have a clue what’s in the 
new agriculture policy framework agreement. Other ministers 
in other provinces seem to know; they’re prepared to sign on. 
Terry Hildebrandt from APAS (Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan) knows what’s in the deal. But the 

Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan who is supposed to be 
funding 40 per cent of this program has no idea, cannot tell the 
people of Saskatchewan what is in this new agreement. The 
people in rural Saskatchewan are saying that our Minister of 
Agriculture is incompetent. 
 
We have a Minister of Highways, and the Premier has been 
saying why don’t you ask the Minister of Highways a question 
in question period. Well if there was a good Minister of 
Highways maybe we’d have a good question for him, but quite 
frankly the way that member has distinguished himself is being 
the last MLA to fall on the sword over the long-term care 
increases, he was the member that yelled so loud in this 
Assembly it almost blew the walls out, that that gouging of our 
senior citizens and disabled people was the right thing to do. 
People heard it out in Pense, Mr. Chairman. People heard it 
over in Balgonie. 
 
The MLA for Regina Qu’Appelle yelled out that gouging 
seniors and disabled people was the right thing to do. The 
people of Saskatchewan are incensed with the MLA from 
Regina Qu’Appelle. The voters in Regina Qu’Appelle cannot 
wait to dismiss that member from his responsibilities. It’s no 
wonder the official opposition doesn’t ask him any questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, the MLA, a former Liberal, 
don’t know what he is any more, the Minister of Education is 
negotiating a teachers’ contract and will not tell the people of 
Saskatchewan how he plans to pay for the increase. The 
Minister of Education — he used to be a Liberal, we don’t 
know what he is any more — he made a commitment to see 
enrolment in schools drop by 35,000 people by the end of this 
decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — That’s his vision for Saskatchewan. The 
MLA who used to be a Liberal and we don’t know what he is 
any more now is not keeping his commitment to reverse the 
funding ratio for education so the property taxpayers are given a 
break. That is the record of this Premier’s caucus and Premier’s 
cabinet. 
 
And I want to close, Mr. Chair . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . by talking about the Premier himself. 
Now the Premier was first elected many years ago. He cannot 
claim to be a novice. He is not a novice; he has had a number of 
elected years. Yes, he chose to exit politics for a year or so and 
then he came, decided to enter back in through a by-election 
and became the Leader of the NDP and subsequently, because 
Mr. Romanow resigned, he is now the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, has never been elected as the Premier of this 
province. 
 
How has he been representing, how has he been representing 
the people of Saskatchewan? Well he is the architect of the 
weakest cabinet Saskatchewan has seen in my lifetime. 
 



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — He has nobody in the backbenches to 
replace them. He’s tried and failed. He’s brought them in, they 
failed, and he’s had to dismiss them from cabinet. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, he is the Premier that is taking Saskatchewan 
back into deficits and increasing our debt, the same as Grant 
Devine did. He’s following in his footsteps. He is the Premier 
that is imitating the fair share program by picking winners and 
losers, by telling four communities they can get ethanol 
facilities and nobody else in Saskatchewan can. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair, our current Premier is the 
so-called ambassador of Saskatchewan that goes from our 
province and has the nerve to call our province a wee province. 
I say shame on the Premier. What kind of an ambassador . . . 
you talk about gloom and doom. What could be worse than the 
Premier of Saskatchewan going out of our province and 
belittling it in the media and saying that we have a wee 
province? 
 
Mr. Chair, we have a great province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — We have a province of potential. We have 
a province that can grow if the Government of Saskatchewan 
would get out of the private sector, if the Government of 
Saskatchewan would encourage private sector investment. If the 
Government of Saskatchewan would give our young people a 
hope and a reason to stay here, Saskatchewan would take this 
country by storm, in fact the world by storm. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we would have the most prosperous private 
sector. We would have the most prosperous small-business 
sector in Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, we would see industry 
establish itself in our province. We would see an expanded 
tourism sector. We would see oil and gas reach its potential in 
Saskatchewan. We would see mining step forward and grow. 
We would see the forestry sector expand. And, Mr. Chair, we 
would even see agriculture respond . . . (inaudible) . . . if we 
had a Premier . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . if we had a Premier who had 
confidence in Saskatchewan. But no, we have a Premier that 
thinks we have a wee province that can’t perform. 
 
We have a Premier that’s satisfied with emigration from our 
province, with lack of job creation, with a low standard of 
living, with negative GDP growth. We have a Premier who 
can’t deliver on agriculture promises. We have a Premier who 
can’t even properly represent his constituents in his own riding. 
They have one of the lowest standards of living in all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . or, Mr. Chair, it is obviously time for change in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, I have a team around me that’s 
ready to go to work. I have a team that thinks Saskatchewan is a 
great province. I have a team that thinks Saskatchewan can 
grow. I have a team that thinks that not only can we keep our 
young people in Saskatchewan, but we can attract those that 
have left back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I have a team that can actually establish 
an ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. I have a team that can 
balance the books and do it openly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I have a team that can bring in summary 
financial statements. I have a team that can create economic 
development in Saskatchewan. I have a team, frankly, Mr. 
Chair, that excites the living daylights out of me. I can hardly 
wait for the opportunity. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, the last question I ask you, and the most 
important question I ask you, is when are you going to get out 
of the way so my team can do the job? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, my observation in political 
life is as follows . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as I was endeavouring to say 
before the interruptions, it’s been my observation, not only in 
political life but certainly in political life, that someone will 
engage in a long tirade of personal attacks when they don’t have 
a brand new idea in their head, when they haven’t got a 
substantive issue . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . and when they absolutely would 
disappoint the people who came here. What we’ve heard in the 
last 15 to 20 minutes was a litany of personal attacks from the 
Leader of the Opposition and not one substantive comment, not 
one substantive new idea for the province or the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that is the reason, Mr. Chair, that leader and 
the so-called team he leads will never occupy the government 
benches in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This group of men and women, a 
collection of the Devine Conservatives who are so afraid of 
their own history they changed their name, they haven’t got a 
leader in their history they can point to with pride — not one. 
 
A collection of the Devine Conservatives turned Sask Party. A 
collection of Liberals disaffected, who knew they were going 
nowhere in that party because the party itself was tossing them 
out. A bunch of Reformers, former members of the House of 
Commons, all in a collection that now calls itself the 
Saskatchewan Party and denies, denies they’ve ever occupied 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

 

the benches of government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the people of Saskatchewan know the truth about that 
matter — when in fact some of them did occupy the benches, 
when many of them worked for that government, and they all 
supported it and belonged to the party that supported it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now he wants to talk about former governments. He talks about 
the years that Mr. Romanow served as premier, the Romanow 
government. Well we’re going to talk for a couple of minutes 
about another former government of which they are all very 
well acquainted — that being the government led by Mr. Grant 
Devine. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition can go on television and say, 
I don’t know that man. Well that’s about how truthful he is on 
many occasions. That’s about how truthful he is on many 
occasions. 
 
Now he talks about population loss. He talks about population 
loss in this debate. Let me tell you, Mr. Chair, about population 
loss in this province. You know when it peaked? You know 
when it peaked? 1989, when these people were in government. 
1989, when . . . (inaudible) . . . when the member from . . . 
(inaudible) . . . was working in offices right upstairs in this 
building. 
 
The population loss to this province peaked in 1989 — 
18,000-plus decline in the population. It declined every year 
that those folks were in government almost. Every year since 
the New Democratic Party and the coalition government has 
been governing in this province, with the exception of the last 
two, the population in this province has grown. 
 
And here is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member of 
Saltcoats, the member of Saltcoats wants the facts. You see, this 
is the difficulty. You can’t debate these people because they’ve 
got no regard for the truth. No regard for the truth or the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member for Saltcoats in particular. 
 
The facts of the matter are . . . I won’t take the time of the 
House to read them. I have them right here from Statistics 
Canada. Right here. 
 
Population every year in the 1990s growing until, Mr. Chair — 
and you would think that these ladies and gentlemen, these men 
and women, would have a sensibility about this — where did 
our population turn around? It turned around when we faced the 
crisis in agriculture — the drought and the low commodity 
prices that have hit our family farms and our rural communities. 
 
You’d think they’d know something about that, but they don’t. 
As the Minister of Agriculture said, they’re so out of touch with 
the very constituencies they would seek to represent, it’s either 
AWOL (absent without leave), deserted, or absent. 
 
Now while they were government, Mr. Chair — they want to 
talk about former years in government — while these people 
and their philosophy occupied the benches of government in 

this province, what happened? The population went like that 
every year. But what went like this? The debt of the province. 
Like this every year that they occupied government. 
 
In their 10 years that they and their philosophy occupied the 
government benches, they rang up a debt in this province of $15 
billion — $15 billion, $15 billion. 
 
Well there’s the member from Thunder Creek. He won’t deny 
that he was a member of that party, I hope. He won’t deny it. 
He was right here. His friends were right here, ringing up the 
debt of $15 billion, which will handicap every citizen, every 
taxpayer, and every government in this province for years to 
come. 
 
That’s the result of their philosophy in government. That’s the 
result of the days they were in government. And they can’t sit 
here today and deny their own history. They won’t. 
 
So what were they doing while they were busy driving people 
out of the province, ringing up the debt — what were they 
doing? They were selling off the assets of Saskatchewan 
people, fire sale prices. They talked about the Potash 
Corporation. They talk about the Saskatchewan Minerals 
corporation. They sold off the assets of this province. 
 
What else were they doing? Raising up the taxes. Raising up the 
taxes, cutting the services to Saskatchewan people, selling off 
the Crown corporations and the assets of Saskatchewan, driving 
up the debt, and driving people out of Saskatchewan. And the 
people of Saskatchewan do not forget. 
 
They do not forget the nature of these people. They do not 
forget those years. And they said then, we tolerated them once 
in the 1930s. We had them once in the 1930s, this Conservative 
lot. We didn’t let them back for 50 years. Having had them 
once in the 1980s again, we’re not having them back for 100 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I have said today, I have said today, Mr. 
Chair, on many occasions, to many of the journalists of this 
province, when asked to give my assessment of the session that 
we are now completing — these last four months, these last 78 
days — when asked to give my assessment of this session, I’ve 
said to the journalists and thereby to the public of Saskatchewan 
that in my view a session is measured not by whether it’s been 
successful for an opposition or whether it’s been good for a 
government, although it’s been particularly unsuccessful for 
this opposition and I would say particularly good for this 
government. But that’s not the measurement of the session. 
 
The measurement of a session is how well has it served the 
people of Saskatchewan. How better today are the people of 
Saskatchewan today than before this session began. What is the 
substantive issue . . . issues and accomplishments of this 
session? 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, I don’t want to take the entire time of the 
House to describe the list. But let me say a few of them. 
 
As a result of this session, Mr. Speaker, children in the inner 



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

cities of Saskatchewan are safer. That’s a result of this session. 
A result that . . . 
 
Mr. Chair, the member from Wood River, former . . . a former 
distinguished service person in this country, while in this House 
we discuss the children of the inner city, wants to make fun and 
a lark of it. I’m disappointed in the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we’ve learned a great deal about this 
opposition. Today, we’ve learned a great deal about this 
opposition. They have no regard for fact, little regard for the 
truth. 
 
We’ve got a Leader of the Opposition who this afternoon in the 
House called upon the Premier of the province, along with his 
Justice critic, to interfere in the process of justice in this 
province. A Leader of the Opposition who called upon this 
Premier, accompanied by his Justice critic, to intervene in the 
process of prosecutions in this province. That, Mr. Speaker, as 
one of my members has just said, is a shame. It is a shame. 
 
Now these people, Mr. Speaker, these people will not serve in 
the government benches. 
 
And when they run completely out of ammunition, what do they 
do? They catcall. They holler from their seats. And they engage 
in personal attacks. 
 
You see now, we’ve got the member from Rosthern quite 
agitated in his seat. He gets very agitated in his seat but rarely 
on his feet, I notice. He describes . . . he describes, Mr. Chair 
. . . he describes a discussion of the years when his party was in 
government as a personal attack. He describes the discussion of 
the Devine years of government as a personal attack. I guess he 
feels it a little personally. I understand that. But I’ll tell you, the 
personal attack that resulted from those years was a personal 
attack on every citizen of the province of Saskatchewan. That 
was the personal attack. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat — I repeat, Mr. 
Chair — I repeat as a result of this session children in 
Saskatchewan are safer. As a result of this session consumers in 
Saskatchewan have new consumer protection legislation. 
 
As a result of this session, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, there is a 
host of new educational facilities, colleges, and classrooms 
being built for the young people of Saskatchewan under the 
leadership of our coalition partner, the member of Saskatoon, 
the Minister of Education. 
 
Even today announcements being made in the city of Saskatoon 
about moving progress on a northeast high school. An 
extremely important contribution to Saskatoon and the future of 
young people in that city. As a result of this session young 
people across Saskatchewan will have new educational 
facilities; and new support, if I may say, for their teachers and 
the staff who provide the education. 
 
As a result of this session new funding for post-secondary 
education. As a result of this session a new Department of 
Learning which brings together the capacities of learning, 

life-long learning, in our province. 
 
As a result of this session, Mr. Chair, new resources for the 
Department of Health and health in Saskatchewan. And if I may 
say, Mr. Chair, as a result of this session no health care 
premium levied on the people of Saskatchewan. As a result of 
this session no closures of rural hospitals. As a result of this 
session no user fees, no user fees. All of which you will quickly 
expect should these folks ever occupy the government bench. 
 
As a result of this session, for the people of Saskatchewan, a 
leadership plan in health care being implemented by the current 
Minister of Health. A new Quality Council. A new provincial 
waiting list program. 
 
New bursaries for the training of health care professionals. New 
programs to recruit and retain health care professionals. As a 
result of this session, as a result of this government, negotiated 
contracts with our nurses, with health care providers. 
 
Mr. Chair, as a result of this session, the record of this 
government, the fiscal management of this government, we are 
fixing the highways of Saskatchewan. We’re rebuilding the 
roadways and highways of Saskatchewan. The largest 
infrastructure program in the history of Saskatchewan being 
undertaken by this government, being implemented again in this 
session by this Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
And we go a whole session, an entire session of question 
periods . . . (inaudible) . . . How did I figure it out? Thirty-two 
hours of question period questions. Over a 1,000 questions and 
that opposition doesn’t ask one question of Highways and 
Transportation to the minister here. 
 
Now that tells me, that tells me, Mr. Chair, we are doing a good 
job in terms of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of this session 
— and I have visited many of the locations — new high-speed 
Internet connections in schools across the province, in health 
care institutions, in Social Services offices, new high-speed 
Internet access to the business community across Saskatchewan 
in an unprecedented in Canada provision of these high-speed 
21st century technological issues to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As a result of this session — criticize it as they will — a 
25-year gaming agreement with First Nations people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. As a result of this session, a 
greenprint for ethanol development in the province of 
Saskatchewan that is leading the continent and leading the 
nation. And again, despite the opposition, we are building in 
this province an ethanol industry — despite the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — During the course of this session, Mr. 
Chair, we have seen the commissioning of the wind power 
generation — first in our province. We have gone from a 
position of no green energy development through wind to a 
position of being third in the country, and it’s growing, Mr. 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

 

Chair. 
 
At the end of this session, Mr. Chair, we’re beginning to see the 
fruit of many of these labours. When I can see headlines in the 
daily papers — they won’t be acknowledged over there — but 
when I can see headlines that say the jobs keep coming; when I 
see the employment statistics of 11,000 new jobs in May, 
12,800 new jobs in June, that’s a province on the move, that’s a 
government on the move, and that’s a province that’s moving 
into the 21st century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, these estimates I think have 
proven some valuable exercise. It’s demonstrated, through the 
course of all the estimates, a government that is hard at work 
building for the people of Saskatchewan, providing for the 
people of Saskatchewan good results. When we look at the 
results of this session, the people of Saskatchewan are better, 
communities in Saskatchewan are better, the future of this 
province is better assured. 
 
We’ve learned from this session as well we face an opposition 
on a daily basis with no plan, no agenda — at least an agenda 
that they’ll talk about — and when worse comes to worst, they 
will only result in personal attacks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today on a number of occasions the Leader of the 
Opposition has stood in his place, joined by his colleagues, and 
asked me to call an election. Now this is a peculiar request — a 
peculiar request for a leader who put into a proposed legislation 
in this House that we should fix the election dates and the next 
election should be held next fall. Again, the contradiction. Does 
he want an election today? Does he want an election next fall? 
 
You know what surprises me about the whole issue? That he 
would want an election at all. That he would want an election at 
all because as sure as I stand here today, Mr. Chair, as sure as I 
stand here today, following the next election I will be standing 
in this very same place with many more colleagues on this side 
of the House and many fewer colleagues on that side of the 
House. 
 
With that I thank the Leader of the Opposition. I thank the 
critics for their questions. But most of all, I thank the public 
servants who have sat by my side in the course of these 
estimates from the Department of Executive Council, and 
through them, I thank every civil servant who has worked 
extremely hard to serve all members of this legislature during 
the course of this session but particularly to serve government 
members and members of Executive Council who have spent 
hours and hours compiling the information, answering the 
questions for the opposition, meanwhile continuing to do the 
work of serving the people of Saskatchewan through the public 
service . . . (inaudible) . . . I, on behalf of Executive Council and 
all of government, want to thank those public servants who 
have served us so well in this session. And I thank the Leader of 
the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Subvote (EX01) agreed to. 
 

Subvotes (EX02), (EX07), (EX04), (EX03), (EX08), (EX06) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 
(17:15) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Centenary Fund 

Vote 70 
 
Subvote (CF01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 70 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvotes (CP01), (CP02), (CP04), (CP07), (CP06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 73 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvotes (CR01), (CR02), (CR03), (CR07), (CR05), (CR06), 
(CR08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 27 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvotes (FI01), (FI02), (FI04), (FI03), (FI06), (FI05), (FI10), 
(FI08), (FI09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance - Servicing the Public Debt - Government Share 

Vote 12 
 
Subvote (FD01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Vote 175, 176, 177 
 

Votes 175, 176, 177 — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund 

Vote 71 
 

Subvote (FS01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 151 



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Subvote (MF01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 

Subvotes (GR01), (GR02), (GR04), (GR07), (GR08), (GR03), 
(GR06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Affairs and Housing 
Vote 24 

 
Subvote (MG18) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvotes (HE01), (HE02), (HE03), (HE04), (HE06), (HE08), 
(HE10), (further HE03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvotes (HI01), (HI02) agreed to. 
 
(HI04) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Chair. Because it’s the 
right thing to do, Mr. Chair, I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That Subvote Preservation of Transportation (HI04) of 
Vote 16, Highways and Transportation, be reduced by 
$6,750,000. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Subvote (HI04) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (HI10) agreed to. 
 
(17:30) 
 
Subvote (HI03) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Moved by myself, seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That subvote, construction of transportation system (HI03), 
of vote 16, Highways and Transportation, be reduced by 
$650,000. 

 
Motion agreed to. 

Subvote (HI03) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (HI06), (HI11) agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 145 
 
Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 145 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 16 

 
Subvote (HI04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
Subvotes (PS01), (PS02), (PS06), (PS04), (PS03), (PS07) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 
Vote 33 

 
Subvote (PS03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 

Subvotes (SP01), (SP02), (SP03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Vote 53 

 
Subvote (SP02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 53 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 165 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

 

Subvote (CI01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
Vote 152 

 
Subvote (PW01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Vote 153 

 
Subvote (ST01) — Statutory. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to make the 
following motion: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2002, the sum of $89,602,000 be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 

And I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to make the 
following motion: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2003, the sum of $3,681,928,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
And I so move. 
 
The division bells rang from 17:45 until 17:49. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 
Calvert Atkinson Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Lorjé Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Nilson 
Junor Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Thomson 
Yates McCall  
 

Nays — 26 
 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 

Gantefoer Bjornerud  
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Toth Wakefield Stewart 
Elhard Eagles McMorris 
D’Autremont Bakken Wall 
Brkich Wiberg Weekes 
Harpauer Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 81, The Appropriation Act, 2002 (No. 4) be 
now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, the 
Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moosomin on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a motion 
regarding committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee on Regulations 
 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the membership on the Special Committee on 
Regulations, other than that of the Chair, shall be 
transferable by written notice, signed by the original 
member, and filed with the Chair of the committee. 

 



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 18:02 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 61 - The Regional Health Services Act 
Bill No. 62 - The Health Statutes Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des 
modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur la 
santé 

Bill No. 41 - The Health Quality Council Act 
Bill No. 43 - The Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation 

Act 
Bill No. 57 - The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 

Act, 2002 
Bill No. 40 - The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 4 - The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 79 - The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment 

Act, 2002 
Bill No. 32 - The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 33 - The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 9 - The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 59 - The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Act 
Bill No. 60 - The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Consequential Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Saskatchewan 
Financial Services Commission Act 

Bill No. 63 - The Members’ Conflict of Interest Amendment 
Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 69 - The Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians Amendment Act, 
2002 

Bill No. 3 - The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 53 - The Department of Economic Development 

Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 48 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2002 
Bill No. 77 - The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 

Act, 2002 (No. 2)/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi 
de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons 
alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

Bill No. 74 - The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

Bill No. 72 - The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 
2002 

Bill No. 70 - The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 203 - The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Awareness Day Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 81 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years ending respectively on March 31, 2002 and 
on March 31, 2003. 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 18:07. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to go to motions for returns (debatable). 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 1 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I move for an order of the 
Assembly that an order do issue for return no. 1, seconded by 
the hon. member from Lloydminster. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 2 
 
Ms. Draude: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, item no. 2, return no. 2. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 3 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 3, seconded by the hon. 
member from Lloydminster. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that all the words 
after “dangers” be deleted and substituted with the following: 
 

of improper usage of electricity. (2) Whether the incidents 
of toaster tragedies dropped significantly since the public 
awareness campaign. 

 
I move that, seconded by the Government Whip, the hon. 
member for Regina Dewdney 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 4 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I move item 4, return no. 4, seconded by 
the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 5 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the hon. member for Rosthern, item no. 5, return no. 5. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the words “in the year 1992” be deleted. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

 

Return No. 6 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Carrot River Valley, item no. 6, return no. 6. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 7 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Humboldt, item no. 7, return no. 7. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 8 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Rosthern, item no. 8, return no. 8. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 9 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the hon. member for Carrot River Valley, item no. 9, return no. 
9. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 10 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the hon. member for Rosetown-Biggar, item no. 10, return no. 
10. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 11 
 
Mr. Wall: — I move, seconded by the member for Arm River, 
item no. 11, return no. 11. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(18:15) 
 

Return No. 12 
 

Mr. Wall: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, item no. 12, return no. 12. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 13 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, and seconded 
enthusiastically by the member for Arm River, item no. 13, 
return no. 13. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 14 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Canora-Pelly, item no. 14, return no. 14. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 42 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Shellbrook-Spiritwood, item no. 15, return no. 42. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 43 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I move, seconded by the member from Swift 
Current, item no. 16, return no. 43. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 49 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Lloydminster, for an order for item no. 17 that an order do issue 
for return no. 49. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 53 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers, on item no. 18, return no. 53. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 54 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I move, seconded by the hon. member for 
Lloydminster, for an order of the Assembly do issue for return 
no. 54, item no. 19. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 55 
 

Mr. Hillson: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Lloydminster, item no. 20, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 55. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 61 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale, item no. 21, return no. 61. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That all words after “corporation” be deleted and 
substituted with the following: 

 
the policy for SaskEnergy and that of its subsidiaries 
regarding payment of property taxes to local municipalities. 

 



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

That’s seconded by the Hon. Whip, the member for Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 62 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale, item no. 22, return no. 62. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That all the words after “corporation” be deleted and 
substituted with the following: 

 
the policy for SaskEnergy and that of its subsidiaries 
regarding payment of grants in lieu to local municipalities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s seconded by the Government Whip, the 
hon. member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on division. 
 

Return No. 78 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Opposition 
Whip, the member for Indian Head-Milestone, item no. 23, 
return no. 78. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 79 
 

Mr. Hillson: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Moosomin, item no. 24, return no. 79. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 81 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member of Thunder Creek, item 25, return no. 81. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 82 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Moosomin, item 26, return no. 82. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 83 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Saltcoats, item 27, return no. 83. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 84 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Thunder Creek, item 28, return no. 84. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 85 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Estevan, item 29, return 85. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 86 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from Swift 
Current, item no. 30, return no. 86. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 87 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, item no. 31, return no. 87. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 88 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Cannington, item no. 32, return no. 88. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 89 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Lloydminster, item no. 33, return no. 89. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 90 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from Swift 
Current, item no. 34, return no. 90. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 91 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Humboldt, item no. 35, return no. 91. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 92 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, item 36, return no. 92. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

 

Return No. 93 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Canora-Pelly, item no. 37, return no. 93. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 100 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from Regina 
Dewdney, item no. 38, return no. 100. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 101 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Estevan, item no. 39, return 101. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 102 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, item no. 40, return no. 102. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 103 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Redberry Lake, item no. 41, return 103. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 107 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Watrous, item no. 42, return no. 107. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(18:30) 
 

Return No. 108 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Estevan, item no. 43, return no. 108. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That all the words after “projected” be deleted and 
substituted with the following: 
 
actuarial cost is for increasing the WCB maximum wage 
rate from $48,000 to $51,900 on January 1, 2003; $51,900 
to $53,000 on January 1, 2004; and $53,000 to $55,000 on 
January 1, 2005. 

 
That’s seconded by the Government House Leader, the hon. 
member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 109 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from Arm 
River, item no. 44, return no. 109. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 110 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers, item no. 45, return no. 110. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 111 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife, item no. 46, return no. 111. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 112 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I move, seconded by the member from Wood 
River, item no. 47, return no. 112. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 113 
 

Mr. Weekes: — I move, second by the member from Watrous, 
item 48, return no. 113. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 114 
 

Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Watrous, item 49, return no. 114. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 115 
 

Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Watrous, item no. 50, return no. 115. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 116 
 

Mr. Peters: — I move, seconded by the member from Wood 
River, item 51, return no. 116. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 119 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Redberry Lake, item no. 52, return no. 119. 
 



2810 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 120 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Cannington, item no. 53, return no. 120. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 121 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone, item no. 54, return no. 121. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 122 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Rosetown-Biggar, item no. 55, 
return no. 122. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 123 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife, item no. 56, return no. 123. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 124 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife, item no. 57, an issue for 
return no. 124. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 125 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, item no. 58, return no. 125. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 127 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the 
member from Saltcoats, item no. 59, return no. 127. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 128 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Saltcoats, item no. 60, return no. 128. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 129 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I move, seconded by the member from 

Humboldt, item no. 61, return no. 129. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 130 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move item 
no. 62, return no. 130, seconded by the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 131 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 63, return 
no. 131. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 132 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Humboldt, item no. 64, return no. 132. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 133 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 65, return 
no. 133. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 134 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Humboldt, item no. 66, return no. 134. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 135 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 67, return 
no. 135. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 136 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 68, return 
no. 136. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 137 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Humboldt, item no. 69, return no. 137. 
 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2811 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 138 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 70, return 
no. 138. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 139 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 71, return 
no. 139. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 140 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 72, return 
no. 140. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 141 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by that member from Swift Current, item no. 73, 
return no. 141. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 142 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 74, return 
no. 142. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 143 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt, item no. 75, return 
no. 143. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 144 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saltcoats, item no. 76, return no. 
144. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 145 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, item no. 
77, return no. 145. 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 146 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Rosthern, item no. 78, return no. 
146. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(18:45) 
 

Return No. 147 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Arm River, item no. 79, return 
no. 147. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 148 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Redberry Lake, item no. 80, 
return no. 148. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 149 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Lloydminster, item no. 81, return 
no. 149. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 150 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Battleford-Cut Knife, item no. 82, return no. 150. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 151 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Rosetown-Biggar, item no. 83, 
return no. 151. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 152 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, item no. 84, return no. 152. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 153 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Lloydminster, item no. 85, return no. 153. 
 



2812 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 154 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife, item no. 86, return no. 154. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 155 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife, item no. 87, issue a return for return no. 
155. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 156 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
my friend and colleague, the member for Meadow Lake, item 
no. 88, return no. 156. He said okay. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 157 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Redberry Lake, item no. 89, return no. 157. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 158 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, item no. 90, return no. 158. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 159 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, item no. 91, return no. 159. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 160 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I move, seconded by the hon. member from 
Swift Current, item no. 92, return no. 160. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this being the final resolution 
before us under motions for returns (debatable), I think it is 
worth noting that in this session there were 446 questions asked, 
which is an extremely high number. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
of those, there were 439 written answers provided which I 
believe may be an all-time record for the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, many of those questions had multi parts to them. 
And it took literally hundreds of hours of public service 
employees’ time to provide the answers. And on behalf of the 
Executive Council, I would like to express the appreciation of 
the Executive Council and of the House to those many public 
service employees who provided the answers for the House 
today. And I think it would be appropriate to express our 
appreciation to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leave to 
move an adjournment motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As is customary in this House, the Government House 
Leader and the Opposition House Leader take the adjournment 
motion as an opportunity to say thank you to our colleagues and 
to the people who have worked with us so diligently during the 
session. 
 
And I want to say in the beginning of my brief remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, that this will be my favourite speech of the session 
because it signals an opportunity for all of us to go back to our 
constituencies and be with our family and with our friends. And 
it also signals a great deal of work that has been accomplished 
by, not hundreds, actually thousands of people who make our 
government function. 
 
And as usual, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a lively session. We have 
passed over 80 pieces of legislation with the government 
business, appropriation Bills, and so on. And I think it’s been a 
very successful session. So I think we can all be very 
comfortable with the work that we’ve done. 
 
But it’s been interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, in that we’ve 
welcomed a new member to this legislature, the member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. We’ve said goodbye to a colleague, 
someone who has served this legislature for a long time, Mr. 
Bill Boyd, the former member from Kindersley. 
 
And as well we’ve seen some very positive things; some things 
that we feel very grateful for. The member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife who’s come back to work and is looking fit and fiddle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
can all be thankful for that. 
 
I want to say a few words of thanks to people who work in the 
building, but before I do that, before I thank all of my 
colleagues, I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your work. I 
want to congratulate you. This is your second session. 
 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2813 

 

I think you’ve served all of the members of the session, both the 
government and the opposition side, and the independent 
member — or the Liberal member; I’m sorry, Jack. With . . . 
oh, excuse . . . and I withdraw that. I withdraw that. The 
member from Battleford. 
 
You’ve served all of us really with fairness and you’ve allowed 
debate on the issues and you’ve allowed us to display our 
emotion and our enthusiasm as this place is wont to bring to the 
fore on occasion. 
 
I want to thank my colleague, the Opposition House Leader for 
his work. I think it’s fair to say the member from Cannington 
and I don’t always agree. Sometimes, sometimes I’m right — 
but it is true, Mr. Speaker — sometimes I’m right and he’s 
wrong; and sometimes he’s right and I’m wrong. So . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Oh, it’s a moment for concession. 
 
But moving on, I also want to thank our deputy House leaders: 
the member from Moose Jaw North who’s taken a very, very 
large role in the operations of our side of the House; and the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone; and I want to thank them 
for their advice and their assistance. 
 
I need to and I want to thank the Clerk of the Assembly. 
Gwenn, you have been a stalwart member of this Legislative 
Assembly for a long time. You serve us well. 
 
I want to thank Greg Putz, and I want to thank Meta Woods, 
and Viktor Kaczkowski. And Viktor, they put it in phonetics 
here, I need to tell you, because your name is as bad as mine. 
It’s a real difficult one. And I want to thank all of you for your 
hard work. 
 
Monique, Sandra, Rebecca in the Clerk’s office, thank you. 
 
And our Pages. You’re going to be leaving us to move on to 
other parts of your life. Andrea, Robin, Michelle, Fabian, and 
Dean, thank you all for your assistance and I know that, and I 
hope that you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I’m hoping you carry some 
fond memories with you. 
 
I want to thank our interns — Tim, Maria, Wendy, Jessica — 
for your assistance. And I hope . . . oh there you are, some of 
you are. I hope you found this a rewarding experience as well. 
 
And I want to thank our constituency assistants who represent 
us not only when we’re gone during session, but they work 
very, very hard. They’re sort of the pulse of our constituencies 
and they work all the time. It’s sort of a 365-day job out there, 
and I thank all of them. So all of you who are listening, thanks a 
bunch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I need to, and I want to thank all of 

the caucus office staff, the staff in the ministers’ offices, the 
Executive Council staff. They work probably as long or longer 
hours as we do in carrying on our duties. 
 
And I’ve got to thank our Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick, and your 
staff and all the commissionaires for keeping this place safe and 
helping to build security. 
 
And of course the Hansard staff and Journals. I think there’s 
sometimes we’re very thankful that inaudible interjection is part 
of what you report. So thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And our Law Clerk, Ken Ring, and 
his staff; Ian Brown and his staff in the legislative drafting 
office who prepare our legislation. 
 
And of course the staff in the cafeteria. It’s very noticeable, 
their work. Some of the work that happens around here is not 
that tangible but certainly theirs is and I can attest to that. I’ve 
got to go home and work on some of this. 
 
But I also want to thank the SPMC building and maintenance 
staff. I want to thank the visitor services staff who bring in 
school groups, tourists, and the general public. 
 
And of course all of this is televised in many places in the 
province so I want to thank Gary, Ihor, and Kerry in the 
broadcasting services who provide the television coverage for 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I want to note, Mr. Speaker, 
that these folks have worked together for 20 years and they 
continue to do a very excellent job. 
 
I think all members would like to recognize as well the 
contribution of the officials from the different government 
departments as my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw 
North, has indicated, and their work as they help us put together 
the work of the Committee of Finance and the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
And I need to mention the reporters. I’m going to be very 
careful here — I don’t have to. I guess today’s our day off. We 
can say . . . No, I seriously want to thank the media for their 
work. They report I think in a fair and an impartial way as 
journalists are wont to do. We don’t always agree with what 
they say but I know that’s the direction and that’s where they’re 
headed and they like to report and need to report the happenings 
of the legislature. 
 
(19:00) 
 
But I think lastly as I close, Mr. Speaker, before I move to the 
motion, I want to thank, on behalf of all of us — and I think the 
Opposition House Leader will concur — I want to thank our 
families, our spouses, our partners, and our kids for what they 
do because without what they do, all of this couldn’t be 
possible. And so I want to, on behalf of all of us, thank those 
who are at home and were waiting for us to be back there. 
 
So with that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2814 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government; and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, of such date and time. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
to rise at this time, along with the Government House Leader, to 
thank the various people that we have dealt with over the past 
session. 
 
I’d like to particularly also congratulate the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife for being here, fulfilling his duties. It was 
a pleasure working with him. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, we do miss the past member for 
Kindersley, Bill Boyd. Bill was very much a joy to have in 
caucus where his sharp whip . . . wit; and whip, once in a while 
too. Mr. Speaker, he certainly brightened our day and had a 
very good outlook on life and we wish Bill well in his future 
career. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — I’d like to thank the officers of our side 
of the House that I have to work with and that’s the Whip, the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone; the Deputy House 
Leader, the member from Redberry; and the Deputy Whip, the 
member from Saltcoats. 
 
Working with them and working with my colleagues has been a 
very easy thing to do in this session. Whenever there was any 
hint of a possibility, I’d just ask those three to go and deal with 
it. Mr. Speaker, it didn’t have to happen, though. The 
colleagues on this side of the House this time were very, very 
co-operative and worked very hard. 
 
I’d also like to thank, Mr. Speaker, the Government House 
Leader and his deputy. While I agree with him we didn’t always 
agree, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we both knew and 
understood that we were here to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan and that, to do that, we have to co-operate at 
times. At the end of the day, we have to co-operate. And I think 
that while it’s our role as opposition to hold the government 
accountable, we also have to be able to pass through this House 
good legislation for the people of Saskatchewan and that does 
take the co-operation of both sides of the House, and I’d like to 
thank the members for working co-operatively. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, when people are watching 
on television, particularly in question period, they get the 
impression that we are very combative, that we haven’t got 
anything good to say about the members on the other side, that 
when we go into the corners we always go in with our elbows 

high. Well in question period that’s true. But the rest of the 
time, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of dealing back and forth, of 
co-operation, of working towards the best interests of the 
people in the province. 
 
I know that my colleagues, when they approach a minister on 
the other side of the House to deal with an issue dealing with a 
constituent, they can generally resolve the issue. There are cases 
where there is no resolution possible and both sides understand 
that. But whenever there is an issue that needs to be dealt with, 
there was always co-operation in place and I’d like to thank the 
ministers and their staffs for that. 
 
I’d also like to thank, Mr. Speaker, our caucus staff and our 
constituency offices. They’re the ones who, if we do look good, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because of the work that they do behind the 
scenes. They are the ones who do the research. They are the 
ones who are in contact with the constituents and the people 
around the province that are phoning up or writing, inquiring 
about issues. So they’re the first line of contact and they do an 
excellent, excellent job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Like to say thank you to yourself, Mr. Speaker, and to your 
office. We’ve always had co-operation from your office, from 
yourself, and from your staff. They’re always very helpful and 
very friendly whenever we need to be in contact with them. 
 
I’d also like to thank the Clerks at the Table and the other 
clerks, their office staff. Again, whenever we need to deal with 
the Clerk’s office, the Clerk, when we have a question, we 
always receive the proper answer. Not always the answer we 
want, but we receive the proper answer. And we have to 
appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and thank you. 
 
The Government House Leader mentioned Hansard. And we 
stand in this House and a few of us, like the member from 
Rosthern, make long, long speeches. And you would wonder 
why anybody would want to ever review that. 
 
But the people at Hansard record it just in case somebody does 
want to review that. So while sometimes the words are not 
exactly as we wished we had pronounced them, they do record 
it and it’s there for posterity, Mr. Speaker. And we’d like to 
thank them for the hard work and the long hours they put in. 
 
And there’s one tradition, Mr. Speaker, that again Hansard 
carried out this year. It’s the annual passing of the cinnamon 
bun to the Opposition House Leader. That occurred yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, and I have to say that while it was a struggle, I 
managed to hold off my colleagues long enough to eat it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And now I’m wearing . . . 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, and I get a lot of help from my 
colleagues on some of these things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Broadcast Services, Mr. Speaker, do an excellent job for us. 
They send the signal out into TV land that let people observe 
and see what’s going on in here to gain some understanding of 
how the parliamentary process works. 
 
They also broadcast it, Mr. Speaker, on the Internet which is a 
new facility that we’ve taken advantage of part of last session 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2815 

 

and this entire session. And I know that the people at Broadcast 
Services are very diligent on their job and want to enhance the 
services that are available to the people of Saskatchewan to be 
able to observe their members and their parliament in operation. 
And I’d like to thank them for their services. 
 
There’s one of the officers of the legislature that as members of 
the opposition we work with fairly closely, and that’s the Law 
Clerk, Mr. Speaker. And we’d like to thank Ken Ring and 
Allison and his other staff members for the hard work that they 
do on our behalf. 
 
They’re the ones who prepare the pieces of legislation that we 
present to the House. We have the ideas, we know what we 
want to do with a piece of legislation, and Ken and his staff are 
the ones that get it into a form that it’s acceptable to the House. 
And we’d like to thank him for his work. 
 
We’d like to thank the department officials and the civil 
servants that have worked on all of our questions. You know, 
this is inquiring minds want to know, and the people like the 
member from Arm River are very inquiring and want to know 
all of the answers. And some of the answers . . . some of the 
questions, Mr. Speaker, he’s still looking for answers for such 
as: where are the fish? 
 
Now I’m not exactly sure which fish he’s talking about but 
there were, Mr. Speaker, some fish floating around here one day 
in some of the members’ water glasses. And so perhaps he 
should make inquiries with the Pages as to where are the fish. 
 
I’d like to thank the Pages for their hard work. You know, 
they’re around on the floor of the House every day while we’re 
in session. They’re never recognized by yourself, Mr. Speaker, 
but they do an excellent job in here. And while they’re not 
heard, Mr. Speaker, they are seen and we appreciate the hard 
work that they’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Pat Shaw and the security staff have 
done an excellent job in keeping us safe again this session, as 
they always do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — And I know that Mr. Shaw is looking 
forward to some opportunities outside of the House here this 
fall. He was just telling me, he signalled to me that he was . . . 
had just been drawn to hunt elk up north this fall. So good luck. 
 
It sort of looks like a touchdown, only a little different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the library staff for the hard work 
that they do in here for us; visitor services, the cafeteria staff, 
and yes, not to forget the media. We sort of have a symbiotic 
relationship with the media. They need us to report and we need 
them to put our message out, Mr. Speaker. And we only hope 
that what they write is what we’re hoping they will write. But 
they always seem to have an interpretation on it that either side 
of the House doesn’t always agree with. But, Mr. Speaker, they 
report what we say and what we do accurately. And I guess at 
the end of the day that’s all we can hope for. 

Mr. Speaker, one last group that I think needs to be thanked, 
and that’s our spouses and our children. They’re the ones who 
hold the fort down when we’re gone. And that means a lot to all 
of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have . . . we have just finished another 
memorable session. And while most of the Bills that we pass in 
this House are housekeeping, there are a few that are very 
meaningful. And I’d like to mention some of those. 
 
The ethanol Bill, Mr. Speaker, I think is an important step 
forward for Saskatchewan. We may have different methods of 
implementing that kind of a strategy in Saskatchewan, but both 
sides of the House recognize its importance. 
 
The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse 
and Exploitation was an extremely important Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
to protect children in Saskatchewan. And I’d like to 
congratulate the member from Humboldt on her work on this 
particular issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — She spent five years, Mr. Speaker, 
trying to bring this Bill to culmination. And the government 
recognized the importance of this particular Bill, so they need to 
be congratulated as well on this. Again, it’s one of those areas, 
Mr. Speaker, where both sides of the House were able to 
co-operate. 
 
Another Bill that I believe was extremely important was The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act, which started a new 
insurance program in Saskatchewan. But in some ways it 
reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of that old Red Rose Tea ad — only 
in Saskatchewan, you say? So we will see, Mr. Speaker, how 
this experiment works out. I think . . . I’m hoping that it works 
well for both areas of that insurance, both the no-fault and the 
tort system, that it serves those people well who choose it. 
 
Two of the other Bills that I want to mention is The Cities Act 
and The Saskatchewan Farm Land Security Act. I think these 
two particular Bills are going to have a major impact on the 
social and economic landscape of Saskatchewan and certainly I 
. . . people on both sides of the House want those Bills to be 
successful and prosperous Bills for all of us. 
 
The opposition, Mr. Speaker, presented 14 private members’ 
Bills and passed one of them. The member for 
Kelvington-Wadena saw her Bill, The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Awareness Day Act, passed — again, Mr. Speaker, though with 
the co-operation of the government. I’m sure that for this 
member this will be the first of many Bills that she will be able 
to pass in this House. Congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the time has come 
for us all to go home and get reacquainted with our spouses and 
our children. So, Mr. Speaker, you all . . . to you and to all the 
members and staff, have a safe and enjoyable summer and we’ll 
see you back in here for the fall session or at the polls. Thank 
you. 
 



2816 Saskatchewan Hansard July 10, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to make a few remarks at the 
conclusion of the third session of the twenty-fourth legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not asking for sympathy, but there are times 
when being on your own in here is not the best of situations — 
57 to 1 is not the greatest odds. Sometimes I feel like the human 
pinata. But I want to put all members of the legislature on 
notice that if I’m back next session, no more Mr. Nice Guy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I may be the only Liberal in this House at present, 
but may I point out we were the first government. And I’m bold 
enough to predict there will be Liberals sitting in this Assembly 
long after both the Saskatchewan Party and the New 
Democratic parties have passed into history. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they have no mercy. Our format here 
is a very adversarial one and that perhaps at times gives a false 
impression. 
 
Premier Thatcher, that most adversarial of politicians, once 
said, quite correctly: 
 

We do not differ as to goals; we only differ as to means. 
 
All of us as members have the same aspirations, the same 
visions, the same beliefs, the same goals as to what is 
fundamentally in the interests of this province and of this 
society. We differ only as to the means of getting there. 
 
I do want to say though, Mr. Speaker, that I think that what has 
unfolded, especially in the last three or four weeks of the 
session, points out the necessity of a fall session. In the 
province of Manitoba, legislation is introduced in the fall and 
given first reading. The House then adjourns in order that all 
members can become familiar with the legislation in order that 
the parties most particularly interested in the legislation can be 
consulted with and can give their opinions. Then everyone 
comes back in the spring prepared to debate. 
 
Unfortunately, something very . . . there is a very unfortunate 
procedure which has come into our House, and that is that the 
most contentious and significant pieces of legislation are held 
back until well into June, in the hope that by the time the 
important pieces of legislation see the light of day, everyone 
will be tired and fed up and so anxious to get out of here that 
they will not receive proper scrutiny and debate. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that may be a political strategy but 
it is frankly not one productive of healthy, democratic debate. 
 
So I would ask that we consider, we consider something 
different. We consider means of making this a forum for the 
debate of public policy and that can best be done by a fall 
session, at which time legislation is given first reading instead 
of held back until we are well into the summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I also want to add my very sincere 
thanks for all of the staff who have served us with courtesy and 

with skill — the library, our Pages, your office, Mr. Speaker, 
Sergeant-at-Arms, cafeteria. And may I take this opportunity to 
particularly mention that I have been assisted throughout this 
session by Vic Polsom and Joanne Johnson who have done so 
much to prepare me for House each day. And I very much 
appreciate the dedication of Joanne and Vic in my office. 
 
I want to wish all members a safe and happy summer. And I 
hope that they will have time to be with their family and 
constituents. My family and I are going to climb the Chilkoot 
Trail. 
 
And I hope everyone will pursue activities that refresh and 
renew. I happen to think that we’ve earned it, whether Murray 
Mandryk agrees or not. But I do want to add my thanks, as well, 
to our media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to report that in the past session 
the Liberal caucus did not have a single, solitary disagreement. 
Unfortunately our federal cousins didn’t fare nearly so well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to warn all hon. members that next session 
the Liberals will be back and ready to fight. And I’ve only one 
piece of advice for you all — don’t mess with North Battleford. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, if you will just permit to make . . . 
add a few remarks, I feel that it’s a . . . you can never really say 
enough thank you’s or thank you enough times. And I would 
just like to add a few of my own. 
 
Earlier this session we honoured the Hansard production 
manager, Donelda Klein. Donelda’s career began in December 
1973 and after 29 years she’s retiring to go golfing and 
travelling, and more golfing. 
 
Donelda’s trained dozens and dozens of new staff over the 
years. And she’s been teaching them to strive for accuracy and 
excellence in their work. And her director stated: 
 

Donelda herself has always been ready, willing, and able to 
do an excellent job. And I admire her dedication to 
Hansard and to the Assembly. 

 
Now many of our MLAs might not recognize Donelda by name, 
but it is she who operates the audio switching equipment during 
routine proceedings and question period. She’s one of the 
dedicated employees in this Legislative Building, one of the 
people who take pride in their work and in the beautiful, 
historic building in which they work. 
 
We wish her well in her retirement. Thank you, Donelda, good 
luck and best wishes. 
 
But Donelda’s work ethic is typical of many of the Legislative 
Assembly staff. And it is through the service of our capable 
staff like Donelda that we’re able to work here on behalf of our 
constituents. 
 
And I’m very pleased to add my thank you to some of those that 
have already been spoken of. And that is to Lorraine 



July 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2817 

 

deMontigny and staff at visitor services; Ken Ring and staff, 
who is our Legislative Law Clerk; the security people with Pat 
Shaw and the sessional security led by Ben Block; people in 
broadcast services led by Gary Ward. 
 
Al Hansen and Steve Bata who is our building manager for 
SPMC; Trent Brears and the staff, the Dome Cafeteria manager; 
Marilyn Kotylak and Pam Scott of Journals. Our Pages: Andrea 
Barraza, Robin Canham, Fabian Contreras, Fredrick Khonje, 
and Michelle McNichol and Dean Regier. Judy Brennan of 
Hansard and all of the Hansard crew. 
 
Of course Gwenn Ronyk and her assistants in the Clerk’s 
office; our interns; and in addition to that, Linda Kaminski and 
the people in human services; and Marilyn Borowski and the 
people in financial services that manage to get our cheques out 
monthly; and Guy Barnabe and his crew who keep our 
computers going. 
 
My notes here point out as well that I should add my own staff 
at this point. And I do want to say myself that nobody could 
really wish people who have a greater loyalty, combination of 
graciousness in their job, and the competence that I have in 
Margaret Kleisinger, Linda Spence, Rhonda Romanuk, and 
Kathy Beck. 
 
So members, I want you in the end to join me with a heartfelt 
thank you for all of us . . . to all of us for our staff here and 
those back in our constituency offices for the work they do. As 
has been said earlier, it’s now time to return our constituencies, 
to our families, meet with those back home. 
 
And thank you to all of you MLAs for the work that you do to 
make Saskatchewan a better place for our children and our 
grandchildren. It’s been very much a pleasure to work with each 
and every one of you and it’s so much a pleasure because 
you’re all dedicated to service. 
 
And thank you particularly to those who occasionally gave me, 
spontaneously, advice how to handle this Chair. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: —This House stands adjourned until an order 
from the Speaker. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 19:25. 
 
 
 


