















































Hansard: May 23, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1519 
 May 23, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of people who are concerned about the 
tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be found in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine 
of not more than $100. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from 
Wadena. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Bird’s 
Point and Stockholm. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with this 
government’s tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present regarding the condition of our highways in the 
province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 

in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Weyburn, 
Lampman, Francis, Odessa, and Glenavon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the tobacco legislation. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, McTaggart, 
and Colgate. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life, to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Eyebrow, Brownlee, Central Butte. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from people who are concerned about the annual drug 
prescription plan. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by good people 
from Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

from citizens concerned about rising crop insurance premiums. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of the Battlefords. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it will be no surprise today I have a petition of citizens 
concerned about Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by citizens from 
Watrous, Simpson, and Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Spiritwood, 
Lloydminster, Belbutte, and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 23; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 8, 11, 18, 24, 59, and 129. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Today I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of hard-working 
public servants who have taken some time out today to learn a 
little more about what we do in our day-to-day jobs. 
 
And we have people represented here from the departments of 
Government Relations, Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization, Health, Industry and Resources, Social Services, 
Justice, Environment, Highways and Transportation, Culture, 
Youth and Recreation, and Learning. And I look forward to 
meeting with our group later today and having a discussion 
about the work of the legislature. And I ask all members to join 
me in welcoming them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the public servants to the 
Legislative Chamber today. I too will be having an opportunity 
to meet with them after question period, around 3 o’clock I 
believe or 3:30, and hope to be able to answer some of the 
questions that perhaps weren’t answered during question 
period. Welcome here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 
privilege today to be able to introduce a school group from my 
community. And I’m sure the Premier will be glad because it 
will be the best behaviour that I’ve been on all year. 
 
The students are from Hague High School. And there’s 57 of 
them, grade 11 and 12 students, and am I glad I didn’t offer to 
buy them chocolate sundaes, with all 57 of them. 
Accompanying them are teachers — the best English teacher in 
Saskatchewan — Margi Corbett, Scott Richardson, and a 
number of other individuals: Barb Braun, Val Reddekopp, 
Helen Wiebe, Dale Wagner, and most important of all, John the 
bus driver. 
 
So would you join me in welcoming these students to . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
16 students sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Odessa, 
Saskatchewan. They made the trip in from Odessa last night and 
spent the evening in Regina and are making a few stops around 
the city today. And of course the Assembly is one of them. 
 
Their teacher, Karen Zarowny, Dave Wild, Colleen Hoffman, 
and Pat Muchowski are accompanying them. I had an 
opportunity to meet with them prior to coming into the 
Assembly today. And it’s quite interesting, they’ve done a lot of 
work on the parliamentary system in our province. They’ve had 
some mock parliaments and I guess are here to see whether we 
resemble what they did there. 
 
It was quite interesting though, they are looking for a heated 
question period. And I’m sure we’re going to be able to 
accomplish that today. 
 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

 

I welcome them all here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Trailtech Industries Expansion 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I 
attended the sod turning for a major expansion at Trailtech 
Industries in Gravelbourg. Trailtech started business in 1997 
manufacturing and distributing light commercial flat deck 
trailers and ag transports into Western Canada, Ontario, and the 
United States. 
 
A devastating fire in June 2000 destroyed half of Trailtech’s 
facilities. But recently Trailtech merged with an Alberta 
company in June 2001 which created Montgomery Brown 
Group Inc. and doubled the size of the company. This plant 
expansion is the first major building project of Montgomery 
Brown at Trailtech Inc. 
 
Trailtech employs 95 people full-time at the Gravelbourg 
facilities. The project consists of 21,600 square foot, 
made-in-Saskatchewan steel building which will be used for 
enhanced finishing and new product development and will 
require an estimated additional 20 people. The cost of the 
project is estimated at $1.2 million, entirely funded by the 
combination of Trailtech reserves and bank financing. 
 
This is being accomplished in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan 
entrepreneurs and without one penny of government money. 
 
Congratulations to Keith and Rosemarie Brown. You are the 
kind of entrepreneurs that this province needs to be successful 
and to grow our population by 100,000 people in 10 years. 
 
Also congratulations to the management and staff of Trailtech 
and the community of Gravelbourg, all of whom made this 
possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tamara’s House Opens 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. This morning I was privileged to 
attend the official opening of Tamara’s House, the only facility 
of its kind in Saskatchewan and, in fact, Canada. 
 
Tamara’s is a charitable, community-based organization 11 
years in the making that is dedicated to supporting the complete 
healing of female survivors of child sexual abuse. Women come 
to Tamara’s House for short stays when they need support to 
deal with child sexual abuse. 
 
Tamara’s House is a beautiful eight-bedroom home that 
includes a healing centre, a sacred space, a library, bedrooms 
for overnight stay, and complementary care rooms. The centre 
is a safe place for women where they are believed and can get 
support from other women. 
 
By utilizing new understandings about sexual abuse, its 
after-effects, and effective healing strategies including holistic 

approaches, Tamara’s helps survivors along the path to healing 
and wholeness. 
 
Not only does Tamara’s House help female survivors of child 
sexual abuse, but the centre works to help society break the 
silence and the generational cycle of child sexual abuse in an 
effort to make the world a safer place for children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am so proud that this much needed facility has 
finally opened in Saskatoon. I invite all members of the House 
to join with me in congratulating every solitary person who was 
instrumental in seeing this project through to fruition. 
 
Tamara’s is a right step in the right direction for female 
survivors of sexual abuse that we should all be proud of and one 
that sets an example for the rest of the country. 
 
On behalf of all of my colleagues in government, I want to wish 
all of the volunteers and everyone who has had anything to do 
with this historic occasion the very best in the years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Principal of the Year Award 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today 
to rise to recognize the principal of Robert Melrose Elementary 
School in Kelvington, Laurel Irving Piot, who has been chosen 
out of over 800 other principals to be awarded the provincial, 
Distinguished Principal of the Year Award. 
 
In the tribute to Mrs. Irving Piot, Mrs. Kathi McLeod remarked: 
 

There are many kinds of leadership styles. Laurel ranks 
right up there with the best and I’ll tell you why. It is a 
story that spans many years and involves many things. Our 
school is a caring, sharing school, a kinder, gentler place 
where all people are respected and the needs of children are 
met in every possible way. The reason for this growth in 
achievement can be linked to our principal and friend — 
Laurel Irving Piot. Her list of accomplishments is long and 
continues to grow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, some of these accomplishments include: 
implementing a band program for students in grades 4 and 5; 
funding a new playground; funding a computer lab; a 
millennium project that makes pottery tiles to become part of 
gigantic mural; and implementing a grassroots program entitled, 
Band on the Web. She also supports plays, concerts, poetry 
readings, musicals, and skate-a-thons to name just a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Irving Piot has not only been an inspiration 
to the teachers and students of the elementary school, she has 
also been very active in the community of Kelvington as well. 
She’s on the provincial organization such as Sask Sport Inc., 
Synchro Saskatchewan, Sofia House for women, and the 
Canadian Legion. 
 
I would ask this Assembly to join with me in thanking Mrs. 
Irving Piot for her dedication to the children of the community 
of Kelvington. Her work will ensure that students from this 
community will develop skills necessary to continue their 
education and eventually become contributing members of 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

society. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Premier’s Business Lunch 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday at one of 
Regina’s fine downtown gathering places, the Premier hosted 
his second annual Premier’s Luncheon. The second of many 
annual luncheons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over 600 Regina business and professional people paid a very 
modest fee for an excellent lunch and received in return a 
spirited, entertaining, documented, well reasoned, and at the 
same time inspirational message about Saskatchewan’s 
economic prospects for this year and the future. 
 
No gloom, Mr. Speaker, no doom. The Premier’s speech was 
delivered in the clear light of day, at noon in the capital city of 
our province of Saskatchewan — not Calgary, Alberta. And as 
you know what else, Mr. Speaker, his optimistic message of 
how our province will grow and prosper in this age of 
globalization made sense. 
 
Of course if you love this province, if you admire its people, if 
you believe in their entrepreneurial spirit, if you understand and 
appreciate our natural advantages, then this is easy to be 
optimistic — justifiable optimism, Mr. Speaker. And this 
message from our Saskatchewan leader was well-received by 
the audience of Saskatchewan people because they appreciate 
straight talk almost as much as they shun mumbo-jumbo, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I leave this to you and other wiser people 
to interpret. Almost as soon as the Premier concluded his 
remarks about the need for rain, it began to rain. Coincidence? 
Perhaps. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, May 21 to 24 is Aboriginal 
Awareness Week across Canada. This week marks the time in 
which we recognize and celebrate the many significant 
contributions made by Canada’s Aboriginal people and when 
we look forward to enhanced understanding and co-operation 
between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people in Canada, in 
order to capitalize on the boundless opportunities available to 
effect a wholesome and prosperous society for all people. 
 
Aboriginal people are the fastest growing segment of the 
population in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and nowhere is that more 
relevant than here in Saskatchewan where it is expected that 
Aboriginal people will make up 30 per cent of the population 
within the next few decades. What that means, Mr. Speaker, is 
that there is a wealth of enthusiasm, energy, and experience that 
is literally waiting to be tapped into. 
 

All members of the House know the important role that 
Aboriginal people play in Saskatchewan’s future. Quite simply, 
Mr. Speaker, the success of the province depends largely on the 
success of our Aboriginal people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Indian and Métis affairs critic for the 
opposition, I have seen first-hand the many serious issues 
currently facing our province’s Aboriginal people. And during 
Aboriginal Awareness Week I encourage all residents of the 
province to become more aware of those issues and to recognize 
the many contributions made by Aboriginal people, as well as 
the wonderful potential that they possess — a potential that will 
greatly impact everyone’s future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw’s First Annual Business Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 
honour last night, along with my colleague from Moose Jaw 
North, to attend Moose Jaw’s first annual business awards. This 
event, sponsored by the district chamber of commerce and the 
Moose Jaw REDA (regional economic development authority), 
presented awards to businesses who have demonstrated 
excellence in their fields. 
 
The award for young entrepreneur, an award for someone under 
30 who has established or expanded a business, went to a Orion 
Taxidermy owner, Rion White. Rion in 1999 was recognized 
with a world championship for his taxidermy work, and has 
recently expanded his Moose Jaw business from three 
employees to seven. 
 
In the exports category, Prairie Berries won the award. They 
designed a marketing plan that successfully brought together 
seven Saskatchewan orchard growers in seeking larger markets 
for their Saskatoon berries, with the motto “working together, 
we are better”. 
 
Cranberry Rose was the winner of the customer service award. 
The Victorian setting allows patrons to enjoy personalized 
service in a very relaxed atmosphere. 
 
Nutravim received the new business venture award through 
manufacturing high-quality Saskatchewan health products at a 
reasonable price. 
 
And Tim Hortons, Mr. Speaker, one of my favourite stops, 
received business of the year. 
 
Wrapture Day Spa & Salon won the award for job creation. 
Wrapture has increased its full-time staff from four to nine this 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although only these firms received awards, all of 
the entries should be congratulated because their success 
contributes to our success as a province and a good place to do 
business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

 

Swift Current Chamber of Commerce 
Business Excellence Awards 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the years 
businessmen and women in Swift Current have had to 
persevere. They had to compete with drought and slow periods 
in the oil patch. They’ll tell you that they’ve had to constantly 
battle with their proximity to Medicine Hat. 
 
And last night was no different, Mr. Speaker, as small-business 
people battled the wind and the cold and the snow — albeit 
welcome snow — to make their way to the Civic Centre in 
Swift Current where I had the privilege to also attend the annual 
Swift Current Chamber of Commerce Business Excellence 
Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were 270 people gathered to celebrate the 
best in local business at the fourth annual awards night. This 
year there were 34 nominees in 8 categories. 
 
Congratulations to Mary Taylor-Keefe and Clark Moen, who 
accepted the award for business of the year for T.S. Metals. The 
business choice award went to John Gannitsos of the Akropol 
Café. Wyatt Hughes of Double T Computer Services accepted 
the award for young entrepreneur. The customer service award 
went to Harry and Theresa Friesen of Professional Upholstery 
and Carpet Cleaning. Mike Coupland of Dooly’s Billiards was 
named the new business of the year. Pat Perry accepted the 
heritage award on behalf of Creative Video. Bert and Paulette 
Legault of Legault Manufacturing picked up the community 
involvement award. And the award for property appearance 
went to Trudy Lacher of Yours Truly Gift Shop in Swift 
Current. 
 
Once again, I’d like to congratulate all of the nominees and the 
award winners, and hats off to the Swift Current Chamber of 
Commerce for hosting another excellent SCABEX (Swift 
Current Achievement in Business Excellence) awards in Swift 
Current. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investment in Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago in the Crown 
Corporations Committee hearings, the president of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), Frank Hart, said no 
deal had been struck with Broe industries for ethanol production 
in the province of Saskatchewan. He also said the government 
had no specific plans for investing taxpayer dollars directly in 
the industry. In fact he said, and I quote: 
 

. . . if projects can proceed without our investment, we 
would actually prefer to see that happen. 
 

Yet this morning, just two weeks later, Mr. Speaker, at a press 
conference attended by several senior officials at CIC, the news 
was pretty clear. The government is close to putting in 100 
million taxpayer dollars into this deal. The question to the 
minister responsible is this: why has the NDP(New Democratic 
Party) given up so quickly on producing ethanol in 

Saskatchewan without government money? Why have they no 
faith in the private sector to develop this industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to thank the member for the question. And I 
want to begin the answer by asking him if he would care to 
detail the people from Crown Investments Corporation who 
represented that corporation at this media conference this 
morning? 
 
My understanding it was a group of people from across 
Saskatchewan who are interested in developing ethanol in their 
communities — people from Shaunavon, Tisdale, Melville, 
Belle Plaine, along with Broe group. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, I thought it was reports that came back to me that, of 
course, the Saskatchewan Party had staff there and I believe that 
to be the case. 
 
I would have thought they would have brought back the 
comments that came as a result of this media event this morning 
held by people across this province, that they were very 
enthusiastic about the fact that there was a private sector 
investor willing to come to this province and commit to 60 per 
cent of ethanol development initiatives that these people have 
been working on for some time. 
 
I ask the member opposite to name those officials. But what is 
important is that I ask him to tell us what he will support with 
respect to ethanol development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the NDP keeps telling us 
about this particular deal is indeed that no deal has yet been 
struck. But at this morning’s press conference there was some 
pretty specific information available to the media. 
 
They talked about the size of the plants, they talked about the 
location of those plants. They talked, Mr. Speaker, about the 
amount of money that the taxpayers could be exposed to with 
respect to this development up to $100 million. That is a huge 
expenditure of taxpayer dollars. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there was talk of a MOU 
(memorandum of understanding) being signed. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to ask the minister this question: has cabinet approved this 
deal? Mr. Speaker, has the CIC board approved this deal or is 
CIC President Frank Hart running around this province, 
committing taxpayer dollars and doing deals without the 
approval of the government’s cabinet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me ask that 
member and his colleagues: why don’t they support, why don’t 
they support the people from their communities? Why don’t 
they support the business people from Tisdale? Why don’t they 
support the business people from Melville? Why don’t they 
support the business people from Shaunavon? Why don’t they 
support the business people from Moose Jaw and Regina, all of 
whom were there? 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say to the member opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
disturbing when you have a group of business people from 
across this province who hold a press conference trying to get a 
message across that what they have been working on is a good 
thing, that they have found a private sector investor who is 
willing to invest up to 60 per cent of ethanol development. They 
have also said that they are raising money in their communities 
in order to support that 60 per . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Let’s try to get it 
down to one person speaking at a time here — just close to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — So, Mr. Speaker, let me say this to 
the people of Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Party can stand 
in this House and misrepresent the truth. They can stand in this 
House and speak half-truths, Mr. Speaker, which is what they 
do. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
see right through them. This is nothing more, this is nothing less 
than blatant politics. 
 
And I’ll tell you that this government will support the business 
people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. Member’s time 
has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, did you note . . . Did you 
note, Mr. Speaker, that he didn’t answer the question whether 
cabinet has any idea of the specifics of this deal? 
 
But I guess these kinds of deals don’t need cabinet approval 
from this government, Mr. Speaker. They’ll just go ahead and 
do the deal, pay Reg Gross $30,000 to survey the cabinet to see 
how they like the deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is about to enter into an exclusive deal; it 
appears, it appears they’re about to enter into an exclusive deal 
with Broe industries that will require millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars even though the company has no experience in ethanol. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a letter from Commercial 
Alcohols Inc. that was sent to CIC President Frank Hart earlier 
this week. Commercial Alcohols is the largest producer of 
ethanol in the country. They are interested in building plants in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and they have a concern about 
an exclusive deal between this government, Mr. Speaker, and 
any particular private company. 
 
The question to the minister is this, Mr. Speaker. How in the 
world could this government sign a deal — any deal, any 
exclusive deal — with any company that would be a 
disincentive to Canada’s largest ethanol manufacturer to invest 
in the province and grow the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite that no deals have been signed by Crown 
Investments Corporation or by this government. Mr. Speaker, 
there have been discussions with respect to what the proponents 
of investment would require and what they would desire in 
terms of a provincial government role. 
 
There have been discussions with local communities in terms of 
how much money they’d be able to raise. The Broe group of 
companies, who this member stands up and maligns, who as a 
matter of fact have operated and are operating businesses in 
northern Saskatchewan — short-line railroads, Mr. Speaker — 
the Churchill, the Port of Churchill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member should understand of what he speaks. 
These people are doing business in this province. They’re well 
respected by people like Jim Boxall. And I don’t want to raise 
his name but, Mr. Speaker, he mentioned specifically this 
morning in his remarks that these are good people. And why 
would he partner with them? Because he trusts them; they’ve 
got the capital to make things happen. Mr. Speaker, he’s not 
involved in politics the way that member is, a myopic view of 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the only group that we have a 
problem with, with respect to this deal, is this NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s who we have the problem with. They are 
. . . What might . . . The spectre of what we’re dealing with 
today is the ghost of that old potato investment, Mr. Speaker. 
These are all the same words we heard when the government 
ventured into potatoes and 28 million tax dollars later here we 
sit, Mr. Speaker, with a potato industry trying to recover. That’s 
what we’re concerned about on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Commercial Alcohols is Canada’s largest ethanol 
producer. And in this letter to Mr. Hart, they also attached a 
letter from their financial partner, RBC financial capital 
partners, Mr. Speaker, and that letter made it pretty clear. This 
company has the financial means to invest in our province and 
to grow the ethanol industry in our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll give the minister one more chance. Why 
in the world would he even consider a deal with any company, 
whatever that company might be, that would be a disincentive 
to any other Canadian manufacturer or world manufacturer of 
ethanol from investing in the province and creating jobs in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he can attack 
this government. He can attack Crown Investments 
Corporation, and he can attack every member of this caucus 
personally. He can do that. 
 
But I tell you what he does, Mr. Speaker, as well. He attacks 
business people, people who are interested in advancing 
agriculture, value-added agriculture in communities like 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

 

Shaunavon. And where does that member stand? In 
communities like Tisdale. And where does that member stand? 
In communities like Melville. I know where our member stands. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can malign us, you can malign us, and you 
can malign American investors. You can malign investors who 
have brought Canadian companies into this province. You go 
ahead, but I tell you what. You better look in your back . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask the member in 
his remarks to remind himself and to remember that all remarks 
are to be made to the Chair and not directly to any member in 
the Assembly. 
 

Drought Assistance for Livestock Producers 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. Yesterday a much needed part . . . or the 
southern part of Saskatchewan got much needed moisture 
through the form of a blizzard, but the vast majority of farm 
families are still staring at dust storms of the worst drought in 
Saskatchewan history. 
 
The cattle producers are facing an immediate crisis. There’s no 
water in the creeks and dugouts. There’s no grass in the tinder 
dry and overgrazed pastures. And there’s no carry-over feed for 
the cattle. And so far, Mr. Speaker, there is no hope of any 
assistance from the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what immediate action is the NDP government 
taking to assist the Saskatchewan cattle producers who are 
facing devastation in their industry because of the drought that 
just seems to be getting worse? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
we implemented a number of policy changes this year and last 
year to assist with the livestock producers. And I want to just 
highlight what they are, Mr. Speaker, so that the member would 
know. And I could send them over to her later so that she’d be 
able to see what they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We made adjustments, as you know, Mr. Speaker, to the crop 
insurance program, Mr. Speaker, so that we could provide for a 
forage rainfall program in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We also 
added in the program this year, Mr. Speaker, the tax referral 
portion, Mr. Speaker, so that livestock producers could set aside 
any tax revenues that they might have this year for future years. 
 
And we’ve also listed, Mr. Speaker, the number of bales and 
hay that we have in the province today. And interestingly 
enough, Mr. Speaker, today — today, May 23 — we have more 
hay that’s listed on our Web site than we had a year ago at this 
time. So there’s lots of hay, Mr. Speaker, for producers across 
the province. The access of this, Mr. Speaker, is the issue. 
That’s the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I fail 
to see how . . . I believe the tax incentive is great. But if we 
have to sell all our cattle, that’s the issue that we’re talking 
about here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cattle producers, they need help right now and 
what they don’t need are more excuses from the NDP 
government that seems happy about doing absolutely nothing. 
 
Last week the association of agriculture producers warned that 
the cattle producers are preparing to sell off between 50 and 70 
per cent of their herds if the drought persists and the 
government continues to do nothing about it. 
 
And here’s what Ryan Peterson of Peterson’s Auction Market 
in Kelvington said, and I quote: 
 

I am extremely concerned about the effect of the drought 
on the livestock industry. Farmers . . . are running out of 
feed, unable to put their cattle on pasture, unable to buy 
feed due to a shortage and coping with the lack of water in 
(the) dug-outs and (the) wells. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister demonstrate today that he 
understands the devastation that this drought is causing in our 
province? 
 
What steps is the NDP government taking to address the 
potential of a wholesale sell-off of the cattle herd of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I assure the member opposite that I’ve had 
a conversation with the Saskatchewan feeders association just at 
noon today. I’ve had a conversation with the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association in this province just yesterday. So 
I’m fully aware of what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan 
today in a major way. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, there’s a number of 
facts that she should make herself aware of, and I want to raise 
them and share them one more time. 
 
On May 1, 2000 we had in supply about 5.8 million tonnes of 
hay, in the year 2000. In May 2001, we had about 9 million 
tonnes of hay. And on May 23 . . . or May 1 of this year, we had 
14 million tonnes of hay for our producers across the province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that last year at this time we 
had the 2.325 million head of cattle. This year, Mr. Speaker, we 
have 2.235 million head of cattle — up 10,000 head over last 
year. 
 
And it’s true, Mr. Speaker, that we have a problem in 
Saskatchewan today in terms of the drought. And we’re 
working closely with livestock producers to make a difference. 
What we won’t do, Mr. Speaker, is take the plans that the 
members opposite have provided — which is no plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
Minister of Agriculture for the opportunity to say what the 
Saskatchewan Party plan will be. Because the NDP 
government’s refusal to step forward, other than to have 
meetings and talk about it, at a time when the farm families in 
the livestock business are being devastated is totally 
unacceptable. 
 
Today the Saskatchewan Party is calling on the government to 
take immediate action by committing $10 million through the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation to assist cattle producers in 
drought-stricken areas. Mr. Speaker, this funding would be 
allocated for three things: drilling new wells, digging new 
dugouts, and the purchase of more pumping equipment. Mr. 
Speaker, these three things are critical if we are to sustain the 
cattle industry in our province. 
 
Will the minister support the Saskatchewan Party plan to assist 
the struggling livestock industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Interesting position that the member 
opposite has taken and the party opposite has taken, Mr. 
Speaker. Because last year when we called on the federal 
government to provide additional $1.1 million for drought, the 
members opposite said no, we’re not supporting that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this year, when we went to the federal government and 
said we need to top up the crop insurance program, they said oh 
no, we’re not going to assist in the topping up of the crop 
insurance money because you know what, it’s all federal 
money. 
 
Today the member opposite stands on her feet and says, you 
know what, you need to pump $10 million in Saskatchewan . . . 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker, into a 
program that should be owned by the federal government. This 
is a PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) 
federal/provincial . . . federal program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite, who have turned coat by the seams . . . 
by the design over there, Mr. Speaker, it appears that we now 
have a group of men and women who are defending the federal 
government in their response, as opposed to joining forces with 
us and making the federal government participate in water 
programs which belong, Mr. Speaker, to the federal 
government, not to the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this minister better know that 
the cattle are in this province and the industry that’s being 
devastated is right here in this province. 
 
And what SaskTel is planning to do is invest $80 million in 
rural Australia. But accordingly the CIC . . . SaskTel is having 
trouble finding a partner. So, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party has yet another solution — don’t invest the 80 millions 
taxpayers’ dollars to provide cellphone service in Australia. 
Instead invest $10 million of that money in new water 
infrastructure here in our province of Saskatchewan for farm 

families here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP government finally get their 
priorities straight and instead of investing $80 million in rural 
Australia, let’s invest $10 million right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’ve heard a number of positions taken by 
that opposition party but I’ve never heard anything that’s so real 
. . . unrealistic as this statement that she made. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan we 
spend 5 per cent of our budget on agriculture, Mr. Speaker — 5 
per cent. The national government spends less . . . or just over 1 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, and the US (United States) government 
spends somewhere in the neighbourhood of 3.7 per cent. We 
spend per capita, Mr. Speaker, more money on agriculture than 
any other jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
And what happens by the members opposite when we talk 
about agriculture? They stand up and they say we should be 
taking more provincial resources and we should be dumping it 
into the Saskatchewan economy, provincial tax dollars. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, get on board — get on 
board or get out of the way. 
 
When we talk about crop insurance, we get . . . talk about crop 
insurance, you say, this should be paid for by the provincial 
government. When we talk about paying for water projects, you 
say it should be by the provincial government. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Performance of New Democratic Party Government 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, after the Devine government had 
to abandon its plans to privatize SaskEnergy, it was left as a 
government with no policy beyond stomping out fires and 
beating off alligators. Now with this government it’s déjà vu all 
over again. 
 
The minister of energy announces an ethanol policy that he says 
will be driven by private investment and will not pick winners 
and losers. He apparently doesn’t know that he’s about to be 
overruled by CIC and Points West. This province is forced to 
back off its despicable attempt to gouge nursing home residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province, wallowing in the worst economic 
stats in Canada, cannot afford a further two years of a 
government that can’t control its civil service and is routinely 
overruled by CIC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Now that the government has reached that 
terminal point of no return, are they finally going to start 
governing or are they just going to run out the clock while they 
cling to power? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, what has become 
clear to every member on this side is that governing has become 
much, much easier since that member took his rightful place . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
what’s more, that recognition has been aided by the fact that he 
hasn’t done one single thing with the federal Liberals to help us 
garner some support with respect to agriculture. What has 
become also very clear, Mr. Speaker, the ineptness that he 
evidenced over here is quite clearly the same as he does over 
there. 
 
I would ask that member to do this: stand back and have a look 
at what this province really needs from him as a member of this 
legislature. And that’s to use his federal connections to tell 
those folks that we cannot support our agriculture community 
against Washington and the European Economic Community 
alone, that that is their responsibility. He can tell them that they 
might want to look at a national mandate for ethanol that will 
help us to grow our grain industry. He might want to tell them 
that they would have another look at Kyoto and how it will 
impact on our agriculture industry and how . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I am quite prepared to accept the verdict of my 
constituents. I doubt my former colleagues are quite so 
sanguine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The people of North Battleford are highly 
unlikely to vote for a Premier who said he would be there for 
them and then wasn’t. 
 
Jim Pankiw stands a better chance of being elected chief of the 
FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) than the 
NDP in North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Prior to session beginning we were told there 
would be major pieces of legislation before us: reform of 
no-fault insurance, changes to labour standards, changes to farm 
ownership. None of them are before us. The province turns in 
the worst job creation stats in Canada and the government 
shrugs it off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Oliver Cromwell said it best: 
 

You have sat here too long for any good you have done. 
Let us be done with you. 

Will the government start governing, or in the alternative take 
Oliver Cromwell’s excellent advice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the rooster 
stands up to crow again. I sometimes believe, I sometimes 
believe that the only reason he gets up to crow in the morning is 
so that he can make the sun aware of the fact that he’s still 
around. Mr. Speaker, and the verdict of his constituents, he will 
face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s asking for legislation to be brought forward 
with respect to no-fault insurance. That he shall see very 
shortly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he is asking for a farm ownership decision and 
legislation to that regard to be made soon. He will know that it’s 
before a committee of this legislature and that decision will 
come back to this legislature and a decision will be made. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know we are in day 49 of this session. 
He has added nothing to this session in the first 49. I’m 
assuming he’ll have as much to add in the next 49 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 46? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Forty-six. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Sorry, 46. But we’re going to be 
very patient. Forty-six. I stand corrected but we’re going to be 
patient for the next 46 days to see if in fact there’s a glimmer of 
hope that he will add something to this institution during this 
session of the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, by leave of the Assembly to move a motion of referral. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION 
 

Estimates and Supplementary Estimates Referred to the 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the estimates for the Legislative Assembly, Vote 21, 
the Provincial Auditor, Vote 28, the Chief Electoral 
Officer, Vote 34, the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Vote 55, the Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate, Vote 56, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, 
Vote 57, as well as the supplementary estimates for the 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate, Vote 56, be 
withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred to 
the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave from the 
members to introduce visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to my colleagues. 
 
I should like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, a group of visitors who are seated in 
the west gallery. These visitors are from Queen Victoria Estates 
in the constituency of Regina Victoria. They’re a group of 
seven seniors. They’re accompanied by their recreation 
coordinator, Michelle Weber and their bus driver, Andy 
Lawrence. 
 
I don’t know if this is their first occasion to visit us, Mr. 
Speaker, but I sure would ask the members to make them feel 
welcome and to, in this way, ask them to come back again. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Charitable 
Fund-raising Businesses Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several charitable organizations approached the 
government in the fall of 2000 with concerns about 
questionable practices of some fundraising businesses. Some of 
the concerns raised with respect . . . Some of the concerns 
raised with respect to campaigns managed by fundraising 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, included misrepresentations by 
canvassers, lack of proper accounting for funds raised, and 
payment of door-to-door canvassers directly from donations 
received. 
 
As a result, a steering committee of charitable organizations, 
law enforcement agencies, and Justice officials was established 
to consider the concerns and options to address them. Mr. 
Speaker, the members of the steering committee have been 
involved in the development of this Bill, and I and we should all 
appreciate the time and energy they’ve devoted to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just give you a list of important community 
agencies represented on the steering committee who helped in 
the development of this Bill: The Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police; Regina Police Service; Association of Fundraising 
Professionals, the Saskatoon and Regina chapters; United Ways 
of Saskatoon, Regina, and Moose Jaw; Canadian National 

Institute for the Blind; St. Paul’s Hospital Foundation in 
Saskatoon; the University of Saskatchewan — and, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Jason Aebig is here and we thank him for the 
work that he did there — University of Regina; the 
Saskatchewan Lung Association, and, Mr. Speaker, we have 
Sharon Kremeniuk in the gallery who’s here and she did great 
work as well; Canadian Cancer Society; SaskCulture Inc.; Heart 
and Stroke Foundation; Salvation Army; the Multiple Sclerosis 
Society; Child Find Saskatchewan; the Kidney Foundation; 
Saskatchewan regional Canadian Liver Foundation; and many, 
many others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d also like to thank Linda Ens and Andrea Seale from the 
Department of Justice who are also here today for the work they 
did. 
 
The steering committee conducted consultations in the fall of 
2001 and a major recommendation of the steering committee 
was the licensing of fundraising businesses. This 
recommendation was overwhelmingly endorsed by those we 
consulted with. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to stress that most 
charitable fundraising in Saskatchewan is ethical. This Bill will 
regulate the fundraising businesses to ensure that this is the case 
for all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill will require the licensing of for-profit 
fundraising businesses which raise funds on behalf of 
Saskatchewan charities. The registrar under the Act will be able 
to require fundraising businesses to file a bond when this is 
appropriate. Once the licence has been issued, the registrar will 
have the ability to conduct audits and investigations respecting 
the financial affairs of licensees. 
 
The proposed Act will require that canvassers working for 
fundraising businesses wear identification cards, and these 
cards will include information such as the name, address, 
telephone number, and licence number of the fundraising 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also requires that the amount being paid 
to the fundraising business and to the canvasser be disclosed 
during solicitations. Further, the proposed Act will require that 
financial information, including the percentage of donations 
used for charitable purposes, be disclosed by charities upon 
request. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Act will require that there be a 
contract between the fundraising business and the charity which 
addresses specific matters set out in the Act. Specific 
information respecting costs of the fundraising and the 
remuneration of the fundraising business will have to be 
included. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the Bill includes a provision that will 
allow a charity to apply to the Court of Queen’s Bench to have 
agreements with fundraising businesses declared void as 
contrary to public policy. This will apply whether the 
agreements were entered into before or after the coming into 
force of the provision. 
 
The Bill prohibits the fundraising businesses managing 
solicitations for charities in which they have an interest or with 
which they are associated. 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re confident that this Bill will help to prevent 
abuses by some disreputable fundraising businesses and 
consequently protect not only charities but consumers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to thank the steering committee and the representatives 
who are here today for their work on this Bill, congratulate 
them on a job well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
regulate Charitable Fund-raising Businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments before adjourning debate on this 
question, Bill No. 49, The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re quite well aware of the fact that many 
charitable groups in this province have over the past few years 
found it very difficult to raise funds, especially since the 
government moved in . . . introduced gambling into the 
province of Saskatchewan, and it’s been an ongoing issue ever 
since. 
 
Some of the key organizations, or many key organizations right 
across this province that fund local recreation and local 
activities have found it very difficult to raise the funds they 
used to raise in the past. As a result, many local charitable 
groups have not been able to make the contributions they have 
for recreational groups and programs for our young people, they 
haven’t been able to make those commitments to them. 
 
And on top of that, add it to the gambling we’ve had, as the 
minister has indicated, other groups and organizations have now 
appeared on the scene and have been abusing the privileges of 
the charitable fundraising and have been calling people and 
basically misrepresenting what the whole program is all about. 
And as a result, they again, that group as well, has created a bad 
name for charitable fundraising in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it appears and would seem to my 
colleagues and I that this legislation that has been brought 
forward is certainly necessary because we have all had groups 
and individuals come to us and asking us whether or not they 
should respond to a request for funding from a phone call — a 
call that has been made via the telephone for a specific 
fundraising or a specific charity and they’re not exactly sure 
whether or not their monies are going to the appropriate source 
or to the organizations that the charity is representing, so-called 
representing. 
 
And I think we’ve seen in the past, many occasions, individuals 
that just use this form of fundraising to actually pad their 
pockets versus actually representing a sound charitable 
organization. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, what this has done, 
it has taken funds from well-thought-of organizations, it has 
taken the funding that people themselves who would dearly 
have loved to and give to an organization like the Heart and 
Stroke Foundation, for example, or the Kidney Foundation, or 
— and you name it, Mr. Speaker, the different organization — 

MS Society. 
 
So many organizations out there are trying to raise the funds to 
meet the needs of individuals. And yet as the legitimate 
organizations try to raise the funds to meet the requirements 
that are . . . and the requests that come to their desks on the 
daily basis, they find that every time they turn around and make 
a legitimate plea, people turn them off. Why? Because we have 
illegitimate groups out there who are abusing the system. 
 
And so this, from what we understand of this piece of 
legislation, the intent is to try to gain some control so that 
indeed we have the legitimate charitable organizations will 
again be able to raise the funds that are necessary to meet the 
needs of the organizations they represent and to meet the needs 
of the public in general. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I believe we need to take a little 
more careful look at this piece of legislation before we move 
forward in debate on the legislation and therefore at this time I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
your west gallery is Mr. Allan Gray of Weyburn and his stepson 
George Kalman, also of Weyburn. Mr. Gray is an old friend of 
mine, as he is a friend of the member from Moosomin as well, 
and the member from Weyburn. So I ask all members to join 
me in welcoming Allan Gray and his stepson, George Kalman, 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Animal Products 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
end of my remarks I will move second reading of amendments 
to The Animal Products Act. The proposed amendments make 
two significant changes to The Animal Products Act. It updates 
the process for appointing inspectors, and an arbitration process 
for settling disputes between the custom feeders and individuals 
having cattle custom feeders. 
 
As members may know, inspectors play an important role in our 
livestock industry by undertaking inspections in several sectors. 
For example, my department inspects livestock at markets and 
for export to help confirm ownership. The Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency inspectors are appointed as inspectors under 
the Act to enforce requirements of the dairy, poultry, and egg 
regulations. Additionally, members of the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) are inspectors under this Act. The 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

existing provisions for the appointment of livestock inspectors 
outlined in The Animal Products Act need updating to reflect 
current needs for enforcement of the Act and its regulations. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation will confirm the 
appointment of inspectors by the minister instead of through 
The Public Service Act or by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. The amendments will also facilitate appointments of 
qualified persons who are not employed by the government in 
order to deal with critical circumstances such as the control and 
movement of animals to prevent the spread of disease, as well 
as is necessary to designate the regulations to which the 
appointment applies because of the broad scope of the 
regulations under the Act. 
 
Currently, under The Animal Products Act, the animal keeper 
or person who custom cares for animals for a fee has a lien on 
those animals. The animal keeper may detain and sell the 
animals to recover his fees. The animal customs care 
regulations 1983 provide direction on process to be followed 
when animals being cared for are detained or sold. Presently, 
there is no provision in the Act or the regulations to settle 
disputes on charges for custom care other than through 
legislation. 
 
During recent consultations on amendments to the animal 
customs care regulations 1983, representatives of the producers 
and livestock dealer organizations requested that an arbitration 
process be required for settlement of disputes related to charges 
of . . . changes . . . charges for custom feeding animals. There 
was unanimous agreement for settling such disputes through 
legislation and . . . too time consuming and costly and that most 
people are reluctant to go through the courts. Mr. Speaker, the 
proposed amendments will establish such an arbitration 
procedure and consequently provide for a more cost of time 
effective manner for settling disputes. 
 
There will be a 30-day period following the sale of animals 
under the custom care lien provisions where the auction mart 
operator will distribute funds from the sale as described in these 
amendments. This 30-day period is intended to provide 
additional time for possible . . . a resolution and for the owner 
to decline on whether the arbitration process will be invoked. 
The new provisions will also describe how the funds are to be 
distributed when there is no notice of appeal filed or if one is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the amendments stated, stating 
provisions of procedures for appeals, they will also include the 
establishment of authorities for creating regulations dealing 
with deductions of expenses by the market operator, notices of 
arbitration, arbitration appointments, and proceedings of the 
determination of which provisions of The Arbitration Act apply. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment . . . commit 
that all of these proposed amendments of The Animal Products 
Act will make the provisions of the Act work better for 
Saskatchewan livestock producers. The proposed changes to the 
appointment of inspectors, Mr. Speaker, will result in a more 
responsive process that can target enforcement needs. 
 
Producers and livestock dealers will benefit from provisions for 

arbitration, as this is less costly than litigation. Additionally, the 
arbitration process being proposed in these amendments is 
consistent with general government policy of supporting dispute 
resolution through more conciliatory processes such as 
arbitration. 
 
I would like you to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Livestock 
Inspection Services Advisory Board agrees with the changes to 
the procedures for the appointment of inspectors and has 
recommended that disputes between the animal owner and the 
animal keeper be resolved through arbitration instead of 
litigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment . . . To the Legislative Assembly, I 
encourage you to adopt these amendments to The Animal 
Products Act. Therefore, I move that the amendments to The 
Animal Products Act be read a second time. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 44, The 
Animal Products Amendment Act deals, as I was listening to 
the minister, in a couple of areas that on the surface look like 
. . . would probably be pretty good changes — one with the 
appointment of inspectors to better meet the need of what we 
need for inspectors for our cattle herds. The other one is the 
whole issue of custom care and when their disputes arise. And 
instead of going through the court system, an arbitration process 
looks like it’s probably not a bad idea. 
 
It’s interesting though that this Bill would be introduced today, 
Mr. Speaker, in light of all the problems that we’re having with 
our cattle herds throughout the province. The cattle industry is 
in big trouble in this province and it was reflective in the 
questions that were asked by our critic for Agriculture, the 
member from Watrous who really hit the nail on the head and 
said that this government really has done very little for the 
cattle industry. 
 
Now this Bill . . . It’s great to have a whole number of 
inspectors and better qualified inspectors, but, Mr. Speaker, we 
could be, in a year or two, having to lay most of those 
inspectors off as our cow-calf herd is being depleted in this 
province simply because we haven’t had programs put in place 
over the last couple of years to deal with the drought situation 
that we’re facing in this province. 
 
You travel anywhere in the west side of this province, 
especially into the northern, northwest part of the province, 
Kindersley and north, and there is absolutely no pasture left 
there, very little feed left there, or anything else. And this 
government has done very little. 
 
I know the member from Cypress Hills last year had talked to 
the Minister of Agriculture and said we’re in dire straits in this 
part of the province. We need to have some programs put into 
place, because if we’re fortunate and we get a rain this fall, this 
spring, this summer, we won’t be in as rough a shape. But 
unfortunately we didn’t get any snow through the winter. They 
got very little rain through the fall, very little rain through this 
spring, and they’re in dire straits, Mr. Speaker. And the 
programs that really needed to be introduced are not there. 
 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can talk all we want about inspectors 
and improving the quality of inspectors. We can talk all we 
want about arbitration process and custom care operations. And 
those may all be very good issues, Mr. Speaker, but the issue 
that we need this government to face is the effect of the severe 
drought and the possible sell-off of cattle herds through this 
province, an industry that we need to grow and to build this 
province, and especially rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s interesting to hear the government talk so much on their 
ethanol plan and all the issues around that but, Mr. Speaker, the 
cattle industry is part of what drives that whole ethanol 
industry. 
 
And so if the government is going to put all its energies into 
dealing with the qualifications of inspectors which are good 
things, but we need to look at better programs offered to 
cattlemen throughout the province in order to maintain the 
cattle herd that we have and increase the cattle herd that we 
need to keep this province growing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, until we talk to a number of other groups 
regarding these two changes, although on the surface they look 
quite promising, we need to move to adjourn debate until that 
process of consultation has taken place. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Department of Agriculture and Food 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my 
remarks I will move second reading of the amendments to The 
Department of Agriculture and Food Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments are required in order to 
provide for the orderly administration and winding down of the 
activities of the Agri-Food Equity Fund in Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food and Rural Revitalization. 
 
The fund was created in 1994 to help establish viable 
value-added agri-food enterprises by promoting equity 
investments in Saskatchewan companies. Over time the 
Agri-Food Equity Fund invested in more than 20 projects that 
have helped expand in the province’s value-added sectors and 
create jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
The emphasis of partnering with Saskatchewan companies and 
adding value to our primary agriculture products will not be 
lost, Mr. Speaker. Though the Agri-Food Equity Fund will 
cease to make new investments, investments in Saskatchewan 
value-added initiatives will still be possible through the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
The decision was made, Mr. Speaker, to coincide with the 
realignment of the government’s responsibilities and the 
streamlining of departments and agencies announced in March 
of this year. 
 
The proposed amendments to The Department of Agriculture 
and Food Act will provide for the orderly wind-down of the 
Agri-Food Equity Fund portfolio in Saskatchewan Ag and Food 
and Rural Revitalization. The proposed amendments will allow 

for the transfer of the fund’s assets and liabilities to the Ag 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan to allow more effective 
administration and portfolio by my departments. 
 
Further, the amendments will allow for the transfer of the assets 
and liabilities from the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan to another department, agency, or Crown 
corporations where it is determined this is the best course of 
action to administer the assets and liabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other amendments are required to update some of 
the language contained in the Act and to reflect the 
department’s new name of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move that the amendments to The 
Department of Agriculture and Food Act be read a second time. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened with 
interest to the minister’s comments on An Act to amend The 
Department of Agriculture and Food Act. And it seems to be, 
part of it just basically a housekeeping change as far as a name 
change to Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization which 
would make sense to update that information and to streamline 
the names and to do with the department. 
 
The one item that is of interest of course is the winding down of 
the Ag Food Equity Fund. And I guess there’s a number of 
questions, Mr. Speaker, that one has to ask the minister and we 
will be doing that in Committee of the Whole and commenting 
on in adjourned debates about the history of the Ag Food Equity 
Fund — what was its purpose? Was it a success or a failure? 
 
And I think those are very important questions when it comes to 
spending taxpayers’ money, to see if it was a valuable 
proposition to have the fund and find out the reasons why it’s 
being wound down and, as I said, the history of the fund. 
 
And any time we hear the government — and particularly this 
government — talking about the ability to transfer funds from 
one department to another fund or another department, as I said 
here, to the Ag corporation or any other agency, department, or 
Crown corporation, you have to wonder . . . As we’ve seen the 
government what they did with the Wildlife Fund, they take the 
funds out of one department, one area to try to balance their 
budget. And so it just . . . one has to ask what’s going on with 
this transfer of funds? 
 
And so we will be keeping an eye on the government 
concerning this Bill and we will be asking many questions 
concerning this Act. And we will speak to the stakeholders 
concerning these changes and ask the industry what they think 
about the ag fund, Agri-Food Equity Fund, and whether they 
believe it should be wound down and what they feel, whether 
it’s been a success or a failure. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 
conclusion of my remarks, I will move second reading of The 
Farm Financial Stability Act, 2002. 
 
The first set of amendments to this Act was introduced to the 
members of the Assembly earlier in this session. These 
amendments focused on clarifying the facts that livestock 
purchased by the feeder/breeder/livestock association are the 
property of the association rather than the individual. The 
amendments that are being introduced today, Mr. Speaker, will 
deal with part 5 . . . or part 6 of the Act which governs the 
administration of the production association loan guarantees. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, section 6 of the Act defines the 
producers as the individual who is a Saskatchewan resident at 
least 18 years of age. The amendments we are introducing 
today, Mr. Speaker, will allow the corporation that operates 
feedlots to be eligible for membership within the association. 
Association membership would allow feedlots to source 
funding through the livestock loan guarantee program to which 
they currently do not have access. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to the expansion of 
the livestock production which has tremendous potential to 
grow in Saskatchewan. Feedlot operations have an important 
role to play in this growth. These amendments will recognize 
their critical role and give feedlots greater access to capital 
through the livestock loan guarantee program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these proposed amendments came about as a 
result of meetings between the government and the 
representative livestock associations throughout the province. 
They support these changes, Mr. Speaker, which are good news 
for the feedlot operators and for our livestock industry overall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these specific changes to the Act are as follows: 
section 41 will be amended to include a corporation within the 
definition of producer as well as adding a definition for 
feedlots; sections 45 and 50 will be revised to include feedlots 
as locations where producer members can grow, use, finish, or 
produce commodities; section 45 will be changed to clarify that 
guaranteed fees are not required; and section 46 to 49 will be 
revised to include feedlots as corporate members. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Section 59 will be amended to indicate that the requirements for 
the release of the assurance funds are prescribed according to 
the category producer. And section 61 will be changed to allow 
regulations to set forth rules for corporations to participate in a 
producer association, prescribe information that is required by 
the provincial supervisor and/or lending institution, prescribe 
minimum load amounts for different categories and producers 
and producers’ associations, and prescribe the time and amount 
of contributions of each category of producer. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, and the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, I encourage you to adopt the members of 
The Farm Financial Stability Act, and therefore I move that The 
Farm Financial Stability Act, 2002 be read a second time. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
respond to the second reading of The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt, while this Act is entitled The 
Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, that agriculture today 
is in many cases in a state of chaos, and it’s a lack . . . because 
of lack of leadership of this government. 
 
And the reason we have this type of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is 
because the government rushed headlong into an industry and 
into creating an industry without taking the time to make sure 
that they had covered . . . crossed all the t’s and dotted all the i’s 
to make sure that there were the protections in place so that 
feeder associations would not be in the dilemma they are today 
as a result of government legislation. 
 
And I think what it points out, Mr. Speaker, it points out the 
fact that every time this government gets involved in something 
they rush headlong without taking the time to sit back and 
assess the avenues that they should follow, the consultation that 
would be maybe appropriate to be made in order to come up 
with a policy that is . . . certainly works, that is viable, and that 
doesn’t produce . . . that doesn’t put producers at risk. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I have seen — certainly have seen it in 
my constituency and many of my colleagues have — where 
individuals have gotten involved in feeder associations only to 
find because of the lack of protection in the old legislation that 
financial institutions have come against their own personal 
property rather than the property of the feeder association that 
they were a member of. 
 
And it’s put a lot of families at risk and it’s put a lot of families 
in very difficult circumstances and situations. And as a result 
we have this piece of legislation before us as well as the Act, 
2002, No. 1, that was, as the minister indicated, brought 
forward earlier in the session. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that my colleagues and I 
have been consulting with the government. We’ve consulted — 
probably individually, I have on a number of occasions — with 
the minister, asking the minister to address the problems in the 
former feeder association legislation so that individuals who 
became members of these feeder co-ops would not be held at 
risk. 
 
And as the minister has indicated, the current legislation before 
us, The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2002 appears 
to try and cover up some of those loopholes and areas where the 
original legislation really didn’t protect the investors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I believe the minister indicated that they 
are allowing . . . will allow associate membership so that it 
allows these feeder associations avenues whereby they can 
access additional funds to make their associations viable and get 
them off the ground and up and running. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at businesses — and whether it’s a 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

 

feeder association, whether it’s a small business in a local 
community, whether it’s a co-operative of some form or other 
that takes a lot of capital dollars to get up and running — and 
any time you start something new, Mr. Speaker, it takes capital 
dollars and it takes time for these associations to get their feet 
on the ground, well-established to the point that they start to 
really generate the revenue for their members so that they can 
start paying out their members in dividends to their membership 
to keep this association up and running. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to realize that. We need to realize 
that a feeder co-op will not in one year be the be-all and the 
end-all or will it generate the types of revenue and the income 
that the investors believed they could have at the end of maybe 
a five- or ten-year period as they invest their capital funding, as 
they build their co-op, and as they build their facility to invest 
in and actually promote the cattle feeding industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as a result of the original pieces of legislation, some 
members found that there wasn’t a long enough period of time 
to allow these co-ops to really get themselves into a positive 
financial picture. And as a result, on many occasions, many of 
the lending institutions became somewhat leery of these 
co-operatives because of the actions of say the individuals who 
were spearheading the co-operatives and the lack of real 
financial direction in the co-operatives. 
 
So it’s . . . it was imperative that the government come forward 
with some new legislation to address the problems that were in 
the original feeder co-ops and make sure that there was some 
stability brought to these feeder programs. 
 
Because as we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, many people across this 
province, once they looked at the concept, liked the idea, liked 
the concept, believed when they were investing in feeder co-ops 
that they had protection, that their investment was going to be 
protected, that their personal, private operation was not going to 
be affected by those co-ops. And unfortunately, as we’ve seen 
in the past little while, many of these individual investors all of 
a sudden found that there was no protection there. Therefore the 
need for The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2002, 
vote nos. 1 and no. 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, my colleagues and I have had a 
number of calls to our offices regarding these feeder co-ops and 
I think it would be imperative that we take the time to review 
these two pieces of legislation to determine that . . . or to assess 
whether or not they are meeting all the needs that are out there, 
the problems that have arisen, and indeed that they will address 
the concerns so that at the end of the day we don’t have to come 
and repair something that we didn’t do a total job of in the past, 
as the government did originally when they brought in the 
feeder association co-op legislation. 
 
And so therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 30 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 30 — The Liquor 
Consumption Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today and speak to the second reading of the liquor 
consumption tax, Bill No. 30. The liquor consumption tax 
moves the tax on consumption from 7 to 10 per cent. It has been 
touted by this government that this is a 3 per cent increase when 
in fact it is a 43 per cent increase on liquor consumption. 
 
Too often we think, Mr. Speaker, of this kind of tax as virtually 
a victimless tax increase and it certainly is not. It affects many 
people in our province, Mr. Speaker. The minister . . . I would 
like to quote a few lines from the minister’s quotes when he 
was giving the second reading when he introduced the Bill, and 
he said, and I quote from the minister: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the liquor consumption tax . . . has not been 
amended since . . . 1991, at which time it was in fact 
decreased from 10 per cent to 7 per cent and now it’s going 
back up to 10 per cent. It was decreased in 1991 because 
the government of that day wished to harmonize (the) 
Saskatchewan sales tax with the GST and they lowered the 
tax rate in anticipation of the harmonization . . . 
 

And he goes on to say further down, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

. . . the people of Saskatchewan spoke out and made it clear 
that they did not want to harmonize their taxes with the 
federal government’s. 

 
Which was all very true, Mr. Speaker, that harmonization was 
certainly not a popular issue. But to put these two pieces of 
logic together is somehow very twisted. 
 
The minister seems to be making the assumption that because 
people did not want harmonization in 1991, that somehow that 
makes it valid for him now to raise the consumption tax up to 
10 per cent, an increase of 43 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I, plus 
many people in this province, fail to see the logic or the 
connection between these two issues. This is some 10 years 
ago, has nothing to do with what’s going on today, certainly has 
nothing to do with the negative effect that this tax increase is 
going to have on hotel owners and the people that they serve, 
the employees and so on, in their communities. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I find it very hard to believe that the 
minister would try and put these two pieces of logic together to 
justify this government raising the tax from 7 to 10 per cent to 
raise $15.6 million in added revenue and to use this as the logic 
for doing that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I . . . the most important part of this is the 
negative impact that this liquor consumption tax is going to 
have on local communities. In the local communities, it’s going 
to negatively impact the hotel and bar owners. But it is also 
going to negatively impact the employees of these 
establishments and the community as a whole. 
 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to refer to some of the 
concerns that the hotel and bar owners of this province have 
with the huge increases that they have seen since March 1. And 
first of all, they had an increase from the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming of 40 cents and this was on 12-dozen pack of beer. 
And then they seen an increase from the breweries of 30 cents. 
Then they seen the consumption tax go from 7 to 10 per cent 
which for their industry was a 43 per cent increase. 
 
And they also were hit with the Bill . . . Bill 56 to do with 
tobacco legislation which impacted on their business as well. 
And they’ve also been hit with the increase in minimum wage 
which is a very direct impact on their industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in the hotel association and that operate 
bars throughout this province are very frustrated with this 
government and being . . . and they’re frustrated because they 
have been singled out as an industry to pay a huge price for this 
government’s mismanagement over the years and their 
desperate attempt to have to find cash to balance this budget in 
March. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen that in many cases the hotel 
industry is one of the largest tax contributors in their 
community, and with the loss of that industry it would be very 
detrimental to many small towns and communities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And not only is it important from a tax . . . the taxes that it 
contributes and the employment that it provides, it also is a very 
major gathering spot in their communities. In many cases it is 
the only place where local people can come together and see 
each other, to discuss issues of their community, and to keep a 
bond for their community. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this tax increase comes on top of a 
reassessment that we’ve seen throughout the province. And in 
many cases hotels across this province seen by far the largest 
reassessment and were hit a lot harder than many industries. 
And they feel that they have been very unequally set out in this 
regard as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve also been hit with an ongoing 
increase in utilities, power, and SaskTel, energy, and, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a monopoly in this province. They have no 
option and they feel very . . . that they’ve been hit very hard by 
the increase in utilities as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government’s negative attitude toward 
private enterprise and their unwillingness to stop the attack on 
private business and the province’s employers is totally out of 
control. And people in business in this province are coming to 
the realization that this government will do whatever it takes in 
order to balance their books and to meet their ends and 
disregard the well-being of their industries and the people that 
they employ. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the decline in population in rural 
Saskatchewan, because of this government’s policies, the hotel 
and bars in these small towns have also seen a decline in the 
labour pool that they have to draw from and also it is very hard 
for them to actually retain employers because of the smallness 
of the community, and they have just had a very tough struggle 

in the whole issue of hiring people and in retention of 
employees. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would just like to read from a 
couple of letters that we have received from people that operate 
hotels and bars in the province because I believe that they tell 
the story as well as anyone and I would just as soon give it to 
the legislature in their words rather than my own. And so at this 
time I’d like to quote from the first letter, and this letter is from 
a hotel owner in a small town in Saskatchewan. And I quote: 
 

Just a small note to inform you what the Government of 
Saskatchewan has done to destroy my business since March 
1, 2002. I am sure my views will represent the views of 
many hotel owners in your constituency. 

 
On March 1, 2002, SLGA increased the cost of beer by 40 
cents per dozen followed by a 30 cent increase by the 
breweries. On March 11, 2002, the government 
implemented their tobacco control legislation requiring my 
business to designate 30 per cent of my hotel’s seating as 
non-smoking. Then on March 27, the Finance minister 
announced a 42.9 per cent increase in the liquor 
consumption tax. 
 
Due to the government’s assault on my business since 
March 1, 2002, we have been forced to raise our table 
prices from 2.75 to 3.25 per bottle of beer. This increase 
has forced our customers to boycott the business, thinking 
it is our increase not the government’s. From a $3.25 beer, 
the brewers receive $1.25, the provincial government 
received 96 cents, the federal government receives 41 
cents, and my lowly hotel receives 63 cents. A 
waiter/waitress earning $8 per hour has to serve 13 table 
beer per hour just to cover his or her wages. In small town 
Saskatchewan you are lucky to sell five table beer per hour. 
 
On April 20, 2002, my hotel was forced to lay off one 
employee earning $8 an hour due to the lack of business 
brought on by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
Unfortunately on April 27, the hotel will lay off another 
employee also earning $8 per hour due to the government’s 
assault on the hotel industry. Finally by July 1, I expect to 
close the business and walk away with larger loss. 
 
When is the Government of Saskatchewan going to wake 
up? When is the Saskatchewan Party going to take them to 
task over this issue? 

 
And this is signed from one of the hotel association . . . or one 
of the hotel owners in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read another letter which reiterates 
what I’ve been speaking about and the assault on the hotel 
industry by this liquor consumption as well as other policies of 
this government. And the letter reads: 
 

Every hotelier, every nightclub owner, every billiard hall 
owner, every lounge and licensed restaurant owner in the 
province of Saskatchewan has sinned. We serve alcohol. 
We allow smoking. We provide VLTs to the general public 
and, God help us, we do on occasion supply an atmosphere 
to socialize with friends and comrades. 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

 

We have sinned. And for our penance, we will now pay a 
modest 3 per cent increase in the liquor consumption tax 
and a modest increase on tobacco. By the way, we means 
you, the purveyors of all evil in this province because this 
modest tax increase must be passed on to the evil customers 
who frequent these seedy establishments. 
 
Oh, and by the way, this is how the modest 3 per cent 
increase works. For every $1,000 we used to send to the 
government, now we send in $1,429. Let me just get my 
country calculator out here and figure that out. My God, 
Ethel, that seems to work out to a 42 per cent increase. 
Where did that Cline fellow get his calculator? Is that 
fellow cooking the books, Ethel? 
 
How are we going to retire now, Henry? 
 
We’ll have to move to Alberta, Ethel, because that Cline 
fellow just put our rent up from $1,800 a month to 3,800 a 
month. 
 
How many percentage point is that, Henry? 
 
Well let me see. That would depend on whose calculator 
you are using. 

 
As a hotelier in the province of Saskatchewan for the past 
18 years, I would like to remind the Government of 
Saskatchewan of a few things. There are 6,000 people 
employed in the hospitality industry in Saskatchewan. As 
an industry, we are the number one employer of women in 
the province and the number one employer of single 
mothers in the province. We are also the number one 
employer of visible minorities in the province. In rural 
Saskatchewan, we are, in many cases, the largest employer 
of staff in the community. As an industry, we are the 
highest ratepayers in every community for property taxes in 
the province. 

 
Here are some other interesting points. Last year the 
government collected $115 million from hotels in this 
province and 99 million from the lounges, nightclubs, and 
billiard halls through the VLT program. They also collected 
$35 million in liquor consumption tax, 60 per cent of which 
came from the hotels of this province. This figure will now 
be 50 million. 

 
Again, let me get my country calculator out. My God, 
Ethel, that still works out to 42.9 per cent increase in the 
liquor consumption tax. 
 
In April of 2001, the government sat down with the Hotels 
Association of Saskatchewan to discuss ways of raising 
more income in the liquor and gaming industry. In 
November, after spending thousands of dollars, the hotel 
association produced a comprehensive plan that would 
allow licences to sell off-sale liquor at retail prices. The 
projections done by the hotel association indicated a profit 
of $17 million in tax dollars. This plan would also allow for 
added services to rural Saskatchewan and employ more 
people in the industry. It, however, would allow hotels to 
compete with the government-owned liquor stores. 
 

We as an association were told that this plan would be 
discussed and that a decision would be handed down in 
January. By the end of February, the hotel association had 
still received no answer. Is this sounding familiar to some? 
 
On March 1, 2002 the government announced a 40-cent 
increase to a dozen beer and also a mandatory 30 per cent 
no smoking area in every bar and lounge in the province. 
 
On March 25, 2002 at the annual convention of the hotel 
association, the CEO (chief executive officer) of the Liquor 
and Gaming Commission assured the executive of the hotel 
association that she would work with us and help solve any 
problems in our industry. On March 27, the government 
announced a modest 3 per cent hike in the liquor . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. While it’s customary to 
accept quotations in this Assembly, usually we try to ask 
members to keep them to a fairly reasonable length and then 
make a comment or two about the relevance of the quotation. I 
find that the member has gone on extensively and I would ask 
her to bring it around to the topic. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
been quoting from the hotel association, from this member. I 
believe that they have very relevant concerns about the 
detriment of this tax as well as other policies to their industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hotel association is not only concerned about 
the well-being of themselves as private business owners, but 
they’re concerned about the employment in the communities 
that they reside in. Many of them, as this gentleman has laid 
out, are long-time residents of Saskatchewan, long-time 
business owners in the hotel association. They have an interest 
in keeping their communities viable. 
 
This tax along with many other of the policies of this 
government are adding great burden to this industry, Mr. 
Speaker. And in many cases it could mean the demise of this 
industry in many small towns. It will be a very sad day when 
we see that these industries have to close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to just wrap up my remarks by 
quoting from this letter, the last paragraph, which is very short, 
Mr. Speaker. And it says: 
 

You have insulted our industry with your arrogance. You 
don’t lie to us, you just don’t tell us the truth. This is, as we 
say out here in the country, the last straw. Trouble is 
brewing. 
 
Ethel, get me that calculator, I’ve got to start adding up 
how many sinful people there are left in this province. Let 
me punch in 60,000 to start with and then we can add in all 
of our sinful customers. 
 
Henry, should we add in them elderly folk too? And how 
about all them there small-business folks as taxes have 
doubled in the past few years? 
 
Yes, Ethel, I think we can count them in too. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this letter I would like to submit is from 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

Claude Bellefleur who owns the Lumsden Hotel as well as the 
Royal Hotel in Weyburn, Saskatchewan. I think Mr. Bellefleur 
speaks on behalf of many hotel associations, many hotel 
owners, and many of their employers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the government believes that they can get 
away with this major tax by using social arguments, Mr. 
Speaker, when this is clearly a tax grab by a government that 
was desperate for funds to balance their budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is very clear by the evidence that we had 
just a week ago, an issue that we brought up in the House about 
the booklet that was put out with the price list for liquor outlets 
in the province that received the booklet on April 1 and just two 
days . . . or one day later it was reprinted after the budget was 
released. So this clearly was a last-minute decision by this 
government to find much needed cash. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while we are letting this go to committee 
today, I think it is important that we do recognize in this 
Assembly, like most tax increases, there is a downside to this 
particular one, especially to hotel owners, to the communities 
that depend on the hotels for their tax base, and the people in 
those local communities that depend on it for jobs, and also to 
most people in the communities that depend on these small 
hotels for a gathering point, a focal point for their community. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 31 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 31 — The Tobacco 
Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak to the Bill No. 31, tobacco tax amendment which 
is again, Mr. Speaker, as the last Bill that I spoke to about 
liquor consumption tax, it is to raise taxes in this province. At 
this . . . only this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to raise approximately 
60.5 million annually by increasing the tax on cigarettes from 
8.8 cents to 16 cents and on loose tobacco from 7.7 cents to 16 
cents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we see a government that was desperate 
for cash and went after another industry in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be letting this go to committee today, but 
my hope is that we will look past the fact that this . . . that we 
will look at the fact that this was a tax . . . a cash grab from a 
government that is running a deficit and was looking for dollars 
to balance their budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also see some positive points to this Bill, and 
we would hope that there will be a positive side which will be 
that people will either cut back their amount of smoking or 
completely quit. 

Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege to be on the Tobacco 
Committee last year. And, Mr. Speaker, the Tobacco 
Committee was especially formed to look at two specific issues: 
one was the detrimental effect of second-hand smoke; and the 
second one was to look at youth smoking in Saskatchewan and 
find ways to stop youth from smoking. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that this Bill would . . . the 
increase in tax would help towards the decrease in youth 
smoking because it was much to my dismay when the 
legislation was brought in on the tobacco Bill that really the 
whole part about youth and stopping them from smoking was 
somehow missed in the legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, what it 
did however, was put the onus on business owners to somehow 
be the . . . be in charge of stopping youth from smoking and if 
they didn’t, that they would be fined and that they would be 
reprimanded for what they were doing in legitimately selling a 
legal item in this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that this Bill will have a 
positive effect in that it will stop youth from smoking. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in committee we will want to know how the 
government will track the rate of smoking in our society with 
this huge hike in tobacco tax and we would like to see within a 
year and every year thereafter how the effects of this tax have 
indeed helped to minimize smoking in Saskatchewan. And we 
especially hope that it will show that there has been a decrease 
in youth smoking in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to say that we 
will move this Bill to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No 35 — The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments regarding the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
Bill No. 35. And in the case of this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, however while the last two pieces of legislation were 
allowed to move to committee, this piece of legislation has a 
little more meat to it and it’s certainly something that I believe 
this Assembly and my colleagues and I need to take the time to 
look at more closely and review before we ever allow it to 
move to committee. 
 
And why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? It’s because of the fact 
that the government is basically changing the rules in 
midstream. 
 
Two years ago when the government came forward with 
provisions to create this Act requiring that 5 per cent of the 
government revenue over a four-year period be put in this 
so-called fund, the reason for the Act was to set up what I 
believe the minister called was a rainy day fund that would be 
available to government when situations arose that government 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

 

found themselves somewhat in a fiscal bind, that they could 
draw on this Fiscal Stabilization Fund to meet the expenditures 
or the needs of government. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, no doubt we’re living at a time in this 
province when, if there was some real money sitting in that 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, there’s certainly a critical situation 
facing agriculture producers in this province — namely the 
livestock industry —in a good portion of the province, that 
unfortunately didn’t receive the rain and the snow that the 
southern part received last night which will go a long ways to 
begin assisting the growth of rangeland and grass and supplies, 
water supplies, so that livestock producers can get their cattle 
out to grazing rather than having to spend more money to buy 
feed. 
 
However, a good majority of the producers of this province are 
still looking for feed. They’re in the process of trying to find 
pasture for their livestock. And in many cases, where there is 
some pastures, producers are finding that they don’t have access 
to water. They lack water and, as a result, they are unable to use 
those facilities because of the long distances to haul water. 
 
And as you heard this afternoon in question period, my 
colleagues and I came forward with a suggestion to government 
that they put in place or they look at a means of addressing 
some of the problems for the livestock sector today rather than 
risk the wholesale sell-off of some of the cow-calf herd in this 
province which we’ve been working so diligently to build in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that would . . . The problems that the livestock 
sector is facing right now would be a good legitimate area for 
this government to draw on this so-called Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. And I believe it goes to the comments the minister made 
back on May 3. He said the amendments are quite simple really, 
they would allow access to money saved in previous years and 
help smooth out recent fiscal fluctuations. 
 
These funds are necessary to continue to provide services to the 
public without imposing excessive tax increases. And certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, we agree with that. And my colleague, the 
member from Weyburn, was just talking about the fact that the 
previous two Bills allowed the government to actually, through 
taxes, raise more funds because they’re starved in their General 
Revenue Fund to meet — with the funds that are necessary — 
to meet the ongoing needs of government. 
 
The minister talked about, under the legislation as it stands, the 
government would be required to leave $298 million in the 
savings account at the end of this fiscal year, even if there were 
public needs. And that’s what the minister said on May 3 under 
the legislation that was introduced two years ago to set up the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that would be fine if there were actually 
$298 million in the fund. That’s one thing — the fact that the 
fiscal fund hasn’t got any money. 
 
In debate last session the member from Canora-Pelly in debate 
with the Minister of Finance asked the minister where the fiscal 

dollars actually were sitting, this big Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
If you were to access it today, where was the money? And the 
minister got up and said well there actually isn’t . . . aren’t any 
physical dollars there because they’re supposedly being used to 
help pay down debt, and meet the ongoing needs of 
government. 
 
So on one hand, Mr. Speaker, this government talks about 
changing the rules, but you have to ask yourself why would 
they be changing the rules about a Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
which doesn’t have any money in it? If, indeed, as the minister 
said, the rules need to be changed so the government can access 
funds when they find themselves in a fiscal need, it would be 
one thing if the money was actually there for them to access. 
 
So I guess, Mr. Speaker, all we can determine is the fact that if 
by changing the rules the government can continue its 
jiggery-pokery of balancing the books by supposedly accessing 
a fund that has no money, and if indeed as this piece of 
legislation enables the government to do so, what it does, Mr. 
Speaker, is basically says to the government they’ll go to the 
. . . the Minister of Finance will go to this Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund; he’ll tell the people of the province there’s some 2 or 
$300 million there, and we’ve got this drought on our hands so 
we’re going to draw a little bit of money out of that fund. But 
the reality is they’ll just be borrowing money against the fund 
because of the fact it doesn’t exist. So one has to ask, why 
change the rules? Why if . . . when the fund has no money in it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other problem with changing the rules is under 
the current rules, Mr. Speaker, what it does is requires a debate 
in the Legislative Assembly, and that’s what the government 
wants to get away from. They don’t want the accountability of 
how they’re spending the taxpayers’ dollars. If something 
comes up that they feel that they would like to invest in without 
having any public input and debate, that if this . . . With the 
changes to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund the minister and the 
government would just be able to access those funds right now, 
and basically say see . . . say to the people of Saskatchewan, see 
what we’ve done for you today; say to rural Saskatchewan, see 
what we have been able to do for you in this difficult times, and 
despite what the Minister of Agriculture would say, despite 
what the federal Liberal government fails to do for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that we certainly feel is 
necessary. It’s important that we do have the debate. It’s 
important that we have a debate in this Assembly to determine 
how government is spending the money. 
 
Now I guess basically what government’s doing is going back 
to the late ’70s of covering . . . or of hiding the debt in the 
Crowns, or hiding the debt someplace else, and presenting a 
balanced budget when the overall expenditures of government 
are actually in a deficit position and, as we see this year, 
continue to be in a deficit position. In fact, Mr. Speaker, a 
growing deficit in the province of Saskatchewan when the 
government likes to talk about fiscal restraint and responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the education . . . or the Minister of Learning 
talks about Moody’s. Well I’m not exactly sure what 
information Moody’s gets to make their decisions on but I’m 
sure if they talked to the Provincial Auditor, they would come 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

out with a different position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly feel it’s imperative that the people of 
Saskatchewan know exactly what this government is doing and 
know exactly which cards they’re pulling from underneath the 
deck so that we know exactly where we’re going and what the 
fiscal responsibilities and fiscal problems in this province are so 
the people of Saskatchewan know exactly what they’re facing. 
 
So we have many questions regarding the changes to this fund 
and we have to ask ourselves, why would the government be 
changing this fund right now when they were the ones who 
implemented the fiscal stabilization plan, when they were the 
ones who basically said we need to set aside for a rainy day, 
when they were the ones who said we need to have an 
accountability factor there and that’s why it had to come back to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now all of a sudden, there’s no accountability factor because 
it’ll be wide open. With this legislation, it just allows . . . it 
allows Executive Council just to make a decision. They need 
some money today, they need to help the Minister of Learning 
so they just go to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund regardless of 
what the public of Saskatchewan think about how they’re 
spending the money. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we do have a number of 
questions. We feel it’s time that we . . . this government became 
more open and forthright with their, with their . . . the way they 
manage the finances of this province. We have to question why 
they would change the Fiscal Stabilization Fund at this time, 
why they are moving in this direction to change their own 
legislation. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe this piece of legislation 
demands more thought, more debate. We need to take more 
time to look at it more carefully to determine and to get a better 
understanding of where the government is really going on . . . 
with . . . in regards to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. And 
therefore, at this time, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 36 — The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon to make a few comments on the 
changes that have been proposed by the Minister of Finance 
surrounding the corporation capital tax that we have in this 
province, one of the most arguably . . . Mr. Speaker, one of the 
most regressive taxes that governments use to hold businesses 
back from investing in a jurisdiction. And certainly the 
corporate capital tax in Saskatchewan is one of the most 
regressive in Canada. It certainly has, as we’ve seen over the 
years, certainly restricted business in Saskatchewan. 
 
And apparently it was said, Mr. Speaker, in the budget speech 
and again in the Throne Speech I heard . . . understand from the 

Minister of Finance that this tax was going to be looked at and 
addressed to some small degree. Certainly we also, we 
understand on this side of the House, this significantly 
regressive tax and its holding back of the Saskatchewan 
economy needs to be looked at. 
 
Of course those of us on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
have certainly proposed that this tax needs to be addressed 
radically. Investment in Saskatchewan is lagging significantly 
behind the rest of the country and it’s taxes such as the 
corporate capital tax that do that, Mr. Speaker. They do restrict 
investment because that’s what it is. It’s an attack on 
investment. It taxes those corporations who try to bring 
investment into provinces such as Saskatchewan so that we can 
create the jobs and the wealth that is necessary to grow 
Saskatchewan, and grow Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, by 
100,000 people over the next 10 years. 
 
But what is most interesting, what is most really interesting 
about this, this Bill, this Bill No. 36, The Corporation Capital 
Tax Amendment Act, 2002, Mr. Speaker, is the wavering that is 
in it. It wavers significantly from the budget speech. 
 
The budget speech spoke clearly about increasing the 
exemption by 50 per cent — 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, from $10 
million for large corporations to $15 million. And then all of a 
sudden, the Bill comes out and talks about it and what it talks 
about is not having legislation surrounding exemptions for the 
corporate capital tax, but regulations surrounding the corporate 
capital tax. 
 
So in fact what’s going to happen is that the bureaucrats in this 
province, those . . . the people who have been appointed into 
positions of power by this government, this NDP government, 
Mr. Speaker, are going to be making the decisions who gets the 
exemption to $15 million and which corporations are going to 
stay at $10 million. They’re going to create a formula, Mr. 
Speaker, that is going to be able to deal with how corporations 
are going to be able to apply to this government and ask for 
permission to get an exemption of as high as $15 million. 
 
Is this how we attract investment? No, Mr. Speaker, it is not 
how we attract investment into this province. Corporations that 
are looking at moving here, probably more specifically — and 
we heard significant discussion on that in the House today 
surrounding this ethanol production, Mr. Speaker — what kind 
of a corporation is going to want to move here and create 
wealth and invest in this province when they’re not sure where 
the taxation levels are going to be? What we see with this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, is that this government is looking at creating an 
unfair playing field. They’re going to be picking winners and 
losers. 
 
One company may want to come in here and set up ethanol 
production. Their corporate capital tax exemption may be 15 
million. This government in their wisdom would maybe decide 
they want to favour another company and set their corporate 
capital tax at 10 million. And so what it’s going to create is an 
unlevel playing field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, a government that is quite willing to pick winners and 
losers. And we certainly see that in this Bill when they’re going 
to create a formulary to decide who gets 15 million and who 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

 

gets less than that as a deduction. 
 
And so then how do we allow corporations in Canada who are 
already involved in the ethanol industry interested in moving to 
Canada . . . or moving to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
investing, investing in this province with their own dollars 
rather than using taxpayer dollars to create wealth in this 
province and certainly to create jobs? Instead what we hear 
from the NDP government, Mr. Speaker, is they’re saying, well 
come on in, come on in, we’re going to invite you in but you 
have to play by our rules, and here is the rules. 
 
We may tax you heavier than someone else who’s already in 
this field of business. We may set the corporate capital tax 
exemption at 10 million for you. But someone that we favour, 
we favour very highly, maybe as an example an American 
corporation that has no experience — no experience, Mr. 
Speaker, in the ethanol industry — we’re going to set their 
corporate capital tax exemption at 15 million. 
 
So how does that create a level playing field? And why would 
anybody then want to come to Saskatchewan and invest? 
 
Well we suggest, Mr. Speaker, that with this kind of unfairness 
and this uncertainty that this Bill is going to bring to businesses, 
large businesses, surrounding the corporate capital tax that 
they’re going to have to pay, is that that uncertainty is going to 
drive away corporations from coming to Saskatchewan to 
invest, bring their dollars here to invest in Saskatchewan, create 
the jobs and create the wealth that we talk about so freely on 
this side of the House, where we have the opportunity to maybe 
create 100,000 opportunities or more people, 100,000 more 
people in Saskatchewan over the next 10 years. 
 
This government talks about this tax being a tax, this corporate 
capital tax being a tax on wealth. Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing 
could be further from the truth. The fact of the matter is wealth 
has nothing to do with this tax. It’s a tax on investment. 
 
If you’re going to come to Saskatchewan and invest in 
Saskatchewan, we’re going to tax you. We’re going to stop you 
from bringing your tax dollars to Saskatchewan. And that’s 
what we see with this Bill. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And so by bringing a Bill that is going to be unfair to those 
people who want to come and invest in Saskatchewan, it’s 
going to drive away investment as this government has done 
since — their name change, in their predecessor, the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) — since 1944 and 
certainly most prevalently since the years of . . . the year of 
1947 when they started to drive the oil industry out of this 
province in droves. 
 
And so what we see then, Mr. Speaker, is because of taxes like 
the corporate capital tax and its variations from anywhere from 
10 to $15 million — we don’t know where that’s going to be, 
what corporations are going to be looked upon more favourably 
than other corporations — is that what we have here then is, 
why would anyone want to come and invest in Saskatchewan 
when they know that their investment is going to be taxed? That 
they know that before they create 1 cent of profit, before they 

create 1 cent of profit, Mr. Speaker, that this government is 
going to attack their investment. 
 
It is this kind of an attitude that drives corporate investment 
from Saskatchewan that wanted to come here. These corporate 
investment dollars wanted to come to Saskatchewan but this 
government is so adamant that this money does not come here 
that they’re actually driving it to other jurisdictions. 
 
So we see to the east and to the west, whether it’s Alberta or 
British Columbia or Manitoba or Ontario, or even south into the 
United States of America, corporations are looking to invest 
elsewhere even though, Mr. Speaker, that they know that the 
province of Saskatchewan is one of the most resource rich 
jurisdictions in the world. One of the most resource rich 
jurisdictions in the world, Mr. Speaker — I can’t repeat that 
strongly enough. 
 
And what we have here is a government, through the type of 
taxation, this corporate capital tax, attacking . . . those people 
who come to this province and want to invest in this province 
and create opportunity and hope in this province and actually 
grow this province are being forced to go elsewhere because of 
the restrictions of Bills such as this one, Bill No. 36, the 
corporation capital tax. 
 
And so we kind of wonder why in the budget speech the 
minister, the Minister of Finance, promised that he was going to 
raise the exemption for businesses surrounding the corporation 
capital tax from $10 million to $15 million. And then the Bill 
comes out and we see a changing of the mind. The Minister of 
Finance has changed his mind that maybe you’ll get the $15 
million exemption and maybe you won’t. Maybe we’ll leave 
you at $10 million. And it’s going to be based upon a hidden 
formulary that we’re not going to be able to get to see. It’s 
going to be controlled outside this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These kind of taxes that are so significant . . . and in fact it is 
quite significant because even the Minister of Finance admitted 
that this brings significant dollars to the Saskatchewan treasury. 
And it brings such significant dollars he didn’t even know how 
much it was. He was . . . even in his speech when he introduced 
during the second reading The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002, he actually talked about it, he didn’t 
know how much it brings. He can only give a rough estimate; 
it’s that large of a tax. Not understanding — not understanding, 
Mr. Speaker — that this kind of tax is actually regressive and 
you can create more tax wealth, Mr. Speaker, in a province by 
almost eliminating this tax and allowing corporations that come 
here and invest dollars, create jobs. 
 
And what will happen, Mr. Speaker, then because of the wealth 
that’s created by more people working in this province, by the 
more . . . wealth that’s created by these corporations and paying 
it through personal income tax, corporate income tax, the PST 
(provincial sales tax) that’ll be collected on the spending by the 
consumers in this province as we get more consumers, the 
royalties that are created — whether it’s in forestry or mining or 
the energy sector — is that they’ll actually create more wealth, 
more wealth than the amount that the minister said is 
significant. 
 
Well even though the minister said that this is a significant 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

amount of tax, we maintain on this side of the House that if they 
increased that exemption significantly more than that and even 
lowered the rate — lowered the rate, Mr. Speaker— of the 
corporate or capital tax, if they halved, even halved that, they 
would actually create more wealth and more tax dollars for the 
government and for the people of Saskatchewan to be able to 
provide those necessities that the people of Saskatchewan 
recognize are most pertinent to our way of life — health, 
education, infrastructure. That’s how you go about doing that, 
Mr. Speaker, not by having significant regressive taxes such as 
this corporation capital tax. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as this government continues picking 
winners and losers, stunting the economic growth in this 
province, deciding that only, Mr. Speaker, only the government 
can grow this province, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Athabasca on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We have some very special guests that have travelled a long 
ways to be here today to view the proceedings of the Assembly. 
 
And I’d like to take this moment to welcome the students. 
There’s 19 grade 7 and grade 8 students from the Birch Ridge 
Community School which is in Turnor Lake, Saskatchewan. 
And they are being accompanied by a number of teachers and 
chaperones. And I’ll just maybe introduce the teachers and the 
chaperones, and they can give me a quick wave. 
 
There is Elann McChesney, Shaeya Baliko, Trevor Poncsak. . . 
I think. Obviously I didn’t do very well there, Mr. Speaker. And 
then we have the chaperones Gina Toutsaint and Jackie Oneeye, 
and I believe Jackie must be a relation to Joe. Joe’s one of the 
respected elders in the North, of course. 
 
And I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome them to the 
Assembly and to thank them for travelling the many, many 
miles from northern Saskatchewan to visit the city and the 
Assembly. And I’d ask all my colleagues here to help me 
welcome them here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a 
pleasure this afternoon to have visitors from the North. And it’s 
a pleasure they are able to be here at this time as we discuss 

how this government has been so restrictive and has 
significantly impacted the regressive regime that exists in 
northern Saskatchewan, to prevent the economic growth that we 
talk about in the rest of the province. 
 
Now what we have with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a government 
that continues to show leadership — show leadership in the loss 
of jobs. No one other than Saskatchewan is losing jobs at the 
rate that we are. We’re number one in job loss; we’re number 
one in population loss in the country. And yet the government 
in their wisdom continues to say that they need to pick winners 
and losers with Bills such as this one, Bill No. 36, that talks 
about picking winners and losers surrounding the corporate 
capital tax. 
 
It’s really unfortunate that the government cannot understand 
that they need to treat business on an equal and fair basis, that 
they’re going to decide who’s going to do business in this 
province, rather than let the marketplace decide who’s going to 
more appropriately do business in this province. 
 
And certainly as mentioned earlier today on several occasion, 
the government has decided who’s going to do the ethanol 
production in this province. They’ll decide who they’re going to 
do business with. The marketplace is not going to decide that 
for us. 
 
And as we know the business of this government has a dismal 
record. All we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is certainly take a look 
at SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), at the $28 million loss there. 
 
And now this government is picking winners and losers in the 
ethanol industry. They’re using the corporate capital tax as one 
of the tools to do that. They’re going to decide who’s going to 
get the $15 million break, and who is not going to be allowed to 
and they’re going to have to remain at the $10 million 
exemption. And that’s really unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many members on this side of the House 
who have lots of comments they’d like to make about this Bill, 
and I think it’s most important that we allow them the 
opportunity to do that. And so, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like 
to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased 
to be joined today by our new president of SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), Ray 
Clayton, who is sitting to my right. Next to him is Paul 
Radigan, the director of financial services. 
 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

 

On my left is Garth Rusconi; seated behind me, Phil Lambert 
and Debbie Koshman. Phil is the vice-president and chief 
information officer, Debbie is the vice-president, corporate 
services. Behind the bar we have Rob Madden who is the 
director of flight operations. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, 
Mr. Minister, and your officials. I appreciate the opportunity to 
discuss with you some issues and some projects that I’m 
familiar with and some elements of those projects that I’m not 
familiar with. 
 
This afternoon I want to refer to a particular project that I had 
asked about in a written question to the minister concerning the 
new Highways building in the town of Morse. I had presented 
the written question to the minister some days ago and I 
provided . . . I appreciate the provision of this rather detailed 
breakdown of the cost for that particular building. 
 
What I want to ask today, Mr. Minister, and through you to 
your officials, how that whole process develops. Now I know 
that the ministry of Highways and Transportation felt that there 
was a need for a new facility in that particular district of 
Highways. And I assume that they evaluated the wisdom of a 
new building and made a site selection. But can you tell me 
how that decision moves from the Department of Highways to 
SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I might 
just start for the benefit of obviously the guests here in the 
gallery, I should just maybe say a couple of words about the 
department and the process we’re going through this afternoon. 
 
This is a consideration of the budget, part of the budget of the 
province. Specifically, this is where we go through a detailed 
discussion of what we spend the money in the province on. 
 
The Property Management Corporation, of course, provides a 
broad range of services to the province, provincial government. 
It in other jurisdictions might be known as the department of 
supply and service or as government services or department of 
public works. In our case, we call it a property management 
corporation because it’s a Treasury Board Crown. 
 
To answer specifically the question that the member has asked, 
I would say that when a department is wanting us to proceed 
with a project they will advise us that they’re wanting the 
project. In this particular case, Highways has said that they 
want to move forward with a building. They identified the site. 
They then tell us the specs of what they’re looking for. We then 
moved forward and put it out to tender. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So from that very preliminary basis, Mr. 
Minister, does SPMC do the project management? Do they do 
all the tendering? Do they do the construction supervision? Do 
they oversee the project? Is that the ongoing role of SPMC in a 
facility like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In this particular case, Mr. Chairman, 
yes we did. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — In a project of that nature, Mr. Minister, when 
the project is finally completed, SPMC maintains the, quote 
“ownership or management or supervision responsibilities” for 
that particular facility. But I assume that the Department of 
Highways has to pay for it on an ongoing basis. 
 
Can you tell me how you determine what the cost will be to the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, in this case, on an 
ongoing basis, on a year-to-year basis. Do you charge that out 
on a certain ratio of value, percentage of value? Do you take a 
commercial value approach? Is it an annualized lease? How is 
that determination made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In this particular case because the 
facility is a government-owned facility, there is no base cost. 
There’s no rent assessed. There is however, of course, ongoing 
operating costs and those are charged to the department. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So I take it that there is no commercial 
relationship between the two departments. You don’t, as a 
management authority, as a property management arm of the 
government, you don’t try to make a profit off of that facility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No, Mr. Chairman, we do not. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I 
looked through the details of the response you provided for us 
and I’m looking at the design cost and construction cost and the 
tendering advertising. The ad costs for the tendering are listed 
here as $768.10. Can you tell me where and in what papers you 
advertised this particular project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I can report to the 
Assembly that we advertised the request for tenders on August 
11 in the Regina Leader-Post, the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 
and the Swift Current . . . I forget the name of the weekly paper, 
but in Swift Current as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The design portion of 
the facility came in at 57,844.99, and that would represent about 
11 or 12 per cent of the construction cost. 
 
Can you tell me, was the design done by an outside engineering 
architectural firm or was that done by an in-house capability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it was done by an 
outside consultant. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Would you be willing to tell us the name of the 
consultant please, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, in this particular case it 
was a Saskatoon company by the name of GENESIS 
Architecture and Engineering Inc. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, can 
the minister tell us if this particular contract was awarded to the 
lowest tender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it was. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, the 57,000-dollar figure — in 
excess of $57,000 — is a substantial amount of money. I don’t 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

think it’s out of line with the industry but it is a substantial 
amount of money. So can you tell me . . . I noticed that you 
classified it in your response as design, but was there additional 
work provided by the engineering firm? Was there contract 
supervision? Was there on-site construction supervision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not able to say 
specifically in this particular case but it wouldn’t be unusual for 
that to be this situation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, under the construction costs, if I 
might go through the detailed expenditures here, there’s an item 
entitled mobilization. Can you indicate for us what mobilization 
is and what we got for $40,712? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this is generally the 
term that we use to refer to getting the site ready. This would 
include such things as moving equipment out to prepare for 
construction. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, 
there’s a considerable amount of additional subcontracted work 
indicated here. And I’m wondering if each of these 
subcontractors were achieved through advertising and whether 
all these subcontracts were equally tendered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the tender applies to the 
general contractor. They select their subcontractors. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So, Mr. Minister, to the best of your knowledge 
did the general contractor make any attempt to have these 
subcontracts filled through a competitive situation? Or did they 
just go to their favourite source and select them individually? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, we prefer not to 
interfere in the normal activity of business, and as such they 
would go through their normal process. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I must be hard of hearing, Mr. Minister, but I 
didn’t hear your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The answer is, is that the general 
contractor chose who they would normally prefer to work with. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, were you aware that there was an 
opportunity for the Department of Highways to secure a 
building — in a different community albeit— but a used 
building, a vacant building that could have been modified and 
made adequate to the department’s needs for a substantially 
lesser amount of money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We are aware that there was a 
suggestion put forward by someone in another community 
nearby that we may be interested in a facility there. There was a 
site inspection done by the Department of Highways and 
SPMC, and the decision was to proceed with the operation with 
the construction in Morse. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, when the final decision was 
made, was that your department’s decision or was that a 
decision primarily of the Department of Highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of 

Highways was the final decision maker on that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I 
assume that this is an important question for the taxpayers of 
this province because we have here a total cost of, well, 
approaching $620,000. Whereas if the decision had been made 
to proceed with the used building, even taking renovations into 
consideration, we probably could have had a perfectly suitable 
facility for, oh, a third, maybe less than half certainly, of the 
cost of this new building. 
 
And I’m wondering if those kind of considerations aren’t 
important enough to be weighed into this equation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, we obviously take these 
issues into account and it was decided that the building was not 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, and through you to the minister, 
once again, earlier in our conversations here you indicated to 
me that the cost per year is not charged back to the Department 
of Highways, if I understood you correctly. 
 
And yet in my written question to you, I asked that the minister 
provide the cost per year that would be charged to the 
Department of Highways, and the response I got is that SPMC 
does not release this information. Which is it? You don’t charge 
them or you don’t release the information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, those two answers are 
not mutually exclusive. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Minister, which is it? Do you not 
release the information or do you not charge the Department of 
Highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, both answers are 
accurate. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Those are very interesting and uninformative 
responses, Mr. Minister. I’d like to know then why is it that 
SPMC does not consider releasing lease information. It’s a 
public body. I think the public has a right to know about the 
kinds of things that SPMC does charge for, and why they 
charge it, and how they charge it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Acting Chairman, I want to advise 
the member that in this particular case we are not leasing the 
facility. This is a facility which is owned by the government. 
We have provided a full and a detailed answer to the member in 
terms of what the cost of this building was to the taxpayer. This 
is I think a fair accounting of what we went through and as such 
all I can say is that this was not a leased building and so there’s 
no lease information to provide. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can I assume from that, Mr. Minister, that you 
would not release lease information in another situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We generally do not release . . . in fact 
we do not release lease information. This is a situation that we 
of course work in a tight market. It is to the taxpayers’ 
advantage that we be able to negotiate to the best deal that we 
can for taxpayers, and as such for us to release that kind of 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

 

information potentially distorts the competitive market. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me if you have a 
similar arrangement with the Department of Highways in 
several other or other jurisdictions within the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that most of 
the Highways buildings are in fact owned by the government 
and as such this is not an unusual circumstance. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, through you to the 
minister, does SPMC play a similar role in terms of all of the 
equipment that the Department of Highways operates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In view of your response, does SPMC play a 
role as lessor in any of the equipment that the department 
operates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Does SPMC have any proprietary role in 
equipment that the Department of Highways operates or any 
other government department that would have heavy 
equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Is the role of SPMC, in terms of equipment, 
then restricted to nothing more than an agency that advertises 
for and receives tenders and evaluates the tenders and makes the 
purchase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Acting Chairman, SPMC serves as 
the purchasing agent in the case for the Department of 
Highways and many other governments. And so in this 
particular case, there’s no need for us to necessarily own the 
equipment, but we would procure it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In the case of equipment procurement, is it the 
policy of SPMC to accept the lowest bid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In most, if not virtually all, cases, we 
would accept the lowest qualified bid. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Does SPMC, Mr. Minister, have a plan by 
which — or a standard or a statute — by which it decides that 
Saskatchewan purchased equipment dealing with 
Saskatchewan-based businesses is its first priority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Acting Chairman, there are of 
course interprovincial agreements in place concerning 
purchasing; certainly in the case of the western provinces, we 
have this. We abide by those. Where we are not bound by those, 
certainly we work towards having Saskatchewan . . . a buy 
Saskatchewan policy. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can I assume from your answer, Mr. Minister, 
that SPMC is bound by different rules than say Saskatchewan 
Power or SaskEnergy or the other Crown corporations? 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That is true. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I understand that SPMC, on 
behalf of the Department of Highways, recently purchased 
some heavy equipment that came out of Manitoba and it wasn’t 
necessarily the lowest priced equipment. Can you confirm that 
for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would need more detail in terms of 
the type of equipment and the time frame that we’re talking 
about. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, to the minister, 
unfortunately I forgot to bring the information with me, but it 
entails five heavy loaders. I believe they’d be a payloader type 
of equipment. And they were purchased probably within the last 
six weeks at most, maybe two months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, I’m not able 
to answer that question. I am not aware of this. We’ll certainly 
take a look and see if we can report back at a future date. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — When SPMC decides to purchase or tender for 
equipment, is it SPMC’s policy to tender for new equipment as 
opposed to used equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It would depend on what the 
departmental specs are like. That is an issue again that we 
facilitate — the procurement. The department would set the 
tendering . . . the basic tendering guideline. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, on the issue of used equipment, 
when you, when you possibly tender for used equipment, as the 
agency that is doing the tendering, do you lay down very clear 
specifications? And do you insist on a warranty protection of 
some nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Again, Mr. Acting Chair, this would 
depend on what the requirements of the department are in terms 
of what, perhaps, what kind of a lifespan they’re looking for the 
equipment to use, whether it’s heavy equipment or otherwise. 
 
Some of the . . . if there are specific questions, these may be 
better directed to the host departments that are putting out the 
tender requests. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, what is the, what is the habit of 
SPMC now? Are you generally looking at leasing equipment 
versus purchasing equipment? Have you come up with a policy 
as an agency, as an extension of the government, in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Acting Chairman, we have a mix. 
In some cases we would still proceed with purchase. Certainly 
in many cases now we lease equipment as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Does the approach of SPMC depend on the life 
expectancy of the equipment? As you may be aware prudent 
financial management would indicate that in many instances 
now it’s much more appropriate to lease and there are fewer and 
fewer instances where it’s a better financial deal to purchase. 
 
So can you give us some indication of where you have gone to 
the provisions of leasing and where you might have gone or 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

stayed with the provisions of buying equipment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Certainly, Mr. Chairman, on the side 
of vehicles it would be an example of where we would . . . we 
have increasingly used leasing as an option. I think there has 
been some discussion in this Assembly about leasing options in 
terms of our CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) operations. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I would be curious to know, Mr. Minister, 
whether or not you can give us an indication at this point what 
ratio or what sort of rough percentage there might be of leased 
equipment and vehicles through SPMC versus the owned stock? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, for this coming year, 
2002-2003, we’re looking at a leasing ratio of about 3:1. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well once again, Mr. Minister, my hearing 
fails me. Would you repeat the answer for me please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I apologize for being so soft-spoken 
but such is my nature, Mr. Chairman. Again, the number we’re 
talking about is a leasing ratio of about 3:1 in CVA. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — We asked earlier some questions that the 
minister was unable to address specifically because I didn’t 
have detailed information. Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the 
minister that if I’m able to round that information up in the next 
day or so, can I present it to you personally and have your 
assurance that you will address that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would welcome the opportunity. 
And, Mr. Chairman, if I might, as this is . . . we’re a little bit 
past what we had agreed to, to adjourn. And I’d just like to 
thank the member for his questions and say that I look forward 
to returning again with the opportunity to answer more 
questions. 
 
With that I would move that we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Many of 
these officials will be familiar to the members of the committee, 
but let me introduce them. 
 
Seated to my immediate right is deputy minister, Bonnie 
Durnford; to her right is the assistant deputy minister, Shelley 
Hoover; and behind me is the other assistant deputy minister, 
Bob Wihlidal. To my left is Larry Chaykowski, executive 
director of housing financial operations; and behind Ms. Hoover 
is Don Allen, executive director of financial management. 
 
Behind the bar are Craig Marchinko, director of social housing; 
Marilyn Hedlund, associate executive director income support; 
Debbie Grant, income security programs manager; Debra 
Bryck, director of child care; Richard Hazel, executive director 
family services; Larry Moffatt, executive director community 

living; and finally Peggy Buckley, director of employment 
services. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the last time 
we had estimates . . . And firstly let me welcome you and your 
officials to the Assembly this afternoon. And sometime we may 
have to just do a little more extended period of time unless this 
is a good way for the . . . for your staff to actually get some 
exercise, being here for 20 minutes, sitting around for 40, or 
whatever the case may be. But I certainly appreciate the fact 
that they’re prepared to come over and respond to our 
questions. 
 
But last time we got into some debate about . . . and we’ve been 
discussing the fact that the annual report is indicating, you’ve 
indicated that there certainly has been a significant decrease in 
the number of individuals on assistance these days versus what 
it was even four years ago, and seven years ago, and certainly 
ten years ago. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But what’s disturbing, and a thought line that we just nicely 
started to get into debate when we moved out of committee was 
the fact that despite the decreases in the number of people on 
assistance, and going back to Friday, May 3, Leader-Post 
article about some changes in the food bank program, the thINK 
program, a national initiative launched in Regina that past 
Thursday — I believe that would have been the second of May 
— where used ink-jet cartridges will be dropped off and will be, 
I believe they’re dissembled and then passed on to Radio Shack 
stores across Canada where the cartridges are reconditioned. 
 
The food banks will then be remunerated for each cartridge. 
Basically a recycling program, an avenue of raising revenue to 
help provide the food banks in purchasing the required 
foodstuffs that they need to meet the needs of their clients. And 
I read a couple of quotes, and I’m going to read them again, 
because we really didn’t get into a significant discussion in this 
area. And the one quote I read was: 
 

In the past year, demand has increased at the Regina & 
District Food Bank. Approximately 80 tons of food are 
handed out monthly to feed between 8,000 to 10,000 
people — approximately half (of these individuals) are 
children. 
 

And Mr. Barnes goes on to say: 
 

We’re not seeing a decline . . . (He does say) that we’re not 
seeing the dramatic increases . . . 
 

But they’re still not seeing a decline. And I guess that’s the 
issue of concern, the fact that we have the caseloads for 
individuals on assistance dropping significantly. On the other 
hand, we still see the food banks continuing to have to meet 
pretty well the same numbers of people monthly in regards to 
food hampers, as people obviously are hungry. We still have 
people who have needs. 
 
And the question is, if indeed we’re seeing people move off of 
the . . . off of assistance — and I would gather if people are 
moving off of assistance, they’ve obviously found a means 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

 

whereby they can provide for themselves that actually is much 
better than being on assistance — and yet at the same time we 
continue to see the same number, the number’s not really going 
down at the food bank. 
 
And I know Souls Harbour on Broad Street continues to feed 
between, I believe, 250 and 300 individuals an evening when 
they provide their meals. And as the food bank . . . Mr. Barnes 
indicated here: 
 

It’s a continual struggle to keep the hampers full — there’s 
never enough food there, . . . (and) Today’s initiative will 
give us a little extra money for milk so we (can) get some 
milk into some of the hampers for children who are part of 
a family group who are getting food from the food bank. 
 

So while there was a positive, there’s still a negative. Even the 
promotion that was . . . initiative that was promoted on the May 
2. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the question is if indeed people are finding 
employment opportunities that . . . and these employment 
opportunities, I would gather, are actually giving them the 
ability . . . they’re looking at employment versus assistance 
because obviously there is an avenue where they are actually 
making more on employment now versus being on assistance. 
 
I know a few years back one of the major complaints — and in 
some cases, still is there — but the biggest complaint was there 
wasn’t much of an incentive to . . . even if there was some 
employment. Because if you were able to get just part-time 
employment so much was reduced off of your assistance that it 
left you with basically nothing and left you really in a 
significant need. Today we do have the income assistance 
program to go along with employment so that at least you’ve 
got some assistance. 
 
The other concern is the health benefits, and if you fall into an 
income need, even though you’re employed, you at least qualify 
for some of the benefits, which for many families is a major 
problem. And that is probably one of the major, most 
significant factors they face in the lack of resources to provide 
for their families. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could indicate to us 
why we are not seeing a dramatic reduction in the food bank 
lineups, why food banks are continually looking to charitable 
groups, to businesses around the province, to individuals for the 
resources needed to supply their shelves so that they can meet 
the needs of those who are looking for their services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for the 
question, and I also welcome the ongoing dialogue about this 
very important issue that confronts the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I think about which those of us in this 
province can feel some sense of satisfaction in having tackled in 
a very responsible and effective way. 
 
As the hon. member correctly points out, Mr. Chair, the social 
assistance caseload continues to decline. As of March, Mr. 
Chair, as we discussed the last time before estimates, 88 
consecutive months in which our social assistance caseload has 
gone down in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And I would hazard a guess that there may not be another 
jurisdiction, not only in Canada but in the world, that could 
claim such a successful achievement in terms of the well-being 
of lower-income people within the jurisdiction by doing 
positive reinforcement or positive support kinds of initiatives. 
 
Some places have taken their approach, trying to reduce their 
social assistance caseloads in different kinds of ways. And 
we’re well aware that, in this nation, there is at least one 
jurisdiction not far from us who has decided that the best way to 
try and reduce the social assistance caseload is to give people a 
one-way bus ticket out of the province. Well, Mr. Chair, that’s 
not our way here, in Saskatchewan. 
 
We recognize the dignity that people deserve and we also 
recognize that there is a potential that is important to our 
province; that we find with our low-income citizens in 
Saskatchewan to be a significant part of shaping the future in 
Saskatchewan, responding to our employment needs. And our 
way of doing that has been through introducing the building 
independence program, as the hon. member has correctly 
acknowledged. 
 
And as a result of that, we find ourselves now, since the 
introduction of building independence, with 6,000 fewer 
families receiving social assistance today than in 1998 when 
building independence, in its fully fledged form, was 
introduced. But most importantly 13,000 . . . more than 13,000 
fewer kids growing up on welfare today and that is, as the 
member also correctly identifies, because people have been able 
to attach themselves to the world of employment. We’ve 
introduced policies that support that, that don’t make it difficult 
for people to make that move to employment. 
 
But just as importantly, Mr. Chair, there are programs that assist 
people by providing the supports attached to employment 
without having to come into the welfare system. To make my 
case, I just point out that in Saskatchewan in this fiscal year we 
forecasted there will be some 20,000 Saskatchewan families 
who will be receiving the benefits of building independence 
programs who are not social assistance recipients. And so it is 
the support for people to not require social assistance that’s just 
as important as the supports for people to move from that. 
 
So having said all of that, we come then to the question of the 
food bank that the hon. member raises. And I think we would 
all acknowledge that in Saskatchewan, the food bank here in 
Regina, which is the one to which he refers to in the article, is 
an excellent food bank. It’s well administered. It’s well 
planned. It’s got an excellent . . . It’s a good strong board. And 
it’s got dedicated people. And what it has had over the period of 
years, Mr. Chair, is a series of growing support programs for 
low-income people. 
 
And so, what was originally a notion born many years ago that 
the food bank was a service that provided food for people who 
needed it extremely, importantly, the food bank here in Regina 
has evolved in a steady but gradual sort of way. 
 
In fact I was over just a few months ago to the food bank and 
was there to be a part of an announcement of some provincial 
support for child care services at the food bank. Now why is 
that important at the food bank? Because at first glance you’d 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

say how does that make sense. Do people need child care if 
they’re just coming there to pick up food and then leave? And 
the answer is, of course, that if that’s all that was happening 
there, it wouldn’t be. 
 
But what’s going on at the food bank are a whole host of other 
kinds of support programs now — a life skills employment 
training, educational forums are part of what happens at the 
food bank. And it has become in some ways a mini-centre of 
support for low-income people to assist people to find 
independence. 
 
So what we find now I think, Mr. Chair, are more reasons than 
just the access to the source of food for coming to the food 
bank. And it’s interesting the hon. member raised the question 
because when I was there and spoke to the folks at the Regina 
Food Bank and talked about . . . at that time I think we were 85 
consecutive months or so that we had reduced our social 
assistance caseloads. 
 
And also I was happy to have joined one of the hon. members 
from Regina in actually rolling a little paint on the wall, that I 
think someone said to me, dub that newscast as men with 
rollers. At the time there was a similarly named movie that was 
hitting the scenes. But I divert, Mr. Chair, although I know you 
take particular interest in this issue, Mr. Chair. 
 
But the point I’m making is that when talking with them, what 
they said to me was they said, you know, actually we can see 
the benefits of the lowering caseloads happening because our 
growth and demand is reduced, which is precisely when you 
interpret the news article that the hon. member refers to. If I 
remember correctly I think 20 to 1 over 2000, if I remember 
correctly, that the growth in food bank demand was up by 1 per 
cent, which was the smallest growth in demand that they 
experienced for some time. 
 
So what they said to me is they’re seeing the reduced demand at 
a place which is a very supportive centre for low-income 
people. It’s a source of food but a source of other things as well. 
And I compliment them for that. Therefore it says to me that we 
should ought to be cautious about when we interpret demands 
for food because there’s much more that goes on in that place 
than that, which will also influence the visits that they will 
have. 
 
So I think that is perhaps a more detailed response than the hon. 
member was asking for, but I think we would both share — I 
would hope we would both share and I think we do — both 
share our appreciation for the kind of support programs that run 
out of the Regina Food Bank. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, no, I don’t mind that 
type of response whatsoever. It allows for a more creative 
dialogue versus the yes and nos of the previous minister, and it 
actually gives the member asking questions the opportunity to 
get some more thoughts around the next question. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, it still doesn’t answer the question why 
we have 5 to 10,000 people a month. And that was the point 
that was brought out — 5 to 10,000 people, 80 tonnes of food 
monthly. Even though they said they haven’t seen the increases 
that they had in the past, they continue to have that ongoing, 

average need. 
 
And as you indicated, certainly when I toured the food bank I 
thought what was very appropriate that the food bank had 
actually moved from a means of just distributing food but also a 
means of training individuals as to how to make good use of the 
food. And the one case, you probably are aware of it, Mr. 
Minister, where they have four, full-fledged kitchens that are set 
up right within the food bank itself so that they can train people 
how to cook up the food that they’re been handled. 
 
And as I understood from talking to two people, whether it’s the 
food bank or other organizations that have handed out hampers 
at some time, there’s a disturbing fact that part of the hampers 
were just disposed of because for some reason people just 
didn’t have a good common grasp of just some of the bare 
essentials of how to cook and prepare a meal, which was 
unfortunate, and maybe in some cases didn’t have the 
equipment as well. They may have had a stove but maybe 
didn’t have the roaster or whatever the circumstances. 
 
So the fact that the food bank is offering avenues whereby . . . 
they’re looking beyond just handing people a food hamper, and 
I think that’s good and that’s excellent because I think we need 
to do it. 
 
We need to look beyond that because the question arises, why 
are people still going to the food bank? Why are they relying on 
the food bank? Is it, Mr. Minister, the fact that because the food 
bank is there that people will take advantage of it? Is it the fact 
that there are people with some real legitimate needs and need 
the food, the food hampers that are handed out by the food 
bank? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Besides the avenues of training . . . And now training I think is 
a little different than just picking up a food hamper. If a person 
is lacking and the food bank has . . . They’ve moved to a 
process of beginning to educate and train people so that they 
can actually look for some legitimate work. There again, I think 
we would compliment the individuals, the leadership of the 
Regina Food Bank for providing those initiatives rather than 
just handing out the hampers. 
 
But I guess the question comes back to: why do we continue to 
have this ongoing need? Is it because it’s something that’s 
available so people take advantage of it? What are the real 
reasons for the need for the food bank, for some 80 tonnes of 
food per month that the food bank needs to just meet the needs 
of the people who seek their services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank again the hon. member 
for his question and the concern. I welcome very much the 
dialogue about how we as a government, as a representative of 
the people, respond to the needs of the poor in our society. 
 
I think in responding to the hon. member’s question about why 
the usage of food banks continues, there’s probably an element 
of truth in all of the things that he suggests. And it’s probably a 
question which in some ways is most accurately answered in 
specific kinds of ways by people who are at the food banks 
themselves and will have the daily contact. 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

 

But I think the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, that the food 
banks, certainly the food bank here in Regina, as we’ve just 
been discussing, has taken on a support role for low-income 
families. And so that would suggest that in part some of the use 
of the food bank is probably related to the fact that there are 
other helpful activities — employment related, life skills related 
— that go on, and that access to the support of the food bank in 
terms of making use of food is something that can be taken 
advantage of at the same time and therefore enable a family to 
manage their finances in a different kind of way. 
 
I think it’s fair to say, too, if you go around the province and 
you talk about food banks in different communities, what would 
be common is that the food banks will attract to the boards of 
them people who are involved in their communities and often in 
a complex and, in many ways, kind of a comprehensive kind of 
series of services of support to people who may be vulnerable in 
families. 
 
So it’s one of the things I think that’s happened over the years is 
that perhaps there is a different sense of invasion of dignity that 
people will feel in taking advantage of a food bank that’s there. 
But the important thing I think to note is that food banks and 
their related kinds of services have . . . they’ve become a source 
not only of conscience but of community-based political . . . 
No. Community-based social action, I think, is a more accurate 
term to support people who are in need of support or in times of 
transition. 
 
And so it would be, I think for all of us, a long-term goal to see 
a society in which food banks are not necessary. I think all of us 
would wish for that. We certainly recognize that poverty is not 
an issue that is easily remedied nor quickly remedied. I think 
we can take significant pride in the leadership that has been 
provided by the Department of Social Services and others in 
tackling poverty, but we must also admit that there’s a long, 
long way to go. 
 
We have by no means eliminated poverty. That is a noble 
objective for which those of us who come and serve in these 
chambers should ought to aspire. We recognize always that as 
we deliver services, we have to do that in a combination of 
responsibilities as to how we take those tax dollars provided to 
us and distribute them to serve the people of our province. 
 
I know the hon. member understands that. And in many ways 
that’s the kind of discussion that goes on in estimates — is we 
look at delivery of services but also in balance to a combination 
of things. 
 
So will food banks be here for a while? I think they will. Do I 
dream of a day in which food banks would not be necessary? Of 
course I do. And I admire others in these chambers and beyond 
who would share that same goal. 
 
Do I also appreciate the kinds of other support programs that 
may be attached either directly to food banks or related to them 
in communities? Of course I welcome that as well. The 
government can’t do it all by itself. That’s obvious. We live in a 
day in which I think we’re realistic. It’s partnerships that are 
necessary in order to achieve important social objectives and 
that is completely true of course when tackling the issue of 
poverty and particularly child poverty. 

I was reminded of that, Mr. Chair, this morning. I was in Prince 
Albert officially announcing the Jobs First program extension to 
Prince Albert. And at the announcement were some good 
representation from both the business community as well as the 
community-based organizations in Prince Albert. 
 
And it was obvious to me as we were gathered at the Career and 
Employment Services centre to talk about this vehicle that 
we’ve introduced to in another way assist our low-income 
citizens to attach themselves to the best form of income security 
which is a job, that it was . . . This was in a room that brought 
together business people and community-based organization 
and government employees all together in one room 
recognizing that we were all of a common purpose, dedicated to 
a common goal. In many ways that’s I think what we’re talking 
about here today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, we look at food 
banks and we look at the clientele that access the food banks 
and certainly . . . and even looking at Souls Harbor Mission. 
And I’m not exactly sure what some of the other food banks 
around the province are facing or what type of clientele that 
may be utilizing their services. 
 
One of the concerns . . . and certainly in downtown Regina is a 
high number of First Nations community who seek the services 
of the Souls Harbor Mission. And I’m not exactly sure what the 
numbers might be in regards to the food bank. 
 
You made some comments about wondering whether or not 
food banks are always going to be with us. I know that Christ 
talked about the fact that we’ll always have the poor with us. 
 
And I’m not sure, I think it’s an achievable goal of finding 
quality employment for everyone. But since you’ve become 
minister I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what has your 
department done or what focus are you moving in to see if we 
can’t as much as possible really move people from the need for 
assistance into full-time employment. 
 
I think what we’re seeing is certainly opportunities are opening 
up where . . . I’m hearing now that in the job sector for the last 
number of years, certainly in our educational facilities, we’ve 
really been talking about young people going to university and 
getting a post-secondary education at the university level to the 
point that I think in some of the technical areas we’re actually 
lacking. 
 
I just heard an announcement on the radio the other day of a 
real lack of heavy-duty mechanics. Even the car industry. 
They’re talking of the fact that because of the shortage of 
technicians we may find ourselves, rather than 40 or $50 an 
hour for car servicing, looking up in the $200 range because of 
the fact that there’s the shortage and companies will be willing 
to pay whoever just to get . . . just to make sure they’ve got the 
staffing on hand. 
 
So I guess what I’m asking, Mr. Minister, what avenues has 
your department looked at as a minister, avenues that you’ve 
given thought to that we could look at, that we could begin to 
move in direction? While we talk about the Jobs First, I think 
we need to look beyond Jobs First as far as the training. 
 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

We talked about the food banks actually promoting some kind 
of training initiatives to assist people. And just wondering, Mr. 
Minister, what your department and the discussions that you’ve 
had and some really conclusive ideas that you’ve been arriving 
at or coming forward with that you see down the road as 
actually really reducing the need for food banks in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member 
for the question, but it’s going to take a bit of time and I know 
the hon. member understands that when he asks the question. 
 
The hon. member, Mr. Chair, raises what I consider one of the 
absolutely critical questions related to this portfolio and to this 
department. And it is . . . there is . . . we live in a time of 
opportunity, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some would say that as we look at the times we’re in that we 
have some serious challenges that face us in the world of 
employment and in one sense they’d be right. Others would say 
— and this is sort of the glass is half empty or half full — 
others would say that we live in a time of opportunity for those 
of us who believe in the social justice of a representative 
workforce. And for those I would say you’re right. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, that one of the reasons that 
people have been leaving welfare to go to work is because 
there’s been work to go to, to state the obvious. Jobs First is a 
program which wouldn’t work extremely effectively if there 
weren’t real jobs for people to move to. And there are. 
 
Since 1996, outside of the agricultural sector, the number of 
jobs in this province has grown by slightly in excess of 35,000. 
And although we sometimes are . . . We’re inclined to think 
here, in our province, because of the impact of the agricultural 
economy, that the economy is all in a slump. In fact, that’s not 
true. Outside of the agricultural economy, the economy is doing 
. . . is bumping along kind of nicely, actually, which is a credit 
for diversification in many ways in our province. 
 
Thirty-five thousand new jobs since 1996; a tightening labour 
market in this decade largely driven by the early retirement of 
the baby boomers provides for us an opportunity. And the 
opportunity then is to take advantage of the dynamics of the 
labour market itself where employers, I think, are now 
increasingly valuing loyalty, the potential for longevity in terms 
of relationship between the employee and the employer. And 
that sets an environment in which employers are now 
increasingly willing to look at doing something outside of the 
traditional practices of hiring and employment. 
 
And so I think for those of us who support attachments to the 
labour market in meaningful jobs, decent jobs, jobs with a 
future, for people who have tended to live outside of the 
mainstream of employment in the past, there is opportunity that 
has certainly been greater than there has ever been . . . that I’ve 
known in my professional lifetime. 
 
So simply, what are we doing? Jobs First is a pilot project we 
introduced in Yorkton last year and Regina that we’re now 
expanding. I announced a couple of weeks ago we’re expanding 
across the province. I’m encouraged by the fact that in the two 
pilot projects, as of March, year over year, the Yorkton social 

assistance caseload dropped by some 17 per cent. Here in 
Regina by, I believe it’s a little over 10 per cent — well above 
the provincial average in the drop of social assistance caseloads. 
 
Why is that happening? I think it’s because we found an 
effective way to connect people who are looking for the best 
form of income security, a job to the jobs. And the fact that 
these orientation sessions take place in the current employment 
service centres all across the province of Saskatchewan, 20 of 
them. State of the art, Mr. Chair — state of the art. The best in 
all of Canada, making use of technology for information. 
 
And then the knowledge and the skills of people to help people 
counsel regarding job choices, job referrals perhaps, but career 
choices and the kind of supports that are there to enable people 
to get experience. Maybe JobStart/Future Skills through 
Department of Learning is a way of getting accredited job 
useful experience. Or maybe basic education, those sorts of 
things. 
 
But also what’s going on then, Mr. Chair, is that not only are 
we reducing the number of caseloads, what they are telling me 
is that within six weeks 30 to 40 per cent of the jobs first 
participants are working, that there’s another 50 per cent that 
don’t have subsequent contact with the department. 
 
Now we don’t know for sure whether they’re working or not 
because they’re not required to report, but I suspect that a good, 
substantial percentage of them are. And what we do know is 
that the caseloads have dropped by some 25 to 30 per cent in 
the pilot areas. 
 
Together with this then, we’re doing a first-step process with 
the workers and those who are coming into welfare, and 
transition planning, a new approach to social workers working 
in a supportive way with individuals, with their clients 
receiving social assistance to assist them to find the 
independence that they want to do. 
 
So some of it’s directly job related. Other of it is a supportive in 
management many times of personal affairs in order to get life 
circumstances in such a position that you can eventually move 
to the labour market if you wish. This would be, for example, in 
the case of some parents, for example, may not be able to 
realistically do a lot of work right now because of obligations, 
but eventually will want to. So that’s happening. 
 
In addition to that we’ve dedicated in this budget an additional 
$1.3 million in training supports for family and for people with 
disabilities. And that will result in also some additional kinds of 
techniques — support with job coaches, for example, to assist 
with the performance of duties at the workplace itself, working 
hand in hand together with employers and the employees to 
help to overcome what may be some lack in some of the finer 
skills, the job skills or the life skills, that are necessary in order 
to be successfully employed. 
 
So those are, I think, are just some quick and dirty sorts of 
things in terms of specific projects. 
 
Now in addition to that, the reorganization of government I 
think has given us an opportunity to find some new synergies, 
bringing to the Department of Social Services the career and 



May 23, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

 

employment service offices, 20 of them around the province, 
the best resources in terms of making connections to the world 
of employment available anywhere in Canada. 
 
And also bringing to Social Services the Sask Housing which is 
also a very important part of the whole picture of stability for 
many, many people about which you have a basis to build your 
future. I’m optimistic that we’ll be able, by bringing these under 
the same administrative umbrella, that we’ll be able to do a 
better job of finding additional synergies. 
 
What we’ve been doing is finding synergies and we’re not 
finished yet, and we’re going to be looking for more synergies 
to take advantage of the dynamics from the pre-employment 
service offices, the resources from the housing portfolio — 
working under the same umbrella of the social objectives of 
connecting people to the world of employment and to the 
independence that they so badly seek, as is typical of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So it’s no surprise, Mr. Chair, it’s with a great deal of 
enthusiasm about the potential that’s there for our department 
that was facilitated by the reorganization that was announced 
and came into effect on April 1. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. I thank you for 
that response and certainly I think . . . you made a comment 
about employers and I personally believe it’s important that we 
look at businesses — manufacturing, processing — employers 
out there who are looking for employees and recognizing the 
fact that they can play an important role in the training process. 
I think they take a hands-on approach. It’s probably a better 
chance that you’re actually going to train individuals to meet 
the needs of that employer with the type of training that is 
essential. 
 
One of the problems though for a lot of businesses and a lot of 
employees or employers is the minimum wage in this province, 
and we keep talking about increasing it — it just increased and 
another increase is coming — and everyone’s treated the same. 
And one of the difficulties a lot of businesses face is when 
you’re training someone they don’t have a lot of those skills. 
And yet somebody already on the floor at that minimum wage 
level or barely above it and then you bring somebody on that 
you have to train, and the feeling is that if you were to go into 
another occupation, if you entered an employment opportunity, 
you enter at a base level and then you progressively work your 
way up. 
 
I think one of the concerns is that they’re expected, especially 
some of our smaller businesses that in many cases provide a 
minimum wage or barely above that, but do work themselves to 
a position of higher than that, that when they’re trying to train 
people they find it somewhat difficult. 
 
In many cases . . . I know locally, people would be more than 
happy to bring individuals on and train them if there was a way 
of recognizing that training period, and that as they become 
more qualified then their wage scale will begin to show that. 
And I think something certainly needs to be addressed in that 
manner as to how we work together with the business 
community to provide the job skills that are needed for the 
current employment opportunities that are out there. And I think 

that needs to be looked at, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, before I sit down though — just looking at the 
time, in case I may not get another chance to offer another word 
in the debate this afternoon — I would like to have one other 
question as well to your office. 
 
And that is, over the past number of years we have basically 
sent over a global set of questions — and I’m not exactly sure if 
our office has done that this year — just basically the questions 
regarding the expenditures of the office, the employees, the 
salaries. I forget what all the numbers are. 
 
And I was just wondering if that had been sent over. If any 
work had gone off. To do some follow-up on that. I thought I 
better ask that before I get to it. And then get to some tedious 
questions down the road which could be answered fairly simply 
by the department. We’ll certainly look into that. 
 
But I think through the Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, one of the 
things we need to look at very aggressively is working with the 
business and the employer community to develop programs and 
coordinate programming and training to assist people in moving 
from assistance into some real quality job opportunities, 
because the training has now given them that opportunity to 
move in that direction. 
 
And I’m not sure if your department is looking at that, the fact 
that you’ve got the . . . is it the training program now under 
your wing or the employment opportunities program? The 
avenues that we can pursue. And I’m wondering where your 
department is going in that regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I’ll be brief and then 
we’re going to move to adjourn. Let me respond quickly as I 
can to the hon. member’s questions. 
 
Although you may be of the view, Mr. Chair, that we’ve had a 
lot of basic questions asked — in excess of 200 written 
questions in this session — among them is not a set of what I 
think referred to as global questions. So if the hon. member 
wants to forward them to my office, we’ll be happy to respond 
and avoid the minutia in this discussion and enable ourselves to 
use our time for discussion about important social issues. 
 
And if I can just conclude then in responding to the hon. 
member’s question again about, as we continue the discussion 
about connection to the real world of work and how you do that, 
I come back again to the current employment service centres. 
And I say that because what occurs there is much more than the 
availability of information connecting . . . that people can have 
about jobs that are actually available now. 
 
I was told a couple of months ago that in the month of March 
that the SaskJobs I think had 600,000 hits on the Internet for 
information, which means that people are certainly looking on a 
regular basis. 
 
But just as importantly and in some ways more importantly in 
the context of our discussion here — and with a focus on those 
who may have a lower set of skills and wanting to build those to 
become attached to the world of work and to shape careers and 
their futures — we have got people who have got knowledge 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 2002 

 

and skills at those centres who are ready, willing, and able to 
provide advice to individual citizens. 
 
And among those advice then are the ability to develop specific 
training plans for an individual citizen and oftentimes 
connected to a specific employer who has some specific skill 
requirements. The JobStart, Future Skills program for example 
can make that connection in a very specific kind of way, meet 
the needs of an employer. It provides supportive training 
through the public purse that is also credited. 
 
The employee building assistance for people with disabilities 
that we cost share with the federal government is extremely 
valuable to overcome some of the barriers in the workplace. But 
also the training institutions for people who . . . with disabilities 
to acquire skills and knowledge and real work. Increased 
support for apprenticeship has been part of that. 
 
I won’t get into the great minimum wage debate, although I 
make it very, very clear that this Minister of Social Services 
will never ever permit in our province, while I am Minister of 
Social Services, work for welfare — not in this province. Work 
for real wages, work for wages — that’s what it’s all about. 
And our task is to support people to attach themselves to 
sustainable employment, preferably with real wages. 
 
But it’s that career employment services centres and that’s why 
it’s so valuable that the job . . . that the Jobs First program is 
located right there where people not only get the information 
related to that that we’ve talked about here, but also become 
aware of an ongoing resource, not only for day-to-day 
information that we used to find in Canada Manpower centres 
about . . . you know, on the job boards, what’s available, but 
also the kinds of support and training programs that people can 
access to get themselves attached in a meaningful ongoing way. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, that is a very, very short answer actually to a 
very good question. And having said all of that and recognizing 
the time, I am sorry that the time has come that we must move 
to rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 


