















































Hansard: July 03, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2447 
 July 3, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are angry 
with the government’s decision to transfer the surplus from the 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund to the General Revenue 
Fund. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to refund the $1.6 million intended for the 
Saskatchewan Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and 
discontinue its present policy of using this money for other 
government purposes. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by approximately another 75 residents of 
Regina. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
rise on behalf of citizens concerned about the shortcomings in 
the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, 
Foam Lake, Young, and Rosthern. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present today on behalf of citizens concerned about 
overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Spy 
Hill, Langenburg, and McCreary, Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources is used as a whole in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by the good people 
of Churchbridge, Esterhazy, and Rocanville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the community of 
Chaplin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And I have several petitions, Mr. Speaker, and they are signed 
by residents of Weyburn, Lake Alma, Saskatoon, Regina, 
Pangman, and Fillmore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of my hometown of Swift Current concerned about the 
state of the current hospital facility in that city. And specifically 
the prayer of their petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its share of funding for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, all of the petitioners today come 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

from the frontier city, the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the high cost of prescription 
drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Hanley, and 
Englefeld. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the new 
regional health authority boundaries. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
regional health authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
regional health authority. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Govan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned about the crop 
insurance premiums. And as in duty bound . . . or the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from the 
dried-out centre of Marshall and my dried-out centre of 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7, 11, 18, 22, 165, and no. 168. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 78 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: what is 
the nature of the $105,341 in consulting work paid by 
SaskEnergy to RBC Dominion Securities in 2001; has 
SaskEnergy or its parent company retained any other firms 
such as RBC Dominion Securities to establish the value of 
TransGas? 

 
And while I’m on, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 78 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: has 
CIC or is CIC currently conducting a review/evaluation of 
the rate review panel; if so, will the results be made public? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you and it’s my great 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to members 
of the Assembly two very fine people seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery. 
 
One is a long-time friend of mine, Leslie Griffin. Leslie has the, 
at times, dubious distinction of being my very first campaign 
manager in my first nomination. I find it very gratifying to 
remember those happy times. 
 
Seated next to Leslie is a lady well known in Regina, having 
run for city council and making her views known widely. She 
writes letters to the editors regularly — Lucy Eley. I ask all 
hon. members to join me in welcoming these two guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to my 
colleagues in this Assembly, I’d also like to introduce a guest in 
your gallery. Seated there today, Mr. Speaker, is Crystal 
Martens. Crystal is a summer student at our constituency office 
in Swift Current and wanted to come to the legislature and 
certainly she was invited to come and see the proceedings live 
and have a tour of the building. 
 
We’re enjoying Crystal’s work in the office this summer and 
we want to wish her well as well. Now, Mr. Speaker, she’s 
planning to return for her third year at the Millar College of the 
Bible in Pambrun when fall begins again. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I just ask all members in the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming Crystal here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like to 
introduce a group of young people sitting in the east gallery, 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

 

over my shoulder here. These folks belong to the Association 
Jeunesse Fransaskoise. They’re organizing, they’re coming here 
to prepare for their youth parliament here, the francophone 
youth parliament that will be held October 17, 18, 19, and this 
will be their seventh edition. 
 
And today they’re represented by members of the cabinet and a 
member of the opposition. So I’d like to introduce some of 
these folks. I’m not sure I can see them all. 
 
The Premier is Maxe Joanisse-Blackmore from Regina. He will 
stand and then we’ll know you’re here. Maxe? And then Deputy 
Premier is Gent Laird, and I understand he had some exciting 
times up at Prince Albert this past weekend. The Speaker is 
Alexis Normand from Saskatoon. The member of the 
opposition is Erica Potié, from Saskatoon as well; and the 
House Leader Natalie Berard. 
 
Now they have a debate and elocution instructor, Janique 
Dubois, and the director of AJF (Association Jeunesse 
Fransaskoise) is Dave Turcotte who happens to be a constituent 
of Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
And all members of the House will be invited to a luncheon 
October 17 at their event. 
 
So I’d like to ask all members to give them a warm welcome 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Area Transportation Planning Committees 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there’s 11 
area transportation committees working across the province 
working with the Department of Highways and Transportation 
to develop and implement transportation plans for their specific 
regions. 
 
This regional consultation, Mr. Speaker, is necessary to deal 
effectively with the changes that are going on in the grain 
handling industry and in other changes that affect our 
transportation system. The area transportation planning 
committees are necessary for shared decision making and 
responsibility that are used to help make our roads and 
highways the best they can be. 
 
Area transportation planning committees make 
recommendations to their rural municipal and urban municipal 
and First Nations memberships and to the province on local 
transportation priorities, truck traffic management, short-line 
rail initiatives, northern access, and northern airports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Highways and Transportation began this program, 
this initiative, when it signed what has proven to be a very 
successful one done in the Southwest. I want to commend and 
thank each of the 11 transportation planning committees for the 
excellent work they have done and that we know they will 
continue to do into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

SaskTel Prepaid Cellular Service 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not long ago SaskTel 
decided to make some substantial changes to its prepaid cellular 
service product. It used to be, Mr. Speaker, that those who 
purchased this prepaid card would have to make at least one 
billable call within 60 days of purchase to keep their minutes 
activated. But effective the week of June 16, SaskTel 
announced that prepaid customers would now have to keep their 
total minutes prepaid topped up to their original level every 60 
days or they would lose their minutes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t take long for SaskTel customers 
and residents of our province to start expressing their concerns 
about the unfairness in this policy change. Sask Party MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) have fielded many 
inquiries and concerns about SaskTel’s new use-it-or-lose-it 
policy. So, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party raised the issue at the 
Crown Corporations Committee not long ago. And wouldn’t 
you know it, Mr. Speaker, by the end of last week, only days 
after we raised those concerns, SaskTel admitted it was also 
getting a lot of calls and that it would look to improve this 
problem and to change its policy perhaps by extending the 
current terms to the . . . for the prepaid cellular customers to the 
end of this year. 
 
That would be a step in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. And it 
has proved that the system can work. Mr. Speaker, residents 
calling Sask Party MLAs from city and country, the Sask Party 
raising the issue, the problem getting solved, Mr. Speaker — 
that is a preview of what is going to happen on a lot more 
regular basis after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Maintenance of Northern Saskatchewan Roads 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, there was a good northern article 
written by Gil Gracie in a recent edition of her independent 
magazine called Opportunity North, a journal of northern 
Saskatchewan business, industry, training, and employment. 
And as someone who knows a bit about road construction and 
bridge building, the article made me feel good about progress in 
the North. 
 
The article consisted of one short paragraph of prose and then 
two columns of facts and figures. The headline — “$34 million 
for northern roads in ’02-’03”. The paragraph says that: 
 

. . . $34 million will be spent on northern . . . (roads) again 
this year. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we’re fixing the roads and we’re fixing 
them in the North as well as in the South. 
 
The columns listed projects: major capital projects, nearly 12 
million; partnership expenditures with mining companies, 1.5 
million; major preservation projects, 2.8 million; other 
preservation projects, 2.8 million; the Centenary Fund 
expenditures, 500,000; and strategic rural roads partnership, 
300,000. 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

From Cumberland House to La Loche, to Pelican Narrows, to 
Green Lake, to the Sucker River, and all places in between, 
work is taking place to provide better and safer roads for 
northerners, to provide jobs for northerners, and also to promote 
tourism and northern cultural exchange and to, of course, 
solidify the vital infrastructure of the North. 
 
That’s good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Restaurant in Bellegarde 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in spite of the NDP (New Democratic Party) roadblocks put in 
front of entrepreneurs in this province, we have three new, 
young entrepreneurs that have started up their own business in 
the village of Bellegarde, Mr. Speaker. They have started a new 
restaurant called the Bistro Belge and it’s going to be open from 
June 28 to August 23. 
 
And what’s unique, Mr. Speaker, about these three 
entrepreneurs is they’re all grade 10 and 11 girls. Bonita 
Wolensky, Lindsay George, and Chantel Bauche have started 
up their own little restaurant as a summer project, Mr. Speaker, 
supported by their teacher, Mrs. Prefontaine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these girls are putting on an excellent meal. 
They’re inviting everyone in the area to come and attend. And 
what they specialize in, Mr. Speaker, is Belgian cuisine. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to read here, it says: 
 

Our specialty, homemade desserts. 
 
And, yes, Mr. Speaker, they are good. I tried them on Saturday. 
And they make an excellent little waffle that they coat with 
Belgian chocolate. And, Mr. Speaker, it is excellent. And I 
recommend that everyone visit Bellegarde and try out the Bistro 
Belge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

18th Annual Canadian Student Leadership Conference 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 18th 
annual Canadian Student Leadership Conference makes its way 
back to Saskatchewan from October 1 through October 5 of 
2002; 425 high school student representative council members 
and 200 student activity advisers from across Canada will be in 
Saskatoon for the Canadian Student Leadership Conference. 
 
There will be a pre-conference tour from September 29 to 
October 1. This tour will take the participants to visit 
Saskatchewan’s north country. The students will be visiting 
Batoche, Waskesiu, and Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conference keynote speakers will include 
Tamara Hall, Mark Tewksbury, and Mark Scharenbroich. There 
will be a variety of leadership workshops, time management 
in-services, communication seminars, and community building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conference will be located in a variety of high 
school settings in Saskatoon, the Centennial Auditorium, the 

Delta Bessborough Hotel, the Saskatoon Forestry Farm, and 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park, and the Prairieland Exhibition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, conferences of this nature go a long way to help 
forge the new ideas and visions of the next generation. I think 
all members of this House will join me in hoping the organizers 
and delegates from across Canada will benefit from this 
conference and we wish them a wonderful time here in our 
province next fall. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SunBridge Wind Power Project 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I know 
that just last Thursday, the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
commented on this particular project, but I would like to bring 
it to the attention of the House once again. 
 
It’s a very successful venture that has given rise, technically, in 
my constituency. And on Thursday, I attended the grand 
opening of the SunBridge wind power project which is located 
south of the No. 1 Highway and a little east of Gull Lake. 
 
This $22 million project is a 50/50 partnership between 
Enbridge Incorporated and Suncor Energy Incorporated that 
signals the start of a growing initiative to harness an alternative 
energy supply in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now this is an encouraging venture for our province, and most 
particularly southwest Saskatchewan. Typically for a windy 
prairie area, that conjures up a negative attitude, yet this 
convenient power source has generated a positive turn and 
indicates a significant potential well into the future. 
 
I’m sure that everyone in Saskatchewan will agree that our 
wind is indeed a source that should be considered renewable. 
Having already received commitments from purchasers who are 
willing to pay a premium to buy GreenPower electricity, this 
project shows that there are consumers who are anxious to reap 
the environmental rewards of this clean energy source. 
 
Dave Byler, executive vice-president of Suncor, indicated this 
project may be the first step of a $100 million expansion by his 
company into renewable energy by 2005. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s my hope that government policies will be 
forthcoming to encourage the private sector to continue this 
type of initiative rather than discourage them through over 
regulation and direct competition after the risks have been taken 
by the private sector. 
 
My congratulations on behalf of the entire constituency of 
Cypress Hills to the SunBridge wind power project. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Students Have a Case 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a group 
of University of Saskatchewan students from Saskatoon have 
decided to raise awareness about the plight of farm families in 
their own way. 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

 

Mike Baker, Bryce Brodie, Rob Gilroyed, and Shaun Janzen 
pooled their cash together and bought a Case 2090 tractor. They 
have driven their tractor to Ontario to raise awareness about the 
plight of Saskatchewan farm families. Bryce says that people 
are also signing the camper trailer as a petition of support. 
 
Bryce said that they were inspired to embark on their trek after 
they heard that a friend’s father had to sell the family farm due 
to American subsidies in part. The student quartet report that 
they have been well received by the people of Ontario and that 
easterners do care and have shown a great deal of sympathy 
towards the hard times being experienced by farm families. 
Local media also have shown support to the group as their 
travel ensues. 
 
The example set by Mike Baker, Bryce Brodie, Rob Gilroyed, 
and Shaun Janzen is exactly the kind of tenacious spirit that 
inspires the people of Saskatchewan in the face of adversity. 
 
I am sure all members join me in saying that this is an action 
that commands their immediate respect and appreciation for the 
province and for all farm families. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Reports 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we are now a quarter of the way 
through the province’s fiscal year and the Finance minister has 
promised to release quarterly financial reports, and I understand 
that these reports just aren’t ready at the moment. But I wonder 
if the Finance minister could give us a general idea where the 
government is with its budget. 
 
They have obviously been . . . there have obviously been 
increased demands on the budget since it was released last 
March, like forest firefighting costs, a new teachers’ contract 
that is currently being negotiated that will affect at least seven 
months of this current fiscal year. 
 
So could the minister give us an update? Are revenues up or 
down? Are expenditures up or down? And what adjustments is 
the government making to meet its new budget targets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
should know that retailers who will collect taxes until the end of 
June will have until some time, I believe, in early August to 
remit their sales tax receipts to the government. So if the 
member opposite is suggesting that at the third . . . the end of 
the first quarter, immediately there’s a third quarter or first 
quarter statement available, Mr. Speaker, that is not accurate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what will this government do? This government 
will continue to do what this government has always done 
which is to manage appropriately, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — And we can have, Mr. Speaker, claims by 
the opposition that the province is being mismanaged to which I 
would say this, Mr. Speaker. Before I take the word of the 
members opposite I’ll take the word of Moody’s of New York 
who have looked at the budget, Mr. Speaker, and have given us 
a credit rating upgrade and restored the credit rating of this 
province to straight As, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we understand that the minister has already received at 
least two months’ worth of financial information from the 
department of treasury, so there is an understanding about what 
is going on in the province of Saskatchewan even though the 
minister does not want to admit this. He does know this and I’m 
sure that he’s looking forward to the next month’s report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s budget in March indicated that the 
government projected a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, the government projected a razor-thin surplus of 
$45,000 and they’re spending more than that investigating their 
own ministers. 
 
There are also some bigger expenses that they are now incurring 
— a new nurses’ contract, the upcoming teachers’ contract I’ve 
already mentioned, forest fire costs, a $1.3 million legal 
settlement, and millions more expected in pending settlements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these additional costs are going to add up to 
millions of dollars. The Finance minister estimated government 
spending of $6.319 billion this year and a $45,000 surplus. Is 
this still his estimate or does he expect spending to be up from 
the budget he released? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 
member’s question is that we will monitor the situation. We 
will meet the forest firefighting costs, we will see what happens 
with the teachers’ negotiations and we will manage accordingly 
in the same way as we have for the last 10 years. 
 
And I want to say to the House and to the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, that one must be very suspect listening 
to the claims of the opposition. For example, on Friday last we 
had the member from Kelvington-Wadena saying, Mr. Speaker, 
that every year an interim supply motion is heard at the end of 
June in order to provide payments for July. 
 
We look at the record, Mr. Speaker, and what do we see? Mr. 
Speaker, we see that what the government has done this year is 
exactly the same as what the government did last year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The only mismanagement and incompetence in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, is the incompetence of the members opposite who 
took one year to realize that there is no interim supply motion at 
the end of June, Mr. Speaker. 



2452 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Members, oral 
question period . . . Order, members. Oral question period . . . 
Members, oral question period would go much better if we had 
one remark at a time and one response at a time. I ask members 
to allow the question to be put. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
seems like it’s a . . . it must be Friday already this week, and 
here it’s only Wednesday. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, the NDP was forced to make some 
major last minute adjustments to its revenue estimates. That left 
the government scrambling to revise its budget at the last 
minute. This year we’re hoping that they’re keeping a lot closer 
tabs on their revenues so they don’t get nailed with another last 
minute surprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March the minister forecast revenues of $6.094 
billion. Is that still his estimate or have there been major 
changes to the revenue estimates since the budget was delivered 
in March? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, unlike the party 
opposite which when they were in power did not have mid-year 
financial statements, and one year did not even produce a 
budget, Mr. Speaker, we are going to produce quarterly 
financial statements. And when the first quarter financial 
statement comes out, that will show the member what the 
estimate for revenues and expenditures for last year is. 
 
But I want to say — and for the current year — but I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite that what we are not 
going to do is to advocate what they advocate, such as the 
member from Lloydminster who says what? He says the 
Saskatchewan Party can no longer promise to maintain income 
tax cuts brought in by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then we have him going on to say what are they going to do? 
Quote, “If BC is doing the right thing, we want to learn from 
that.” Well they have, they have a lot to learn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then we have the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. What 
does she say? She says she wants to increase provincial sales 
taxes for individuals and families in Saskatchewan, in the 
Weyburn Review. 
 
We’re not going to increase personal taxes and sales taxes like 
they would do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for 
two consecutive questions I’ve asked the Minister of Finance to 
indicate whether his $6 billion expected revenue budget was on 
target or whether his $6 billion expenditure budget was on 
target. And he goes forward by talking about things of the past 
and demanding to know what kind of a policies are going on. 

Mr. Minister, I’m going to read a quote. And I want you to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — And I would like to be able to hear the quote. 
I ask the members to tone it down a bit. Once again, I recognize 
the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like the 
members opposite, including the opposition leader, to determine 
who made this quote. Is this the Minister of Finance or is this 
Leader of the Opposition? The quote reads: 
 

The economic forecast assumes an average crop in both 
quantity and quality annually through to the end of the 
forecast period. A poor harvest, as a result of drought or 
other causes, would detract from economic growth while a 
bumper crop would add to the province’s economic growth. 

 
Mr. Speaker, do you know whose quote that is? That is the 
Minister of Finance in this current budget. Are revenues and 
expenditures on target? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members 
opposite don’t know that the economy of Saskatchewan is 
affected by commodity prices, there’s not much I can say to 
help the members opposite. Although, although I do note that 
the opposition Finance critic is now taking the same acting 
lessons as the Leader of the Opposition has apparently been 
taking. 
 
But I want to inform the members opposite and I want to inform 
the House, Mr. Speaker, not what the Finance critic from the 
opposition says but what the Investment Dealers Association of 
Canada say. They say the province is running its fiscal affairs in 
a very responsible and prudent way, they say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say this while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, what 
we are not going to do in this province is adopt the remedy of 
the Fraser Institute, which is to get rid of all the business taxes 
and put a bunch of new PST (provincial sales tax) sales taxes on 
consumers, on individuals, harmonize the PST and the GST 
(goods and services tax). 
 
And what does the member from Weyburn say, Mr. Speaker, 
quoted in the Weyburn Review, she says and I’m quoting: 
“Brenda Bakken feels the report echoes what the Saskatchewan 
Party has been saying for years.” In other words, talk to the 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Firefighting Costs 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Environment 
minister. There are municipalities in Saskatchewan that could 
be bankrupted by bills amounting to millions of dollars in this 
province for fighting forest fires. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities has 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

 

asked the government to waive any charges with respect to 
helicopters, water bombers, and provincial firefighting crews. 
So far all they’ve heard is that the province has set up a 
committee to find out how these costs should be handled. Mr. 
Speaker, I asked this question yesterday and so did the media. 
None of us got an answer. 
 
Will the minister explain who is on this committee, what are the 
terms of reference, and when is the committee expected to reach 
a decision on assistance for communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there is no question that 
on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan that I want to 
emphasize that there is a lot of compassion, a lot of sympathy 
for the many people that lost homes, and the many challenges 
that people have faced throughout this very difficult fire season. 
 
I think, as a province, we want to stand next to the RMs (rural 
municipality), and next to the towns, and next to the people of 
the North who’ve had a dramatic effect on their life, adverse 
effect, in the sense that they’ve had their life disrupted and 
certainly many of their lands under threat from fire. And we 
want to stand next to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I’ll point out to that member, Mr. Speaker, is we do 
have a plan. Normally this government covers many of those 
costs. And what you have to understand is in this partnership 
approach, we will stand with the RMs, we’ll work with them to 
a very solid conclusion on how to deal with some of the 
challenges of fire seasons. Especially this year where we’ve had 
a dramatic effect, a dramatic increase in fires, Mr. Speaker. We 
will stand with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister came nowhere 
near answering the question. And with stickhandling like that, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s political career is going to come to 
an end just as quickly as his mediocre hockey career came to an 
end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister told the media and I quote: 
 

We want to foster local . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. No hitting 
under the belts, please. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
minister said, and I quote: 
 

We want to foster local responsibility when it comes to 
firefighting. 

 
I think that means perhaps the minister has been listening to the 
federal government because that’s the same approach that 
they’re taking with farm families. This is the minister’s 
bureaucratic way of telling RMs (rural municipality) that 
they’re out of luck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier made a commitment to the 

community of Nipawin and surrounding RMs for disaster 
assistance. He completely blindsided his own Minister of Public 
Safety in the process. Is it fair to expect that other communities 
would expect the same treatment? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the Premier 
promised disaster assistance for Nipawin if they weren’t 
prepared to offer municipalities the same assistance for 
firefighting? And maybe this time we can get a big-league 
answer, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell that member has 
been playing hockey once too often without a hockey helmet 
and . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, as 
we’ve said time and time again in this Assembly, that we’re 
going to stand next to the RMs. There is certainly a plan in 
process that we’re undertaking to address this very serious 
challenge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out that he should expect within the next 
couple of weeks — this is for the media as well — that within 
the next couple of weeks they should expect an answer to some 
of the work that we’ve been doing, because it has been a very 
tough firefighting season and many RMs have been adversely 
affected as I’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s very important to point out is that we’re not going to 
have an ad hoc approach. We’re going to have a very thorough 
approach. There are many things that the RMs are capable of 
doing and they have been doing. There are many things that we 
will do to help, Mr. Speaker. We will stand with the RMs and 
the many communities that have had this challenge facing them 
time and time again. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, why did that member and 
that party vote against the new firefighters that we hired in last 
year’s budget? Then they have the audacity to get up and 
criticize that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — There’s only, there’s only one thing 
consistent about the NDP: they consistently don’t provide 
answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know there is nothing in the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund because the NDP moved that money to the 
General Revenue Fund so they could fudge the budget. Now the 
Minister of Finance says he estimates the NDP will pay 
anywhere from 10 to $50 million over budget this year due to 
the severe fire year we’ve had so far. 
 
Yet, the Premier promised Nipawin to help deal with its fire 
bills and other RMs are also requesting that same kind of 
assistance because they can’t possibly cope with the $3 million 
worth of bills that they face. 
 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Environment, isn’t it true that 
the NDP are now trying to weasel out of their commitment 
because of their budget difficulties? Will the minister commit 
that there will actually be financial assistance for communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me explain to that 
peewee player there that we are going to address this issue in a 
very timely fashion, Mr. Speaker. There’s no question that 
we’ve asked for a couple of weeks to respond to this matter. 
 
And as opposed to us taking criticism and taking suggestion for 
a party that never understood finances, Mr. Speaker, I will not 
take direction from that member from that party, from that 
member and that party that voted against a budget to increase 
firefighting, Mr. Speaker. I will not take any, any message from 
that party or that, or that member on how to manage the 
finances of this province, nor will I take any advice on how to 
fight fires, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a Minister of Finance and a Premier and a government 
that’s saying today that we’re going to fight the fires no matter 
what the cost. We’re going to stand next to the RMs. We’re 
going to come up with a solution, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to 
be a timely solution, Mr. Speaker. And to me, that is good 
progress, Mr. Speaker, and that is a good game plan. 
 
And again, I ask the members opposite, you have the audacity 
to stand up today and complain about forest fires . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday and today again, we’ve had the minister talk about 
consulting with communities. A lot of these communities 
haven’t even received invoices from Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Manager. Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
even have any way of determining what those costs are going to 
be, whether they’re shared or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry. Order, please, members. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, now the official opposition 
is getting phone calls from individuals who are extremely angry 
about the fact that they’re not being allowed to volunteer for 
firefighting in their own immediate areas. They are being 
refused access, in some cases, to their own land, to fight fires. 
Could the minister explain to us when and why are volunteers 
being refused access to fight fires in their own areas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is very important that 
we always have a coordinated approach to the many challenges 
of fighting fires. We often incorporate volunteer fire 
departments and many people are conscripted to firefight. And 
recently, Mr. Speaker, we’ve upgraded many people’s skills and 
training to make sure that they’re safe out there fighting fires. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we take a very solid 
approach to the manner in which we fight fires. And we 
appreciate the many volunteers that are out there and to the 
many community members that want to fight to protect their 
communities. We appreciate that. But safety and progress are so 
very important to us. We want to make sure that we know 
where everybody is at all times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would point out it is about strong leadership; it is about 
making sure that we respond to the growing threat against our 
communities and to . . . against our RMs. And I would say to 
you, let the professionals firefight — the same professionals 
that you voted against . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I have done this before — order, members — 
I’ve done this before but I would once again bring to the 
attention of the hon. member from Athabasca to complete all of 
his remarks through the Chair and not to repeat. And I would 
ask you to pay . . . ask the member to pay special attention to 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Softwood Lumber Industry 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Industry and Resources. In early 
May, the Saskatchewan Party raised the question of how 
American turfs . . . tariffs against Canadian softwood lumber 
would affect the . . . our Saskatchewan lumber industry. The 
Saskatchewan Party presented a motion that if a conference of 
the Western provinces was held to develop a united position in 
response to the US (United States) farm Bill, there should also 
be a discussion and a position taken on the softwood lumber 
tariffs as well. 
 
The NDP did not allow debate on the motion and they didn’t 
allow it to go to a vote in the House. Now the headlines are 
starting to tell the story. They’re telling a story about how the 
softwood lumber tariffs are costing jobs in Saskatchewan’s 
lumber industry. Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP ignored the 
impact US softwood lumber tariffs are having on 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(14:15) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member will 
remember when this issue was first raised that there were 
significant meetings in Ottawa, significant work done to ensure 
that Saskatchewan’s interests were protected. The industry was 
onside with the position we took, Mr. Speaker, and we took that 
position to Ottawa. There was a concerted effort on the part of 
all the provinces and the federal government to meet the US 
challenge here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That work continues. That work is the responsibility of the 
federal government. We’ve done everything we can with the 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

 

industry to be onside with that position, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 
continue to do that and we’ll continue to make sure that every 
effort is made to protect Saskatchewan and Canadian softwood 
lumber workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We now have a 
new logger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sask trends monitor reports that employment in 
the forestry and lumber industry has dropped by 33 per cent so 
far this year. Total employment in forestry, logging, and wood 
products is now only at 2,500 jobs. 
 
The Weyerhaeuser mill in Big River has told employees that 
they will be shutting down for at least four weeks this summer 
instead of the usual two weeks. Vice-president Steve Smith says 
it’s directly due to how low prices are and the countervail duty. 
In fact, most mills in the province have either laid off people or 
are running out . . . or running just at the break-even point due 
to the trade penalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what action has been taken by the NDP to lobby 
the federal government for trade injury support of this industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
respond on behalf of the government to say that the government 
is well aware of the impact on the forest industry that the 
softwood lumber dispute has had, not only here but across 
Canada. It’s an unfortunate circumstance and we know that and 
we believe that the actions by the Americans are unfair. We 
have taken that position to the disputes and to the discussions 
along with our federal counterparts. 
 
And it is unfortunate that it has had some impact on our job 
numbers as it relates to dimensional lumber here in the 
province, not only in Big River, but in La Ronge and other 
sawmills across our province. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that we will continue to work to ensure fairness in trade whether 
it’s in the softwood lumber industry, or whether it’s in our 
agricultural commodities in which we would like to trade in a 
fair and a non-distorted marketplace. 
 
But I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that it’s very apparent 
that the smile that was brought to the face by that member when 
he recognized that there were fewer jobs in the forest industry 
because of the trade dispute, is very disconcerting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 412 and 413. 
 

The Speaker: — Responses to questions 412 and 413 have 
been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
guests who are in the west gallery today, Dave Coleman and 
daughter, Glenna, who live in the northwest corner of the city. 
Dave is a teacher at Elsie Mironuck School. 
 
And they were also part of my congregation at St. James where 
Glenna often helped her mother, Jean, teaching Sunday school. 
So I’d invite all members to welcome them here to the 
Assembly as they are able to take some time and watch the 
proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials when he’s ready. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today is, to 
my left, is Mr. Ron Styles, the deputy minister of Finance; to 
my right is Mr. David Pratt, who is the senior analyst with 
taxation and intergovernmental affairs. Behind Mr. Styles is 
Ms. Lori Taylor who is the manager of the financial 
management branch of the provincial comptroller’s division. 
 
Behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle the assistant deputy minister of 
the treasury board branch. Behind Mr. Pratt is Mr. Dennis 
Polowyk who is the assistant deputy minister of the treasury 
and debt management division. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I would like to move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $477,941,000 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
2003. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Thank you, very much, Mr. 
Chair. Mr. Chair, I want to first extend my appreciation to the 
minister’s officials for being in attendance this afternoon for a 
number of items. The first being the interim supply. 
 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Minister, the request that you have given to us today is for 
one-twelfth of which was similar to the last request. And 
interestingly enough, Mr. Minister, during the debate that just 
occurred in the legislature during question period — or not 
necessarily the debate, exchange of questions and answers — 
you indicated that for the last three years, I believe, there have 
been no requests for an interim supply prior to June 30, and you 
indicated that it was not necessary. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, since there seems to be some 
indication that this House is not going to sit to the end of July, it 
will end sometimes in the next week or two, could you indicate 
to the people of Saskatchewan why you felt it was appropriate 
to introduce an interim supply Bill today rather than wait for the 
budget to be passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I do not believe that I said the 
words that were just attributed to me by the opposition Finance 
critic in question period. I believe I referred to what occurred 
last year in 2001. 
 
The member said that I said something about what occurred the 
last three years. In fact, I did not so state. But what I did state to 
the House, which of course is correct, is that the procedure 
we’re following this year with respect to interim supply is 
precisely the same procedure that we followed last year insofar 
as the month of June is concerned. Which is that we have not, 
when we’re going into July and hoping to pass the main 
appropriation Bill early on in July, we have not passed an 
interim supply Bill. 
 
And I point this out because the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena said in the media last year that we, you 
know, every year in the last week of June there would be an 
interim supply Bill which is actually contrary to the facts, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
And then this morning in the Leader-Post and StarPhoenix we 
had the columnist Murray Mandryk in fact saying, and I quote: 
 

. . . it happened to have passed an interim supply bill last 
year in June before returning to wrap up the 2001 session in 
early July. 

 
And in fact, even though the media and the opposition have 
stated to the public that this is something done at the end of 
June, that has not been the case. And the fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Chair, what the opposition and Mr. Mandryk say is simply 
factually 100 per cent incorrect, and I want to point that out. 
 
The difference between last year and today is that last year the 
government, through the House Leader, was able to negotiate 
with the opposition to pass the main Appropriation Bill on a 
certain day, which turned out to be July 7. And it was not 
necessary to have an interim supply Bill because we knew the 
budget would be passed by July 7. 
 
This year — and the public should know this too, Mr. Chair — 
the opposition has not come to an agreement with the 
government, as I understand it, or if it has up until this morning, 
I have not been so informed. The opposition has not agreed 
with the government on a specific time to pass the budget. And 
of course the budget has to be passed so that third parties, the 

school boards and so on, that the opposition claims to be 
concerned about, can be paid and people can have their money, 
whether they’re receiving social assistance or the teachers being 
paid or health districts needing money and so on. 
 
And so, because we have not had that kind of co-operation from 
the opposition, I think it is prudent at this time to pass an 
interim supply Bill, and that’s what we’re asking the House to 
do. And since the opposition claims, Mr. Chair, to be concerned 
about the school boards as opposed to playing politics, I would 
think that the opposition would want to pass the interim supply 
Bill without too much complaint since the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena said in the media last week that the 
opposition wanted to do that at the earliest opportunity. So one 
wouldn’t think this would be very controversial, 
notwithstanding the inaccurate statements being made by the 
opposition. 
 
So I believe that an interim supply Bill is in order because I 
don’t believe there’s any agreement as to when the budget will 
be approved by the opposition. And out of respect for the third 
parties, we’re going to present this interim supply Bill today. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite as well that, contrary to 
the statements in the media by the opposition that somehow 
people are not going to be paid and that problems are going to 
be caused by a lack of an interim supply Bill last week, there is 
no such problem. And in fact I’ve spoken to the School 
Trustees Association and I’m advised that a few days’ delay in 
getting their payment is not a problem for them; it doesn’t 
create a major difficulty. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And there are ways, Mr. Chair, that if the opposition spent any 
time at all on thinking about solutions instead of running around 
the province saying that there was a crisis and the sky was 
falling, if they thought about it for a minute, there’s some very 
easy ways to ensure that there are absolutely no interest costs to 
the school boards. But one would have to be interested in 
helping the school boards instead of playing politics in order to 
figure out how to save those interest costs. 
 
We will figure out how to save those interest costs. I don’t 
expect any co-operation from the opposition in that regard, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we 
do intend to co-operate today but we also intend to have you 
provide factual information to the school boards and to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And my first comment, Mr. Minister, requires that you clarify 
why you said that there would have been an appropriation Bill 
passed on July 7, when we adjourned the House last year on 
July 6. I’ve just checked with the Clerk’s office and we did 
adjourn the House on July 6. And you make reference to the 
fact that the opposition did something on July 7. I think that 
needs clarification, Mr. Minister, because you are indeed 
factually incorrect. 
 
Mr. Minister, you also have stated, you also have stated that 
school boards shouldn’t be concerned and that no school boards 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

 

have indicated that there is a problem. Mr. Minister, I do want 
to read to you an e-mail sent out from Saskatchewan Learning, 
from a person who is . . . whose name is Lynn Hendry, and this 
is to boards right across the entire province, and it says this: 
 

School finance of Saskatchewan Learning has been 
informed by Saskatchewan Finance that our total 
appropriation for the month of June will not be available 
prior to June 28. Some school divisions, including yours, 
may not receive the June grant payment until the legislature 
has passed the budget. 
 
Thank you for your patience in this matter. 

 
Mr. Minister, that’s totally confusing to school boards. You’re 
stating on one . . . in one instance that you’re doing something 
different this year, that there’s no agreement with the 
opposition. Well let me tell you that there was no agreement 
from your House Leader in terms of where we were moving 
with this session. 
 
As a result, you did not introduce an interim supply Bill at the 
end of June. As a result school divisions have received this 
e-mail that says bear with us, but Saskatchewan Finance has 
told us because the budget isn’t passed, we’re not giving you 
any grant money. That’s what message the Department of 
Learning has communicated throughout the entire province on 
behalf of the Department of Finance. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you have to come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan here. Did the boards of Saskatchewan receive 
their money on June 28 which is the last business day of the 
year, which is the customary time for receiving that money? Or 
is it going to now be delayed as a result of the fact that we’re 
dealing with an interim supply Bill today, being July 3? 
 
There was no agreement prior to the House Leader of the 
government introducing a motion that shortened last week to 
allow for an extended long weekend. There was a change to the 
fact that we sat Friday hours last Thursday. You understood 
those things as well as every member in this House. Yet there 
was no interim supply. 
 
Now you stand today and you say it’s the opposition’s fault. It’s 
the opposition’s fault that the press has now misled the public 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
You’ve indicated two things today that seem to be misleading. 
One, we weren’t even here on July 7 and two, there is a memo 
from the Department of Learning to the school divisions telling 
them, you’re not getting your money because the budget hasn’t 
been passed. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, what if we weren’t going to adjourn in the 
next week or two? Would you not have had to have an interim 
supply to ensure that school divisions and all other third parties 
receive their money? I ask for your comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the member is correct that when 
I stated that we passed the budget last year on July 7, that was 
not correct. We passed the budget on July 6. That was simply 
an error in the date but . . . and it was given Royal Assent the 
same day. 

In answer to the member’s question, I would say this, Mr. 
Chair, that what we are talking about here is if an Appropriation 
Bill is passed today, that is an interim supply Bill on July 3, 
we’re talking about payments to school divisions being two 
days late. That’s what we’re talking about, two days. The 
interest cost would be very minimal, Mr. Chair. 
 
But what I intend to do, subject to the main budget being passed 
prior to the end of August, is to send out the September 
instalment, which is the next instalment for the school boards, 
two days early or three days early so that there will be no 
additional interest costs for school boards. 
 
And as I say to the members opposite, I believe, Mr. Chair, that 
it’s important, when third parties are involved, for the 
opposition and the government to proceed in a proactive, 
co-operative fashion. And so I’m suggesting to the opposition 
that we should pass the interim supply Bill as soon as possible 
so that we could even process payments today. 
 
And the longer this discussion goes, Mr. Chair, the later it is 
today that those cheques may be processed, or perhaps they 
can’t be processed until tomorrow now. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that if we try to be 
co-operative and think about the school boards instead of 
politics, then what we could do is simply agree that the 
government can send the September payments two or three days 
early so that there’s absolutely no extra interest costs for the 
school boards. 
 
And from the point of view of the government, our concern, 
Mr. Chair, is not to prolong this or have a lot of political debate. 
Our concern is the third parties co-operating with the school 
boards. And I would ask for the members’ co-operation in 
passing the interim supply at the earliest possible moment so 
that we can get that money out to the school boards, which is 
what we should be concentrating on, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Minister, 
I’d like to concentrate on the fact that a circular that comes from 
one of the departments, in this case Saskatchewan Learning, 
that says that Saskatchewan Finance has indicated that boards 
are not going to receive their money because the budget is not 
passed. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know as well as I do that that implies that the 
opposition has held up passing the budget. Well I want you to 
indicate, for the record, that passing the budget — we are not 
going to pass the budget today — that that has nothing to do 
with the fact that school boards and hospital boards, etc., are 
going to receive their money; that that would take place 
anyways. 
 
Mr. Minister, I also want to have you indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan as to the fact that you did not request of the 
opposition any time prior to today that an interim supply Bill 
should be put forward. Would you clarify that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well traditionally, Mr. Chair, the 
legislature will have passed the budget by the end of June or 
very early in July. And last year we were able to obtain the 
agreement of the opposition to pass the budget, I said July 7 — 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

the member corrected me; it was actually July 6, and I 
acknowledge that — and we are hopeful that the opposition will 
agree to pass the budget at a fairly early date. 
 
But I acknowledge that, with the member, that beyond my 
control or the control of the government, we don’t have the 
agreement between the parties to pass the budget as of a certain 
date. So it seems prudent, in the interests of the school boards 
and other third parties, without that agreement, to have an 
interim supply Bill so that we can pay the third parties. And the 
government is asking for the co-operation of the opposition to 
pass an interim supply Bill so that we can get those monies out 
to third parties, and that’s what we’re trying to do here today. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in the 
year 2000, the second interim supply was requested on May 26, 
which is before the new month of June. In 2001, it was 
requested on May 30, prior to the next month. And in fact this 
year the last time we dealt with the second interim supply was 
May 30, prior to the June month, month of June. 
 
That enabled the Department of Finance, the Department of 
Learning to indeed ensure that the June transfers of grants were 
made on the correct date. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did your department not present to this 
House last Monday, last Tuesday, an interim supply knowing 
full well that we were going to sit through a great portion of 
July? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to accept responsibility for 
that, Mr. Chair, because I want the House to know and the 
public to know, as I stated publicly, that my officials advised 
the House business office on June 20 that we would not be 
proposing an interim supply Bill at the end of June. That was 
something that we very deliberately did. It’s not something as 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena is accusing the 
government of that we forgot to do something, that we 
overlooked it. What we did was very deliberate, and I accept 
responsibility for that. 
 
Our hope was that in this current week, right now or tomorrow, 
we would be passing the budget for the people of the province. 
As it transpires, the member has said we’re not passing the 
budget this week. I accept that. I respect the role that the 
opposition plays and they’d like to stay here, and that’s their 
right. And they like it here, their House Leader says, and I 
respect that. And a member says we don’t mind working. 
 
And I’ll just comment on that, Mr. Chair, because that’s another 
observation that was made by that member from 
Kelvington-Wadena last week — that somehow this happened 
because we did not want to work. 
 
I want that member to know that I was at my constituency 
office early on Friday morning. I was not taking a holiday. And 
on Friday afternoon I was in one of their ridings at a public 
event where, Mr. Chair, they didn’t even show up. So we were 
working on Friday. 
 
I can’t account for the whereabouts of the members of the 
opposition on Friday. I don’t know what they were doing. I was 
working, and I think other members on this side of the House 

were working. 
 
But what I want to say to the member opposite, to answer the 
question, is that we did not do an interim supply Bill last week 
because we were hopeful that the opposition would agree to 
pass the budget this week. If the opposition does not wish to 
pass the budget this week, Mr. Chair, then an interim supply 
Bill is necessary and that’s what we shall do. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, this . . . Well, you said that you 
would hope that we avoid the politics and start to deal with 
what is right for the school boards and other third parties. I 
would venture to say that many of our MLAs had many 
different functions to attend last Friday and I take your 
comment as being an insult and I would hope that you would 
retract that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, also . . . I mean, Mr. Chair, I’m 
sorry. Also, Mr. Minister, last week, last week, in fact in the last 
10 days, we’ve had new legislation introduced by government. 
New legislation that requires a time to actually deal with it in 
second readings and Committee of the Whole. 
 
How would you have expected that the budget — after in fact 
your House Leader introduced a motion to shorten last week 
and not return until July 2 — how would you have expected the 
budget to either have been passed by June 27, or in fact I guess 
yesterday would have been the first opportunity. How did you 
make that type of deduction that indeed the budget would get 
passed in that short of notice when we were still getting, as an 
opposition, we were still getting new legislation? Could you 
indicate why you felt that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well there have been many occasions, Mr. 
Chair, where Bills have been passed in one day. In fact it is my 
hope — and I think the member has indicated it’s his hope — 
that this very Bill, interim supply Bill we’re talking about right 
now, would be passed today. And the fact is, Mr. Chair, that the 
business of the legislature can be concluded, you know, in a 
timely fashion. 
 
Having said that, I want to make it perfectly clear that I respect 
the rights of all of the members of the legislature, and in 
particular the members of the opposition, to have full debate 
and ask questions that they need to ask about legislation. And 
that’s the process that we’re into now that we haven’t quite 
wrapped up the business of the Legislative Assembly. We 
haven’t passed the budget; we’ll wait to do that until an 
appropriate time. And in the meantime, because we haven’t 
passed the budget, an interim supply Bill this week is necessary 
and that’s what we’re doing. 
 
And what we’re asking the opposition for, Mr. Chair, is their 
co-operation in moving the interim supply Bill along so that we 
can pay the third parties and then they can go on asking other 
questions about the budget before we give final approval to the 
budget. And I fully respect that. And all we’re asking for, Mr. 
Chair, is that the opposition co-operate with us so that we can 
make payments to the third parties, including the school boards. 
 
And really, that’s what it’s all about. It’s about getting that 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

 

money out to the third parties. And once again I would ask the 
member for his co-operation and the co-operation of his 
colleagues to do that, Mr. Chair. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, while the minister asks for 
co-operation, I think what has to happen within the departments 
of government is there has to be better communication. 
 
Mr. Minister, as of today’s order . . . routine proceedings, there 
are four Bills in adjourned debates, there are 36 Bills in 
Committee of the Whole, and as you might be aware, Mr. 
Minister, of the departmental estimates, no estimates have been 
voted off. 
 
You have indicated that it was your hope that the budget . . . 
and you respect the role that the opposition plays, and you had 
indicated that you felt that the budget should have been passed 
either last week or today or sometimes yesterday, I guess, is 
your other choice. How could you have expected that to occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, people who observed the 
proceedings of the legislature will know that the business of the 
legislature usually has ended by the end of June. It doesn’t 
always. And if it doesn’t, I respect the role of the opposition to 
ask questions and continue debate on Bills. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, in answer to the member’s 
question, that if the House resolved to finish the business of the 
House and put those Bills through committee, that’s what 
would happen, Mr. Chair. It hasn’t happened, so we need an 
interim supply Bill and then we can continue getting to those 
Bills that are in Committee of the Whole and need to be 
completed, which is what the government wants to do and I 
think the opposition wants to do. 
 
And once again, Mr. Chair, we’re simply asking for the 
opposition’s co-operation in putting an interim supply Bill 
through this House today so that we can get the money out to 
the school boards which the members opposite have indicated is 
a priority for them. It’s also a priority for us. And all we’re 
asking for is the co-operation of the members opposite in 
passing the interim supply motion that I’ve made. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, there’s no question 
that the interim supply Bill that is being discussed today was 
required last week. There has been no agreement, there has been 
no consideration. And in fact, as I pointed out, the workload 
that we have before us will require us to be here for a number of 
days of July. I think your officials understood that. 
 
In fact you have Saskatchewan Learning officials circulating to 
boards of education, not that they were expecting that the 
opposition would pass the budget on July 2 or 3 and indeed two 
or three days of being late is okay, they were implying that the 
budget is not passed and as a result, there is no money. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, while you’re trying to imply that the 
opposition has somehow misled the people, that somehow 
we’ve held up the things in this Legislative Assembly. That’s 
simply not the case. 
 

As I’ve pointed out to you in the routine proceedings of today 
we still have a large amount of work to be done and indeed we 
are now looking to doing extra work at nights and maybe sitting 
until 10 or 11 or midnight tonight and tomorrow night. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think you have to come clean on this one 
and indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that the interim 
supply Bill presented last Monday would have been the right 
thing to do. It didn’t take place based on the fact — and if 
you’re to be taken at your word, which I do — you’ve indicated 
that you’ve said to the officials as early as June 20, I believe, or 
21st that you weren’t going to introduce that. 
 
That’s fine. But you have to communicate to people outside of 
your department that indeed it’s not the opposition’s fault that 
they didn’t receive their grant payment on June 28, which is 
what these school boards are implying. They didn’t get the 
payment because there was no interim supply and there was no 
budget passed. 
 
Today there is no budget passed. There won’t be one passed 
tomorrow. So we’re dealing with the interim supply today. 
That’s the procedure that probably should have taken place last 
Monday. 
 
So I would ask you to clarify for the people of Saskatchewan 
the fact that indeed there is no budget being passed today, that 
school boards will receive their one-twelfth supply as a result of 
the passing of the interim supply today, but that could have 
been done last Monday or Tuesday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’ve already indicated to the 
House, and of course I’ll indicate to the people, that it was our 
hope that the budget would be passed by now so we would not 
be doing interim supply. 
 
Mr. Chair, the budget has not been passed. It apparently will not 
be passed today or tomorrow or the next day, so we need to 
have an interim supply motion to get the money out to the 
school boards. And all we’re asking is for the co-operation of 
the opposition to do what they say they want to do, which is to 
pass an interim supply motion to get that money out to the 
school boards. 
 
I’ve also indicated to the member opposite that no school board 
will incur any interest costs whatsoever because what we will 
simply do, assuming the budget’s passed by the end of August 
or third week in August, is send the September payment out a 
number of days early equivalent to the two or three days late 
that the payment may be received for June or July. 
 
And so no one will lose any money, there is no major problem. 
I’ve spoken to the School Trustees Association who say this is 
not a major monetary issue for them. And all we’re asking for, 
once again, is for the co-operation of the opposition to pass the 
interim supply Bill so that we can get on with the other business 
of the House and so that the third parties can receive those 
cheques that the opposition says they want them to receive. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Cypress Hills on his 
feet? 



2460 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Elhard: — To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce to you and 
to the assembled members and other guests in the House a 
family that has come to Saskatchewan, to Western Canada, to 
enjoy the beauty of our area, to see for themselves what 
Western Canada has to offer and also to pick up their daughter 
who has been an exchange student in the community of Eastend 
for the past year. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce to you today Gerd and 
Sigrid Heinze and their children, Torsten and Ute who was the 
exchange student. Would they please stand? Now they’re from 
just outside of Berlin, Germany. 
 
And I’d like all members to welcome them. And before you do 
that, I’d like to also introduce my wife Marilyn who is 
accompanying them around the city today. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d like also to ask for 
leave to introduce a guest at this point. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I see, sitting in your 
gallery, Mr. Jim Yuel who is a respected businessman in 
Saskatoon and also the former Chair of the regional economic 
development authority and named as one of the 10 most 
influential business people in Saskatchewan by the 
Saskatchewan Business magazine. 
 
And I noticed, in the last edition, he wrote a letter pointing out 
that his next-door neighbour was named as one of the most 
influential labour leaders in Saskatchewan. So you can . . . They 
live side by side. I’ve been to at least one of those houses, Mr. 
Chair. And I’m sure that the most influential business leader 
and the influential labour leader have very interesting 
conversations over their back fence. 
 
And I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming Jim 
Yuel to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, could you — while we’ve been talking about school 
boards today — could you indicate to the House whether any 
other third parties would have been affected by the fact that the 
last business day of June was on Friday, June 28 and whether or 
not, as a result of the interim supply Bill not being introduced 

that they would not have received their grant payments — their 
appropriate grant payments for the month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I believe that there would be 
many third parties that would be affected and would receive 
their cheques, you know two or three days later than otherwise. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I am pleased to hear that you’re going to try to 
compensate boards by — that small amount of lost interest — 
by indeed providing a grant payment I guess in advance. 
 
But I recall back in . . . previous ministers of Finance that that 
was a common practice where school divisions, in light of the 
fact that the budget wouldn’t get passed in the . . . at its 
inception, there were many times when school divisions have 
received three months or two months in advance to indeed 
offset interest costs or those kinds of things. So I’m pleased to 
hear that school boards will receive that kind of payment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other questions that I have deal with your 
budget. Today in question period you did not comment on the 
current budget because you indicated that you did not have the 
available information to provide any different information on 
revenue or expenditures that is being provided in the budget. 
But, Mr. Minister, also included in this year’s budget is the 
forecast or the estimated year-end of March 31, 2002, the fiscal 
year that just ended. 
 
You indicated I think in your budget that last year there was . . . 
projected surplus for the year was going to be $412,000. I’m 
assuming that we’re going to see Volume 1 from the auditor 
very soon — sometimes in the next month, month and a half — 
but could you indicate to the people of Saskatchewan and to this 
House what the numbers are really showing for the fiscal year 
that just ended on March 31? Are we still looking at the 
estimated numbers that you have in your budget document for 
both the revenue and the expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well at this point, Mr. Chair, I would say 
that you know the numbers will be released when the public 
accounts are released, and I can’t comment on what the 
numbers will be today. 
 
But as I said to the member in the House, with respect to the 
current fiscal year and the forecast for this year, it’s very 
difficult to put that together today because we don’t have the 
returns from retailers, for example, who would remit their sales 
taxes for the end of June, which is the end of the first quarter, 
perhaps in August. So it will be some time before we can 
speculate on the first quarter. Or at least I can’t see that being 
the case until toward the end of July. 
 
But at that time when we release the public accounts — and we 
have been releasing them earlier than in the past — and put out 
the first quarter statement either at the same time or at some 
subsequent time, those numbers will certainly be made 
available to the member and to the public. 
 
And I want to say that — the member’s asking me for those 
numbers today, and I don’t have them — but I want to say to 
the member that we’re releasing those numbers faster than 
we’ve ever released them before. And we’re making more 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2461 

 

information public than we’ve ever made before. 
 
And as soon as we have the first quarter numbers available, 
those numbers will be released to the member opposite and to 
the public. And that’s the best that we can do today, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And yes, we look 
forward to the first quarter report, Mr. Minister, and by release 
of all those documents from your office. 
 
Mr. Minister, though, my question still is connected to March 
31 of this past year, 2002. And while the auditor is going to do 
a complete analysis, I’m wondering if your officials could 
indicate to the House today whether the projected . . . forecasted 
revenue of 5.957 billion, as indicated on page 12 of your 
document, and the expenditure for last year, which was to be 
March 31, 2002, which was to be 6.368 billion, which is on 
page 13, are those numbers accurate to what you still believe to 
be the numbers that have come in for the fiscal year? Because 
that quarter is long past, March 31 is long past, and I’m sure 
your officials have all the revenue numbers and all of the other 
things that were estimated in this document on March 27. We’re 
now into the fourth month past since March 31. 
 
So I understand your answer for this current fiscal year and I 
await your quarterly report at the end of July and I thank you 
for that. But can you tell us whether the March 31 projections 
for revenue and for expenditure on your documents are within 
reasonable expectations from what we could expect in the 
auditor’s report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I want to make it perfectly clear, Mr. 
Chair, that I am not going to get into giving numbers about 
what is in the public accounts that have not been released yet. I 
will comment on the numbers when the public accounts come 
out. 
 
But in answer to the question, I will say this to the member. The 
member asks, do I believe that the numbers will be within 
reasonable expectation, words to that effect, of what we 
projected them to be. The answer is yes, I do believe that. If 
anything, I believe that the numbers will be somewhat better 
than what we had projected. And I want to say to the member, 
I’m not going into any more detail other than our projections 
will be met, if not exceeded, when those public accounts are 
made public. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
thank the officials from the Department of Finance for being 
here and assisting us today. And I also would like to thank the 
Finance critic and the members of the opposition for their 
co-operation in passing the first resolution for interim supply. 
 
And with that, I would like to move resolution no. 2: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2003, the sum 
of $477,941,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 

Fund. 
 
And I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 80, The Appropriation Act, 2002 (No. 3) be 
now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under the rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second 
and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 57 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 
57, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, is a 
fairly substantive Bill by the size of the . . . the look of it. But 
I’m not so sure that it’s as substantive in terms of what it does 
or accomplishes as the size of the paper might indicate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill introduces some changes to 
SGI’s (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) no-fault 
insurance provisions. What it’s trying to accomplish is a 
recognition of the disappointment many people have had with 
no-fault coverage and is making allowances for a return to the 
tort system where individuals could use the legal system to 
address injuries and get compensation for injuries as a result of 
an accident. And we’ll talk a little bit about whether or not this 
Bill accomplishes the intended purpose as expressed in the 
explanatory notes that accompany this particular Bill. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, no-fault insurance was introduced 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

to this province by the current administration in 1995. It was a 
significant departure from tradition, from legal jurisprudence, 
from insurance protection. We had never seen no-fault 
insurance in this province before and it was held up as a means 
of providing fair and reasonable coverage to most insurance 
holders while not allowing for exorbitant settlements which 
could potentially bankrupt the insurance business in this 
province. 
 
And of course being that SGI is a government owned entity, the 
bankruptcy of that particular insurer was of paramount 
importance to the government at that time. 
 
I’m not so sure that the reality matched the concern. There were 
substantial settlements being offered from time to time through 
the courts to aggrieved parties — people who had suffered 
injury. But whether or not that trend would have continued, 
whether or not the amounts would have escalated or continued 
at a high level is debatable. And the imposition of the no-fault 
insurance system brought a complete and total end to the tort 
system and the high insurance settlements. 
 
But while it achieved a reduction in settlement costs on one 
hand, it also limited fairly significantly the payment for pain 
and suffering and injury to legitimate victims of accidents who 
for one reason or the other fell through the cracks as it pertained 
to the no-fault program that was introduced by SGI and the 
government in 1995. 
 
It was apparent after a relatively short time, Mr. Speaker, that 
no-fault as designed and as implemented in the province of 
Saskatchewan was not going to meet in an adequate way the 
reality of many accident victims. 
 
And without going into a lot of details on specific cases, every 
member of this House, and I’m sure including the government 
side, heard of cases where individuals were significantly injured 
in a bizarre type of accident sometimes and were offered 
absolutely no compensation or no assistance or no coverage 
through the new no-fault program. 
 
And it was those types of situations, what one would often 
describe as hard cases, that it became apparent that there were 
serious shortcomings in the no-fault insurance program as we 
knew it. 
 
There was one individual in this province who was determined 
as a result of her own rather unfortunate and unhappy 
experience to redress those kinds of circumstances. I’m 
referring to Ms. Lorie Terry who spearheaded a campaign by 
victims of no-fault to collect all of the information they could to 
encourage people who had suffered unnecessarily as a result of 
no-fault coverage to put their stories on paper and to make them 
public. 
 
And Ms. Terry undertook a tireless campaign to make sure that 
the awareness level of the general public was raised to a point 
where everybody could see that no-fault as a concept might be 
wonderful, but in application, it could be a disaster. 
 
No one, I don’t think, realizes the significance of these types of 
programs until they personally suffer the consequences of that 
legislation, of that agenda, of that program. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we had a committee of Victims of No Fault 
established, a committee that aggressively pursued a campaign 
to raise awareness of the issues and went from community to 
community around this province hearing of specific cases, 
testimony from individuals who were victims of this particular 
type of insurance coverage. 
 
I believe every member of this legislature was eventually 
presented with a compilation of those case histories. I had a 
stack of three or four very detailed and complete testimonials 
on the floor of my office. 
 
It was an immense effort by that committee to bring attention to 
this very unfair and unyielding insurance system. Mr. Speaker, 
sometimes it takes people of immense determination to develop 
and to initiate, I suppose, first of all, a campaign to raise 
awareness in those kinds of situations. 
 
And because of the determination of one individual, several 
came together; many ultimately were represented. But what we 
saw was an impact made with the government to the extent that 
they were willing to accede to the fact that they had been in 
error by introducing no-fault alone. 
 
This particular piece of legislation is an admission by the 
current government that no-fault insurance, while on paper 
looking so attractive, was not what it was intended to be or what 
was expected of it. It was a failure. And what this particular 
piece of legislation does in Bill 57, it allows for members of our 
society to choose the type of coverage they want, whether they 
want protection through the no-fault system or if they want 
protection through the legal system, commonly known as tort. 
 
It will give people a choice and it will give people protection of 
varying types at varying levels. There are some serious risks 
associated with the choice that individuals will have to make, 
however. And it is the fear of many people who have looked at 
the present Bill that even though the option of using the legal 
system to redress injury claims, even though that’s available to 
them, it may be so expensive or it may be undermined in some 
way that it in practicality will not work. 
 
So I think that we have questions about whether or not Bill 57 
will achieve the genuine option of choosing on behalf of the 
motoring public. There will be a choice but whether or not it 
will be an adequate choice, a choice that is of benefit to the 
individual making the choice, remains to be seen. 
 
Part of the original legislation that introduced no-fault into this 
province contained a provision for a review after five years. The 
opportunity to look at no-fault as a workable or unworkable 
insurance system was subject to review according to the initial, 
introductory legislation. 
 
(15:15) 
 
We don’t see the same commitment to review with this current 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s one of the shortcomings of this 
particular piece of legislation. There is not an option for review; 
there’s no offering of a review opportunity made in this 
legislation. 
 
And it would quite possibly be improved if the government had 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

 

considered making that type of review opportunity available 
right in the legislation so that people who wanted to avail 
themselves of the tort system would know that if there was a 
failure or a weakness in that particular system that it might be 
redressed and looked at by the government at a date some time 
in the future. 
 
But that is not available to them according to this piece of 
legislation. And I think that’s one area that we should look at in 
terms of improving this particular Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suppose the big question here is: why did it take 
the NDP government seven years to admit that they were wrong 
on this particular piece of legislation? Why did it take seven 
years? 
 
You know one of the signs of leadership, I believe, is to look at 
what you’ve done and if it’s plainly been an error, if it’s clearly 
been a mistake, to admit to the mistake, to make the appropriate 
corrections, and to move on. 
 
This government, in almost every instance, has been determined 
to refuse responsibility for mistakes made. And I think that’s 
one of the weaknesses of the current NDP administration. Not 
that they don’t have the ability to make change, it’s their refusal 
to make change. And in this instance it took seven years to 
correct an injustice in terms of insurance protection for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This legislation came in in 1995, as we mentioned earlier, and 
we have seen, individually as members of this legislature, as 
members of the official opposition, and as members of the 
government, we’ve seen people’s lives affected in some of the 
most disappointing and debilitating ways. When people have 
suffered injury as a result of accident to be this unfairly treated, 
as has often been the case under no-fault, it is not just a shame, 
it’s an abrogation of justice. And I hold the NDP government 
accountable for their lack of leadership in that particular area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agents that provide coverage to the motoring 
public on behalf of SGI also have some concerns as they pertain 
to this particular piece of legislation. 
 
We have been informed that they have just recently become 
aware of the intended changes as accorded in Bill 57, but 
nobody as yet has received any training as to how they are to 
treat the motoring public when they come to individual SGI 
agents and ask for coverage for their insurance purposes with 
their vehicles. 
 
And I believe that this Bill is going to take effect reasonably 
soon after passage. I haven’t heard specifically from the 
government when they plan to proclaim it but I would assume 
that their intention would be to move on it fairly soon after 
passage. And if that’s the case then the SGI agents in this 
province should already be aware of the implications of these 
changes and how they can best advise their clients. 
 
It’s going to be a difficult day for the individual who goes into 
an insurance agent’s office to buy protection, to buy coverage 
for their vehicles, without knowing what it is specifically they 
are being asked to buy, or what they are being asked to 
compare. 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that we will see many, many 
individuals in this province faced with a dilemma. They will be 
at the counter of their insurance agent and saying, can you tell 
me some details? Can you give me some examples of how this 
new insurance option through tort will work? 
 
And the agents, being unskilled or untrained in this particular 
area, will not be able to advise them properly. They know that 
they will probably be paying more for the tort option but will it 
provide them the security and the safety and the protection that 
they require as a member of the motoring public? 
 
You know we’ve discussed this particular piece of legislation 
several times. And one of the interesting comments that I heard 
today was from an individual who travels a lot and who’s had 
occasion to hit deer on the highway from time to time. And he 
said, you know when it comes right down to it, the people who 
are going to be most happy with no-fault insurance are the 
people who are hitting deer most commonly because no-fault 
insurance provides them protection that insurance through the 
tort system may well not provide for them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if that is the most that the no-fault system has 
to commend it to the motoring public, I can see where there are 
going to be a lot of people who would want to bail out from that 
particular type of coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other problems as we look at this 
particular piece of legislation, over and above the difficulty of 
the agents not being trained or not being prepared or not being 
adequately versed in the changes and the implications of this 
legislation, is the motoring public themselves. What kind of 
efforts will be undertaken by SGI to inform people looking for 
proper insurance coverage? What kind of efforts will be made 
by the government of the day, their insurance company — 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance — to let people know 
what their options might be? What efforts will be undertaken? 
 
Will they undertake a campaign that has something more than a 
happy face on it? Will they undertake a campaign that promises 
so much more in terms of discounts if you have a safe driving 
record but in reality applies to virtually nobody in the province? 
Will we see some hard, specific facts on these changes? 
 
Will there be a public relations campaign? Will there be a direct 
mail-out? Will there be an effort on behalf of the government’s 
insurance agency to really clearly and specifically delineate 
what the options are and what the alternatives might be and 
what the pros and cons might be of any decision that the 
motoring individual might want to make? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is, I believe, that this government has 
introduced this legislation in response to tremendous pressure. 
And it didn’t come, I don’t believe, from the legal profession 
who might stand to benefit from this. 
 
And as a matter of fact, having mentioned the legal profession, 
they haven’t really jumped on the bandwagon and promoted the 
tort proposals that the government is touting here. So I would 
take from that that they’re not all that impressed with the option 
as has been introduced by the government. 
 
But we need to, we need to look at who will benefit the most 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

from the way this particular Bill has been manufactured and 
written and promoted by the government. And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that SGI will benefit the most. Because while the 
government will be able to say, we introduced legislation to 
allow for a choice on vehicle insurance, the decision will be so 
favoured, so loaded on the side of no-fault insurance, that only 
those people absolutely determined to get out from under 
no-fault will even consider the option. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think that that’s a fair choice. I don’t believe that that’s 
really giving people a fair opportunity to make that kind of a 
decision. If the decision is so potentially weighted in favour of 
one side as opposed to the other, there really exists no choice at 
all. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will 
provide exactly that kind of a situation. 
 
So we are concerned that while the tort option has now become 
available, it will not be as appealing as it might have been. It 
will not serve the interests of the motoring public as well as it 
might have. And it might be something that’s really been done 
for public relations purposes by the government, some cosmetic 
changes I guess is one way to describe that, when in fact it 
could have been so much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has raised the issue of 
no-fault insurance over the past several years repeatedly in this 
legislature. We have gotten to know some of the victims of 
no-fault insurance personally. We have understood the tragedy 
that has befallen them as a result of no-fault insurance, and we 
feel strongly that an injustice has been done to many of those 
people. 
 
We looked forward to the introduction of these changes as a 
means of addressing those inequities but, Mr. Speaker, in many 
ways this particular Bill falls far short of our expectations. 
 
This Bill or a very small part of it, Mr. Speaker, allows for the 
safer driver recognition program. I think we alluded to that a 
little earlier, about the little happy face that showed up in the 
mail. A nice bright yellow colour, big grin, two black . . . coal 
black eyes, and a little bit of a dab on the nose. And as I 
mentioned earlier while the campaign made you feel good when 
you looked at that happy face, when you looked at the details it 
was sadly lacking as well. 
 
I understand that while there are individuals who might benefit 
from safe driver deductions or reductions in their policy 
premiums, many, many people in this province have been 
excluded. I had a couple of calls to my office shortly after the 
information material, or the introduction material, showed up in 
the mail. And one of the individuals that called my office is a 
commercial truck driver. He’s not a long-haul truck driver and 
he doesn’t run heavy rigs around the province, but he has a . . . 
he has a business whereby he hauls small loads of cattle and 
machinery from farm dealerships to farm locations and maybe 
he does odds and ends of that type, hauls various types of 
machinery around the province. 
 
He also is a . . . has a route, a delivery route for one of the major 
daily newspapers in this province. And he picks the papers up at 
6:30 or 7 in the morning and drives all through the southwest 
part of the province delivering those papers to communities. I 

would . . . I would estimate he probably takes in maybe 8 or 10 
different communities in the Southwest. So he makes quite a 
circuit. 
 
This gentleman is on the road all the time. He would put on 
literally hundreds of thousands of kilometres in a year and he 
has a very good driving record. But because he’s a commercial 
operator, he is ineligible — ineligible for the safe driver 
discount that was introduced with such fanfare earlier this 
spring. 
 
The other people that I think have been put off by this particular 
program are those individuals who jointly own vehicles, 
whether it’s a husband and wife whose name is on the 
registration of their car or truck, or some other arrangement. If 
there’s more than one name on the registration of a vehicle, 
those two individuals, no matter how safe their driving record 
might be, are ineligible for the safe driver discount. 
 
I’ve heard of similar and several other types of examples where 
people are automatically eliminated from the safe driving 
discount because they don’t fall within a very narrow category. 
And having looked at it, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m going to make 
some assumptions here. But having looked at the criteria, who 
qualifies and who doesn’t for the safe driving discount, I would 
say that SGI has undertaken a massive publicity campaign to 
promote safe driving but only a very, very few people will 
benefit from the program as it currently exists. 
 
The criteria are so narrow that it looks to me the only people 
who could possibly benefit would be single drivers, maybe 25 
and under. Now I suppose there will be some older than that. I 
might be going to extremes with my assertion. 
 
But there’s so many people who do not qualify, so many people 
who would ordinarily qualify because of their marital status or 
because of the fact that their vehicle is registered in a company 
name or they undertake driving for commercial purposes — 
when those people do not qualify, how many people does that 
leave who will qualify? And I think, Mr. Speaker, that SGI has 
actually undertaken a publicity campaign in such a way that it’s 
become a cruel hoax for the people who would ordinarily be 
considered safe drivers. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Maybe it’s an attempt to bring more responsibility to drivers 
who are youthful and exuberant and who don’t think that 
there’s any consequences to their driving behaviour, I’m not 
sure. But as it looks right now, it would appear that that was the 
ultimate intent of SGI — to get young people to be more 
responsible in their driving. 
 
However, having said that, there is at this point, I think, 
substantial interest in seeing the government proceed with 
legislation that would compensate for the failures of the no-fault 
legislation that has been with us since 1995. And while we see 
some weaknesses in this Bill, as we’ve alluded to earlier, while 
we see it as maybe underwritten and maybe not as specific or as 
directly beneficial to the people who are looking for alternatives 
in terms of their insurance coverage, we will not stand in the 
way of this particular piece of legislation. And we hope that 
after some considerable time in Committee of the Whole that 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

 

the government will accept some possible suggestions from the 
official opposition as how this Bill can be approved . . . 
improved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill 57 be moved to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 70 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 70 — The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to talk about Bill No. 70, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, first off we have to go back a little bit in 
the history of the hog operation of this province. There was a 
time not long ago when the hog operation was quite a small 
industry in this province, and governments and industry had 
encouraged the hog operation to grow. And, Mr. Speaker, it has 
grown to the extent now where the hog industry employs about 
8,000-plus people. It has an economic impact of about $289 
million with about 30-some million dollars going into direct 
wages. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that this is a success story. 
And if it’s a success story, then why are we attacking it? Why is 
the government bringing in labour laws that could jeopardize 
the hog industry? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears that when something is successful in 
this province the government . . . the NDP government has a 
propensity of trying to control it, take over it, or attack it. And 
that’s the case that it appears in The Labour Standards Act in 
relation to the hog industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the labour legislation that’s before us is quite a 
complex, complex set of rules. In here we have a government 
that has a feeling that one size fits all, that we can include the 
hog operation into the same legislation as governs shopping 
malls, as an example, and I don’t see that as being correct. It’s 
obviously a different and unique industry and here we have a 
government that tries to put it into the same package as every 
other industry such as shopping malls. 
 
And a concern, Mr. Speaker, of all of us is putting the hog 
operation under The Labour Standards Act puts . . . what’s 
next? What is the next step? And that’s a fear from an awful lot 
of people in the hog industry. Is unionization going to be forced 
upon them as the next step? And also what other part of the 
agriculture industry is going to be affected? Is the livestock 
industry going to be affected? Is it going to come under the 
same jurisdiction? If we expand and have large feedlot 
operations, are they going to be subjected to The Labour 
Standards Act? How about larger farms? And how about mixed 
operations? 
 

And I don’t think we have a clear understanding yet about a 
mixed operation. 
 
How about a hog operation plus a farming operation? Is that 
going to be subjected to The Labour Standards Act? Those are 
all questions that people outside of the legislature have and 
that’s where we’re getting an awful lot of our questions and 
concerns from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we look at the hog operation and how it’s progressing 
and expanding in this province, one really has to stand and 
wonder, what are we doing? What are we putting this Labour 
Standards Act in place for? Do we really know why, the 
ultimate reason that we’re doing it? 
 
I think the main reason is because the Premier, in his bid for the 
leadership of the NDP Party, had said that he was going to. He 
said that to satisfy the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. And 
I believe that’s the only reason that it’s being pushed through 
and pushed through in this session. 
 
Does it make any sense for the industry? Definitely not. The 
pork producers definitely are not in favour of this. Mr. Speaker, 
the government is now rushing into putting this Bill through 
and it’s been without meaningful consultation. Now the 
government has suggested that they have had a consulting 
process and that is a bit of a laugh to say the least, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A consultation process. The government says they’re forming a 
committee and going through a consultation process. Well I’d 
just like to talk about the committee that they had. There was 
three employers including three pork producers representing the 
spectrum of the industry. Employees included one hog barn 
worker for Saskatchewan’s only unionized commercial hog 
operation, and two non-industry employees: one from the Grain 
Services Union and one from the Communications, Energy and 
Paperworkers Union. 
 
Now is this consultation with the industry? It doesn’t take a 
rocket scientist to figure out this was a predetermined set-up 
case of a committee going out and getting the answers that the 
government wanted before they even went out. In other words, 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the answer we want from you, committee, 
so you go out and consult with a couple or three or four or five 
people that are really onside with us and come back with this 
answer. Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not consider that a consultative 
process. Now I can suggest that in my constituency I have a 
number of hog operators and I can suggest that not one of them 
was consulted, not one. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I visit with people that work in the hog 
industry in my constituency, I can relay some of their fears and 
concerns. One is, what does this Bill do? 
 
The employers are extremely happy the way it is. The 
employees are extremely happy the way it is. Why in the world 
would we want to introduce something that is going to change 
that? It really does not make sense, if everybody’s happy except 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour — thus, ergo the NDP 
government. And that is why this Bill is being introduced. 
 
And now the next step as I suggested, Mr. Speaker, is 
unionization. And I spoke with members from one of the hog 



2466 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

barns in my constituency and they are 100 per cent against 
unionization — 100 per cent. Every member there says they 
will fight against unionization. And these individuals are 
extremely happy the way things are right now in their hog barn. 
So why in the world are we going to try to change it? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at what’s going on in 
Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan. We talk about rural 
revitalization. We totally agree. We need to revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
How do we do it? Value-added. Let’s go with our strengths. 
What are our strengths in rural Saskatchewan? I’m going to use 
southern Saskatchewan where my constituency is. One of the 
strengths that we have is lots of agricultural land. We know 
diversification is essential now to stay afloat in agriculture. So 
what can we do? We can add hog operations; we can add 
extensive livestock operations. And with those comes 
value-added industry such as feed mills, ethanol. 
 
But now we introduce legislation that is going to have an 
extreme impact on expanding these industries. And why? It is 
because investors are not going to want to come to a province 
that is going to be totally controlled by labour. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have heard from companies and I have 
talked to companies who come into Saskatchewan, they have a 
look . . . We’ve got a great province here; there’s no doubt 
about it. But companies come in here and they have a look and 
they turn around and will go back — so many of them go back 
— for two basic reasons. And I’ve heard more than a few that 
have said the two basic reasons they will not come into 
Saskatchewan is, one, your labour laws; the other is your labour 
attitude. 
 
So why, why in the world are we going to introduce more 
stringent labour legislation when we’re already chasing 
businesses out of this province because of very stringent labour 
laws and labour attitude? 
 
Now who wants this? Is it the people of the province? No. It’s 
the government to support the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour. 
 
Now we look at, look at revitalization of rural Saskatchewan — 
in fact, in all of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We look at the hog 
industry, and where can it go? We’ve grown from 1997 until 
now to a 1.8 million hog industry in this province, with 
projections that in three years we can double. In three years the 
hog production in this province could double. 
 
What would that do for this province? It would create 
something in the neighbourhood of 10,000 new jobs — in three 
years. Mr. Speaker, we are talking on this side of the House 
how we can create 100,000 jobs in 10 years. In three years the 
hog industry alone could create 10,000 new jobs. 
 
Look at that compared to the record of what’s going on under 
the leadership or lack of leadership of the NDP government. 
We’ve lost 25,000 jobs in the last few years — 25,000. And yet 
we get a little hurrah from the government side because the stats 
out the other day were that we’ve got a few of those jobs back. 
The net is still a loss of about 15,000 jobs. 

So here we have, here we have a hog operation, a hog 
production, a hog industry that in three years could double — 
create another 10,000 jobs, direct and indirect. And what do we 
have the government doing? Bringing in legislation that is 
going to inhibit the investors to grow the hog industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that just does not make sense. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at, we look at what happened, like I 
mention in the consultation or lack of consultation that was 
announced. The government and the Minister of Labour out of 
the blue announced that this is going to happen, we’re going to 
introduce a Labour Standards Act. Well, it didn’t take long for 
the hog industry to reply. 
 
(15:45) 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, the chamber of commerce. And here are 
the issues as the business sector sees them. And I would like to 
read these into the record — into the record as the business 
sector sees them. 
 

1. It is discriminatory to segregate the (pork) industry from 
the rest of agriculture . . . 

 
I think we would all agree on that. 
 

(It must be made clear) . . . how this legislation will affect 
the 95% of producers that are mixed operators. 

 
Again that is one that I just spoke to — how are we determining 
the hog operators, the mixed operators, and where is it going to 
go. In the piece of legislation, it really doesn’t say anything to 
those numbers or how it’s going to work. So therefore what is it 
going to do — come in regulation, again, where it’s not going 
to be debated in this House. 
 

3. There must be clarity (of future intention) . . . 
 
Does the government intend to later bring other agriculture 
sectors or all of agriculture, including the family farms, under 
the Act? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very, very valid question: bringing 
family farms and ranches under the Act. Can you imagine, can 
you imagine, a cow-calf operation that has to come under The 
Labour Standards Act? 
 
How do we have, how do we have people under this Act that 
are going out and calving heifers in the spring? Are we going to 
try and do selective breeding so they’re only calving between 8 
and 4? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. So it’s totally ludicrous to 
even contemplate this coming under The Labour Standards Act. 
 
Number four: 
 

There must be a thorough economic analysis to determine 
how this legislation will affect the growth and development 
of an industry that the (government) Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization has (itself) 
promoted and supported. 

 
And that’s what I was just referring to, Mr. Speaker. The 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

 

economic analysis, was there any economic analysis done on 
this? Absolutely not. How could we have a government stand 
up with a hip shot and say, we’re going to introduce labour 
legislation at any cost? Well if there’s an economic analysis 
done, I would assure you, I would assure this House, that if 
we’re going to introduce a Labour Standards Act that this 
industry will not grow, or will not grow at a rate as if it was left 
alone. And again I would suggest that if it’s left the way it is, 
investors will come. We’ve got to get rid of that government 
first, but then investors will come and they will come in force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chamber passed a resolution I would like to 
read into the record. The chamber passed the following 
resolution: 
 

(The) government should pull back legislation from this 
session and engage in a complete and fair consultation with 
the pork industry and (its) stakeholder groups . . . (and with 
agriculture and agribusiness in general, and they) should 
clearly identify issues and costs and assess impact on 
growth and sustainability of the pork industry. 

 
It’s not too much to ask. It’s not too much at all to ask, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see, I’m a firm believer that this 
piece of legislation is going to do nothing to help the hog 
industry. It’s going to do nothing to help jobs in the hog 
industry in this province. It’s going to do nothing to help rural 
revitalization. The only single thing that I can see that this 
legislation is going to do is to satisfy the Premier’s statement 
that he was going to bring in this legislation, and this statement 
is totally and solely to satisfy the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:50 until 16:00. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Axworthy Nilson 
Junor Hamilton Harper 
Forbes   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order, please. 
Order. Voting will proceed. 
 
Jones Higgins Trew 
Wartman Thomson Yates 
McCall Hillson  
 

Nays — 25 
 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 

Eagles McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Brkich 
Wiberg Weekes Harpauer 
Hart Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert   
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Higgins that Bill No. 72 — The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments regarding Bill No. 72 before we allow 
the Bill to move forward to committee. Unfortunately, Mr. 
Speaker, if we had our druthers, we probably would like to see 
this Bill die and be reassessed because while there’s some 
improvements . . . the Bill brings forward some improvements 
for injured workers, there are a number of questions that the 
Bill doesn’t address, Mr. Speaker, and I think we need to speak 
to those. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, you look at the Bill, and I believe 
what the Bill does, it increases some of the costs that injured 
workers have had to deal with in the past, such as burial costs 
have been increased from 5 to $10,000. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you think that a family may have lost a 
loved one due to an injury related to the workplace and then 
find that in today’s age that $5,000 was all they were afforded 
to help cover the costs of dealing with that tragedy, it’s 
certainly imperative that that be looked at that appropriately. 
And the Bill does recognize the fact that $5,000 doesn’t go very 
far in dealing with situations surrounding the death of a loved 
one in an industrial accident. And so the movement from 5 to 
$10,000, Mr. Speaker, is certainly appropriate. 
 
We’re certainly not disputing the fact, as well, that the average 
maximum wage cap, which goes back to 1985 and was set at 
about $48,000, is now as a result of this piece of legislation, 
will move up to 51.9, and by 2005 will move even further to 
$55,000 dollars . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Swift Current on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to the 
members for leave, and especially the member for Moosomin 
who is speaking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier, before question period, I had the 



2468 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

opportunity to introduce a summer student from our office, 
Crystal Martens. Joining her in your gallery now, Mr. Speaker, 
is her mother, Nancy Martens. She and her husband operate a 
business in Swift Current and she has joined Crystal to view 
some of the proceedings today. And I just ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming Nancy to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I was 
indicating that there are some positive elements to the Bill No. 
72 before us. And just before we had an introduction of guests I 
talked about the wage cap, and the wage cap which sits today at 
about $48,000 and will move up to fifty-one nine as a result of 
this piece of legislation. And by the year 2005 will move up to 
$55,000. So we believe, Mr. Speaker, that that certainly is an 
important move, in view of the problems that people in the 
workplace face if they receive an injury as a result of an 
accident in the workplace. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I, and I’m sure all 
members of this Assembly, have on numerous occasions had 
individuals come to their offices asking for some help and 
basically asking them where they should turn or who they 
should turn to as a result of a work-related injury, and the way 
they’ve been treated by the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
And indeed on many occasions we can talk to the minister, we 
can talk to government officials, the board will tell us that well 
we do have an appeal process in place. And we mention this to 
constituents or individuals who come to us, and they tell us of 
the continuous problems and the hassle they’ve had in dealing 
with the board, and even going through the appeal process. 
 
And on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, I often ask, wonder, and 
ask myself if we wouldn’t be further ahead in some of these 
departments if we had an appeal mechanism that was totally 
independent of . . . whether it’s the Workers’ Compensation 
Board or whether it’s the Department of Health, or other 
avenues of dealing with government. We do have appeal 
processes in place; unfortunately, those appeal processes are in 
place right within that agency. 
 
And on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, we find we’re dealing 
with — as members of the Assembly — we’re dealing with 
individuals who have followed the process to the letter and yet 
continually find themselves in the position where as a result of a 
work-related injury and the inability to be fully functional yet. 
And yet they’re being, basically being told, that well we’ve 
given you the help that is needed to correct this health problem, 
and our medical staff indicate that you’re well enough to go 
back to work, and we would . . . we’re going to cut off benefits. 
And therefore they’re left in the situation, well they’re . . . still 
have an aggravating problem, whether it’s a pain, aggravating 
pain, that they have to deal with, and trying to actually work in 

the workplace. 
 
And I know this situation that . . . one of the most recent ones 
that was brought to my attention was a shoulder injury. And the 
individual came to me basically — almost in tears, Mr. Speaker 
— because they were told that their benefits were being cut off. 
 
And I went to the board and the board said, well we followed a 
process, there was some monetary assistance until they received 
some medical help and we feel now that after this period of 
medical assistance that they should have recovered to the point 
that they were able to go back to work and maybe do light work 
or light duties and then proceed from there. 
 
And the individual I’m talking of had a real problem with the 
shoulder and just couldn’t get, no matter of all the therapy 
sessions that that person had taken, Mr. Speaker, just could not 
really lift their arm above the shoulder height. And the job that 
she was involved in was one that required some lifting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was a frustrating process dealing with 
Workers’ Comp when we were trying to address the concerns 
and trying to come up with Workers’ Comp recognizing that the 
therapy that they had sent the individual to really wasn’t 
working, that they had to find a different avenue or if nothing 
else, realize that this may take a lot longer than maybe the 
six-month period. And I just don’t remember all the total time 
period that that person had been dealing with, with Workers’ 
Comp on the issue. 
 
But it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that every injury is different. I 
don’t think we can treat everyone the same way, that one 
person’s response to rehabilitation may be very effective, and in 
a matter of a few short weeks or a few short months they might 
be in a position to be totally, feel totally comfortable in going 
back to work. The next person it doesn’t work that way, their 
body doesn’t respond in the same manner. It takes a period of 
time. 
 
And therefore it’s imperative that Workers’ Comp be there to 
deal with those problems. And I think Workers’ Comp needs to 
take a very careful look as to how they deal with the workers 
that they’re responsible for and how they manage the related 
injuries that fall at their desk, and how they respond to each and 
every work-related injury. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we do have some major concerns with the 
Bill in the fact that in the year 2001 the workers, the board 
actually made a huge mistake in its actuarial adjustment for the 
year 2001. In fact that mistake, Mr. Speaker, was a $69 million 
mistake. 
 
And so when you look at the legislation before us and we talk, I 
talked about the fact, the pluses of this piece of legislation, 
increasing the benefits from 5 to 10,000 for burial costs or 
increasing the maximum wage cap from 48 to fifty-one nine 
and to 55,000 by 2005, we realize, Mr. Speaker, that there will 
be some costs associated with this. And we’ve been trying to 
get some answers to the types of costs that would be associated 
with the legislation before us. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, when we get into estimates or 
Committee of the Whole we’ll have an opportunity to get down 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2469 

 

to some of the nitty-gritty and the debate asking the government 
exactly what this piece of . . . what Bill No. 72 is going to mean 
for employees and employers. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, 
because when you look at the $69 million mistake that the 
Workers’ Comp Board made in the year 2001, and we also note 
that in the last six years the administration of the board has 
increased by 48 per cent over the six-year period while at that 
same time period we’ve had a relatively stable number of 
claims and employer accounts. And one would have to ask, why 
would we need almost a 50 per cent increase in administrative 
costs when your claims and your employer counts really 
haven’t increased — they’ve been fairly stable? 
 
And so there’s some very serious questions that need to be 
asked in that regard. And that’s one of the major concerns with 
regards to this piece of legislation today. And the costs 
associated with the increase of caps here and what those costs 
will mean to employers across the province of Saskatchewan. 
Because at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the . . . it’s business 
men and women across this province who bear the brunt of the 
. . . of this program. 
 
And while we’re calling for some fairness, and what we realize 
that the government needs to find a delicate balance for workers 
and business owners, we also believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
board itself must be accountable for how it administers a 
program, how it addresses their financial obligations, and they 
must be accountable to their . . . to the employers and to the 
employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have . . . we are concerned about the fact 
that the costs for this program must be affordable and it must 
not be a program that just becomes so expensive that employers 
just start really balking at it. I believe most employers across 
the province of Saskatchewan are quite conscientious and they 
are very concerned about their workers and the people that are 
their employees, the people that are working for them. And . . . 
but at the same time they . . . and I haven’t had an employer 
actually complain to me, Mr. Speaker, about WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board), except for the fact that every time they 
turn around and they find an increase on their desk, Mr. 
Speaker, they have . . . there hasn’t been any real rationale 
given as to why that increase has been . . . has come forward. 
 
Now the government might argue, the minister might argue that 
there was a reduction. And that was about a year ago — there 
was a reduction in the fees because the premiums that had been 
collected had actually given the Workers’ Comp such a huge 
surplus. And one had to ask, what was the surplus being used 
for? And we looked many occasions where that surplus actually 
ended up as a positive in the general revenue pool when it really 
should not have been accounted for in the general revenue pool 
whatsoever because it has nothing to do with government. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that need to be 
raised. We have to ask ourselves, are the amendments going to 
make the system more transparent? And I think that’s what 
employers are looking for. 
 
Are the amendments explicitly stating that the maximum rate is 
gross earnings so that workers are not misled by the amount of 

coverage that they actually receive? And do the amendments 
make the system more transparent for employers and 
employees? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that the first order of business 
for WCB and for the government would be to fix the internal 
problems within the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
And when we look at the number of complaints, while the 
complaints have been relatively stable, there is no reason, Mr. 
Speaker, why we should not be able to arrive at a simpler and 
more clear method of dealing with these complaints so that 
workers don’t end up having to come to the offices of MLAs 
asking for some help and asking where they turn to. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while there are a number of questions that 
need to be raised, there’s no doubt that when we get to 
Committee of the Whole, we will have to have some 
clarification on this Bill. And exactly why this Bill maybe only 
went . . . as we see it, only as going part way to address a 
number of problems that exist in the Workers’ Compensation 
Board, and how are we going to address them? And why the 
government would have brought a piece of legislation forward 
that seems to only address a portion of the problems that are 
occurring at the board at this time, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So those are some of the questions that we need to look at while 
we keep in mind how employees are looked after and treated 
fairly. As well as the fact that employers aren’t being raked for 
more money to try and address an internal WCB problem in 
trying to . . . in the way they manage their finances and the 
fiscal responsibilities are theirs. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me this 
afternoon, to my left, is Ms. Joanne Brockman who’s the 
executive director of the economic and fiscal policy branch of 
the Department of Finance. And behind Ms. Brockman is Mr. 
Hale Ramsey, who’s the senior fiscal policy analyst of the 
economic and fiscal policy branch of the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. Welcome this afternoon again, Mr. Minister, and 
to your two officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the year 2000-2001, you introduced a new Act 
creating the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and today you’re 
proposing an amendment to that fund. Could you indicate the 



2470 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

reason why we have to have the amendment that we see before 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d be pleased to indicate 
that. We had, last year when we passed The Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund Act, said that at any given time the government should 
have in a savings account 5 per cent . . . an amount equal to 5 
per cent of the revenues from the previous year, which would 
amount to approximately $300 million, or $280 million, in a 
given year. 
 
And as it transpired, we certainly have that amount in reserve at 
the present time. But as people will know, we experienced a bad 
drought in 2001, along with softwood lumber duties, lower oil 
and natural gas prices, an economic slowdown in Canada, and a 
recession in the United States. And all of these factors 
contributed to a slower economy which then meant less revenue 
to government than had been projected. 
 
And so we had to make a decision whether to leave money in 
savings at the end of the current fiscal year to keep the $280 
million in savings, or whether we should allow the government 
to draw that down below $280 million, in order to continue 
paying for health care, education, highways, and so on, and in 
order to avoid raising taxes. 
 
So we really were faced with two main possibilities. One 
possibility is we would say, you don’t have to leave that much 
money in savings. If we didn’t do that, we would have to either 
cut back on services to people or raise taxes. And we felt that at 
this time we should not raise taxes, we should not cut down on 
services — it made more sense to draw on our savings in order 
to meet the expectations of the people of the province. And 
that’s what this amendment would allow us to do; to avoid cuts 
in services and to avoid tax increases. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
your communiqué from the Saskatchewan Finance department 
back in 2000-2001, you indicated that the General Revenue 
Fund would receive the final SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) retained earnings dividend for that year. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you then explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan how that transfer occurred? Was money placed 
into an account, was there an actual transfer of dollars in one 
bank account to another, or are we talking about a line of credit 
that had been maintained as a total of retained earnings of . . . I 
would imagine a number of years in Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, because I don’t think that they would have 
accumulated a significant amount of that kind of dividend. 
 
And secondly, what was that number that was actually taken out 
of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority dividend credit 
line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The number, Mr. Chair, is $700 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, each 
time that you have indicated that — over the last two years — 
that the Department of Finance uses the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund to offset an expense, there is an indication in your 
comments from the last mid-term report that the amount of debt 
of the province goes up. 

Could you explain to the people of Saskatchewan . . . and I 
think you said just a few minutes ago that there is sort of money 
in a fund that’s sitting there and we can use this occasionally. 
Why does it mean when you say that you’re using the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund that the debt of the province is going up as 
well? The two don’t seem to mix. 
 
Could you explain that to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d be happy to. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan employs normal principles 
of cash management which also would be used by any private 
sector company or other governments. The principles that we 
apply are the same as they’re generally applied in the business 
world and by other governments across the country. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
your budget document for this year you’ve indicated that it is 
expected that you will draw on these retained earnings or line of 
credit to the tune of about $225 million, which should leave a 
balance in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund of about $139.3 million. 
Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that is what is indicated in the budget 
document. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, in reference to that budget 
document, on page 28 which is I believe the page that you’re 
on, you also indicate that to deliver that budget next year you 
anticipate that for the year 2003-2004 you may use up that 
entire $139.3 million worth of credit in the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. 
 
If that is so, Mr. Minister, if your projections are accurate 
indeed that money is . . . that transfer is required, will you be 
removing or asking for The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Act to be 
amended, or will it just remain in a situation of abeyance until 
there is a transfer of monies to that on some year down the road 
when I guess the revenues exceed expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe, Mr. Chair, that The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund Act with this amendment should continue to 
exist in the form as amended and should continue to be used in 
the same way; that going back to 1925 the province has always 
had a stabilization fund. It used to be called the Liquor and 
Gaming Fund; now it’s called the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
And whether or not we have this amendment, we should keep 
having a fund. And when times improve and we have surplus 
dollars, we should do what we’ve done in the past, and that is 
put those dollars in savings, to draw on them at difficult times 
as we’ve had to do this year in order to maintain services for 
people and to avoid raising taxes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the line items in revenue of course is the transfer of I believe 
it’s profit of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
And in your communiqué of two years ago, you indicated that 
the transfer of SLGA dividends was going to end because you 
were transferring that dividend credit, and that’s how the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund was created. 
 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2471 

 

Could you indicate, Mr. Minister, in both this year and last year, 
when you indicate in your budget that there is a transfer of 
money from Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, is 
that the full amount of profits for SLGA for that year, and 
indeed that there would be no retained earnings back in SLGA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That is correct, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask him to 
introduce any new officials who may have joined him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me this 
afternoon Mr. Len Rog, sitting to my left, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of the revenue division of the Department of 
Finance; behind Mr. Rog is Mr. Kelly Laurans, the director of 
corporate taxes and incentives in the revenue division of the 
Department of Finance; and behind me is Mr. Eric Johnson, 
who is the senior analyst with taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs in the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and welcome 
to the three officials who have joined you this afternoon, Mr. 
Minister. A few short questions on this Bill, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in written questions I asked a question of your 
department, that was: how many companies in Saskatchewan 
paid corporate capital tax during the year for which the most 
recent statistics are available? And your response to me, Mr. 
Minister, was that there were 1,053 corporations. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Minister, the clauses that you’ve put forward, the clauses 
for amendment purposes in this Bill, how many — do your 
officials know — how many of those 1,053 corporations will be 
affected by the most significant change, which is, of course, that 
the level of . . . the $10 million level be raised to $15 million? 
 
Do you have an estimate as to the number of corporations that 
will be affected by that change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well every corporation that paid the 
corporate capital tax would be affected because the corporate 
capital tax would now be applied at a higher threshold, so they 
would all be affected. And 1,436 filed returns last year; 1,053 
paid taxes. All of those would pay less because of the higher 
threshold. And we believe that about 100 corporations would be 
exempted from payment of any corporation capital tax. 
 
So that would be approximately 10 per cent of the corporations 
that paid corporation capital tax would no longer pay it. The 
other 90 per cent would pay less corporation capital tax than 

they paid before. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that estimate. 
And I fully understand that it is an estimate, that you’re 
expecting of the 1,053 about 100 may not have to pay any more 
tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the concerns expressed by some businesses 
is that the formula for the exemption is going to be developed 
and placed in regulations, and there doesn’t seem to be any 
clarity about the formula. 
 
Could you indicate whether or not your officials have already 
created regulations that will indicate how businesses will be 
eligible? And will the formula treat all businesses the same or 
will there be some difference in how the regulations will relate 
to one particular corporation or another? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 
question. I’m advised by the officials that we have exemptions 
from other taxation that are prescribed by regulation. And this 
would be similar to the other formulas prescribed in the 
regulation, such as the resource surcharge deduction. 
 
And the reason is to allow for flexibility in the event that some 
corporations come along and say that, for some reason, the way 
in which the threshold is being applied doesn’t quite work for 
them and sometimes some change needs to be made. And it’s 
easier to make it and respond by regulation than having to come 
to the legislature, especially if the legislation isn’t sitting. 
 
And I can tell the member that the department has prepared, in 
co-operation with the Department of Justice, a draft regulation 
which they intend to pursue as soon as the legislation is passed, 
and it actually is quite complex. There’s a formulae which I . . . 
a formula which I’d be happy to share with the member with 
the usual A equals $5 million times B over C and saying what A 
means and B means and C means and so on. And I think the 
reason to do it by regulation is simply that it is complex. 
 
There may be a need for flexibility if the formula doesn’t quite 
work or works unfairly to some particular business. And the 
experience with exemptions of this type has been, in the past, 
that it makes more sense to be able to respond to the business 
community by meeting the intent of the legislation, but being 
able to amend the way the threshold is calculated in a timely 
fashion should problems arise. 
 
Now we don’t anticipate any problems, but that’s the reason 
why the Department of Finance in this and in similar other 
cases likes to propose to do this by regulation rather than 
through a Bill in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
I realize the formula is complicated . . . no, I don’t want to 
know the particulars. My question, and you didn’t make 
comment to it, was, is this formula going to be the same 
formula for all corporations or do you create, do you create . . . 
are there corporations that could be dealt with in one fashion 
and others in another fashion or does the formula apply to all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I apologize, Mr. Chair. I think I did 
misunderstand the question. The formula applies to all. 



2472 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My final question, 
Mr. Minister, is . . . I think it was the Simon Fraser report 
indicated that Saskatchewan is the largest user of the — in the 
country — of the corporate capital tax and it’s often referred to 
as Canada’s worst tax. Do you agree with that statement made 
by Simon Fraser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well actually, Mr. Chair, I believe that 
Simon Fraser was an explorer that died a few centuries ago but 
I think the member is referring to comments by the Fraser 
Institute. 
 
And generally speaking, I try not to agree with the Fraser 
Institute but I suppose if the Fraser Institute, as opposed to the 
late Simon Fraser, noted explorer, after whom the Fraser River I 
believe is named and the Fraser Valley but . . . And I don’t 
know what Simon Fraser . . . I don’t know if Simon Fraser 
would approve of the use of his name associated with the 
right-wing think-tank like the Fraser Institute but he’s long gone 
so we really don’t know. 
 
But having said all that, in answer to the member’s question, I 
think the Fraser Institute probably is correct when they say that 
our reliance on the corporate capital tax is higher than in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
Now having said that, I would point out that our reliance on 
other taxes that affect business is lower. For example, 
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and Newfoundland apply a payroll 
tax so they have a lower corporate capital tax but they have a 
payroll tax and also they charge their corporations more sales 
tax than we do. 
 
So our corporation capital tax, yes, is higher but some of our 
other taxes are lower. And one has to look at the whole picture. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I do apologize 
for the incorrect reference to the Fraser Institute and I thank you 
for correcting that. 
 
Mr. Minister, one thing I did forget to ask you: when you 
indicated the number of companies that actually paid tax and 
suggested that about 100 would benefit by your change to the 
tax structure, could you indicate what you think is the average 
amount of money that would be saved by those 1,053 
corporations with the introduction of the changes that you’re 
proposing in this Act? Is there any estimate as to the dollar 
figure on the average that these companies will save? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I would just correct the member in 
this respect. I did not say that 100 corporations would benefit. I 
said 100 corporations would have the tax removed altogether. I 
also said that all of the corporations that pay corporate capital 
tax would benefit — they would all get some kind of reduction. 
 
On average, the reduction would be $4,500 per company less 
corporate capital tax. But as I’ve said, some would pay none. So 
some would benefit to a larger extent, some would benefit to a 
smaller extent depending on their circumstances. But the 
average saving would be $4,500. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Benefits Act 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask him to 
introduce any new officials who may have joined him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me is Mr. 
Brian Smith, who’s the director of the Public Employees 
Benefits Agency of the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I understand that, of course, that the Bill was required 
to comply with the federal income tax changes, Income Tax Act 
changes, and that’s where we’re headed. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at the new pension plan that’s 
being created and . . . What advantage is there now for the fact 
that the plan which contained retired members, which contained 
members that are still within the House, the transferring of that 
plan into the Public Employees Pension Plan, what . . . how will 
that meet the standards of the federal Income Tax Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the . . . In answer to the first part of 
the question, the major benefit I think of this legislation in 
terms of the plan members, would be that instead of having a 
special MLA pension fund, the funds would be mixed with the 
regular public service plan which would be a larger pool. And 
it’s felt that with a larger pool, the rate of return tends to be 
better, the risk is less, and the administration is simpler. 
 
In terms of the changes to comply with the Income Tax Act, I 
should point out that the Public Accounts Committee, on the 
advice of the Provincial Auditor of course — and the member, 
Mr. Chair, is the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee — 
the Public Accounts Committee has recommended that we have 
legislation to comply with the federal Income Tax Act in 
compliance with what the Provincial Auditor has 
recommended. And that’s what we’re doing. 
 
The main problem with respect to the current plan, I think, has 
been that the current plan does not describe pensionable 
earnings in the same way that is required by the Income Tax 
Act, and this legislation corrects that. 
 
I should point out also, as I have in the House, that this is not 
something unique to the MLA plan. We have . . . almost every 
year, it seems, we’re amending various pieces of pension 
legislation to comply with the Income Tax Act. And the reason 
we do that is because if you don’t amend the legislation from 
time to time to comply with the Income Tax Act, then the plan 
can cease to be registered under the federal legislation, in which 
case it’s not a pension plan any more, which would put the 
pensions of the members at jeopardy. And we’re doing for the 
MLAs what we’ve done for various employees of pension plans 
that we administer. 
 
So they’re mainly technical amendments of a housekeeping 
nature, really. And I think the reason for that is because this 
plan was enacted in, I believe, 1978 or ’79, thereabouts, and it 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2473 

 

hasn’t been amended since. But the Income Tax Act of Canada 
has been amended several times and now we’re bringing this 
legislation into line with the federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, it is also my understanding, Mr. 
Minister — and I just want you to confirm this — that there 
isn’t really any increase or decrease in the benefit levels to 
MLAs who might retire, and as a result of that, really this Act 
does not increase any additional cost to taxpayers in the 
province. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s absolutely correct, Mr. Chair. There 
is no change to the pensions of the members. These are changes 
of a housekeeping or technical nature that are required in order 
to comply with the income tax law of Canada. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(16:45) 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce any 
new officials who may have joined him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I have the same old official, Mr. Chair — 
Brian Smith. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, we recognize the official as being a veteran and 
an experienced . . . and an experienced member, and I thank 
him for being present. 
 
Couple of short questions on this Bill, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, under current municipal pension employees . . . there 
have been some people that have called our office who are . . . 
they’re seasonal, part-time municipal employees. Are all 
municipal employees required to be part of the municipal 
pension plan? That’s the question that I have for you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that every 
permanent employee of an employer covered by the Act must 
join the plan. But there may be employees who are 
non-permanent, and I’m advised that the non-permanent 
employees must join the plan after meeting a certain threshold 
of hours, and I’m advised that the hours are 700 hours in each 
of two consecutive years. And after that, the temporary 
employee would have to be a member of the plan. 
 
So that every permanent employee from the first hour of his or 
her service would be a member of the plan and the pension 
contribution would be taken off and made — the employee and 
the employer contribution. That’s the permanent employees. 
 
And then the temporary employees, they would not initially be 
in the plan and they would not initially have deductions made 

and payments by the employer to the plan. But after they put in 
a certain number of hours, they would be required by the Act 
and the regulations to then be put into the pension plan, once 
they have worked a certain amount of hours. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that would 
explain to a few of the individuals who had called us. And I 
need you to also clarify, when you said temporary, then I would 
take it that urban municipalities, rural municipalities that hire 
students for summer employment and only work for that one 
summer, as long as they remain under 700 hours for each of 
their two consecutive years, then in the third year they still 
would not be obligated to be contributing to the pension plan. 
 
But if they were over 700 hours in each of their two years, 
consecutive years of employment, then they would be required 
to begin contributions. Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, I think that’s 
basically correct with this caveat. That if a student was working 
for an employer during the summer and occupying a position 
that was considered to be permanent, albeit they’re only 
working for the summer, then they would have to join the plan. 
 
But if they’re classified as a temporary employee, which I think 
is the member’s question, then what the member says is correct. 
That they would work each summer for any number of 
summers I suppose and as long as they never worked more than 
700 hours in two consecutive years, if they were a temporary 
employee they would never become members of this plan. 
 
On the other hand if they were for some reason classified as a 
permanent employee working for the summer and then say they 
had leave to go to university but they were hired on 
permanently with some leave, then the situation would be 
different. But for most students they would be temporary 
employees and what the member says would be correct. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
final question regarding designated members and general 
members. And I understand that police officers, firefighters 
may fit into the category of designated members that allows 
them to contribute additional amounts of pension to be able to 
retire earlier than the age 65. 
 
What changes are you making to this Act that will, I 
understand, combine the two and allow for I guess withdrawal 
of pension monies on a more consistent time? And secondly is 
it changed, the benefit, to the actual retiree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the member is correct that the reason 
that the police officers and firefighters are called designated 
members is so that they can retire at age 60. And the plan has 
allowed them and the employers to contribute somewhat more 
to take into account that they will work for a lesser period of 
time. 
 
But the situation up until now has been that some of the police 
officers and firefighters have not had the option to retire at 60, 
so they have been general members not designated members. 
What this amendment would do insofar as they’re concerned, it 
would allow their employer — I believe the city of Swift 
Current is one of them — to say that the firefighters could now 



2474 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

retire at 60. My understanding is that the — in the city of Swift 
Current up until now — the firefighters have gone beyond age 
60. And this amendment would allow the city of Swift Current 
to negotiate with their firefighters that they could retire at 60 
like other firefighters and be designated members. They then 
would be allowed to contribute more to the pension plan in 
order that they could get their pension at age 60. 
 
So basically up until now some of the police and firefighters 
have not been able to be designated members because of their 
own arrangements with their municipalities. This says if you 
become designated members we will accommodate that, extra 
money can be put into the plan to make you equivalent in effect 
with firefighters from Saskatoon who have always been able to 
retire at age 60. 
 
No additional cost I don’t believe to the plan, but there may be 
additional costs to some members who may be buying the 
additional service. And so that is the intent of the amendment 
insofar as firefighters and police officers is concerned. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
introduce, first of all, to assist us this afternoon, Mr. Russ 
Krywulak, who is the executive director of grants 
administration and provincial-municipal relations, and Mr. 
Keith Comstock, who is seated behind him. He’s the policy 
manager in policy development branch. There are other officials 
that are here but I will introduce later on, if that meets with your 
approval. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have no real problems with this Bill at all, Mr. Minister. I 
think as we’ve talked before on this Bill, everyone seems quite 
satisfied with it. 
 
The only question I have some curiosity about, Mr. Minister, is 
disclosure of campaign contributions and expenses, and you 
have put in a 60-day limit. I’m just wondering what was the 
reasoning behind that? Is there a specific reason? 
 
(17:00) 
 
The only reason I ask, Mr. Minister, is that possibly in — and I 
think it would be a city that this would probably affect the most 
possibly — that the incumbent council could possibly play 
games, I suppose, if they really wished, if the incoming or the 
opposition to them running was getting close, and they may 

want to put limits on that person. 
 
Was there a reason you brought the 60-day limit in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, and with sincere due 
respect to the member, we are dealing . . . I believe that’s under 
The Local Government Election Amendment Act. We’re 
dealing with The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act. 
 
With all due respect, we have, we have all the answers to the 
questions, but I don’t want to get the . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, prefer later. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You’re right, 
we are . . . we got ahead of ourself. We told you things were 
going to move along today, and I guess we were moving so fast, 
we missed one Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question I have on that Bill is there’s one spot 
in there where you talk about in existing provisions. But you’ve 
changed the wording and you’ve went from “shall pay” when 
you’re talking about the revenue sharing and the new money 
going to municipalities. And if I understand it right, it used to 
be “shall pay,” and for some reason, if I’m reading this right, 
you’ve changed that to “may pay.” And I’m just wondering 
why that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the reason for that is 
because they are grants and not entitlements, so the “may pay” 
of those grants. There could be some changes to that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, the new dollars that you put in this year — I believe 
for urban, it was four point some million dollars, rural was four 
point some. Is that the form that they’re being paid in is grants 
and will it be affected under this provision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The member is correct, Mr. Chairman. 
Because of the additional amounts, there will be some changes 
and that will apply. Yes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess 
where my concern comes in, and I think it’s understandable that 
when you change from “shall” to “may,” is there a situation that 
you may not pay these on? If the budget come out and these 
were in the budget, is there for some reason down the road that 
these grants may not fully be paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that funding, that money is 
committed. And I have to say at this point I can’t think of any 
reason why they would not be because those are commitments 
that are made through the budget for the revenue sharing. And I 
would say quite confidently that there would not be any reason 
that would suggest not meeting a commitment that’s been 
made. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that 
was my main concern with this Bill. So at this point we can let 
this Bill pass on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2475 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce any 
new officials who may have joined him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ken Kolb is joining us. 
He’s a senior policy analyst in the policy development branch. 
And he’s seated next to me here. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, now we’ll try this one more time. You probably know 
the question that’s coming. 
 
I just need clarification on why the 60 days was chosen and just 
how you came about making this provision in the amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it was felt that the 60 days 
was a reasonable notification period so that there would be an 
opportunity for the public to be made well aware of any bylaw 
that would be passed. And 60 days was chosen as a reasonable 
time frame. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s 
really the only concerns. I think everyone that I’ve talked to out 
there is quite happy with what’s in the Bill here and quite 
satisfied. So, Mr. Chair, at this time we will pass this Bill on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Prebble): — Would the Minister of 
Government Relations introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ve had an 
addition to the very capable and competent people that have 
been assisting me — Mr. Rod Nasewich, who’s the senior 
policy analyst, policy development branch who has joined the 
previous members that I introduced earlier. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I think 
the same goes for this Bill. I don’t think there’s any big 
controversy out in Saskatchewan with municipalities. 
 
I just have a few questions, Mr. Minister. 
 
Can you tell me or give me some explanation of what you feel 
the change to the assessment system that we have now, with the 
changes that you’ve brought in this Bill, what effect do you . . . 
instantly will this have on the way we’re doing assessments 
now? 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
question. I think it’s important that people that will be affected 
by these amendments are aware that the amendment, first of all 
will enable the use of new assessment methods that the member 
has alluded to, such as the income approach, once these 
methods have been approved by use . . . by SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency), for use by 
SAMA, and set out in the assessment manuals that are prepared. 
 
And secondly, it will in fact enhance the ability of assessors to 
collect the information needed to make proper evaluations such 
as rent and income information, and increasing the 
consequences for individuals who are non-compliant in 
providing requested information. 
 
And finally, I think it’s important as well, it’ll provide some 
additional measures to safeguard potentially sensitive 
information from improper use, access, and disclosure 
throughout the assessment and the appeal processes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The one part of 
the Bill that I know has had some controversy and a fair amount 
of discussion on is the income-based approach. Have you had 
. . . well the one example I know for sure is the inland grain 
terminals system are not very happy about if the income-based 
approach was used in their situation. Have you had concerns 
brought forward to you that they don’t like the idea of using the 
income-based system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member. The 
business community has not indicated any significant concerns. 
As a matter of fact, they welcomed that type of opportunity for 
assessment, for more accurate assessment and valuation of their 
buildings. 
 
There have been some that have indicated a concern about the 
information they may need to supply. However, as I mention 
again, the Act will provide for confidentiality of that 
information. 
 
But in answer specifically to your question, I have to say that 
there have not been any serious concerns raised by the business 
community. As a matter of fact I believe that they welcome it, 
recognizing it as perhaps a more valid way of more accurately 
valuating properties. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And possibly 
at the time maybe they didn’t understand how this was going to 
work. And I guess at to this point they maybe don’t know how 
it will affect them until it actually happens. 
 
But as we know, the concerns that many have had in the 
province, no matter what area you’re in, with the way 
assessment has gone in the past, understanding that SAMA has 
new leadership now, and I’ve heard nothing but positives 
coming out of where we might be heading. I think, Mr. 
Minister, you passed on that productivity will be used now for 
agriculture land out there. You had talked about that before. I 
think that’s a positive. I know SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) themselves are very happy 
that that is you know down the road and coming in to be used, 
maybe bring some sensible assessments back into the system, 
especially because of the education portion of the tax that’s 



2476 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

charged to farm land. 
 
So you know the direction I think that we’re heading in SAMA 
is a positive and I’ve heard nothing but good from that. And 
hopefully we can continue to make changes that when the next 
time around, that the improvements will just filter right down, 
because you know the problems we’ve had in the last two 
reassessments. The first one was a nightmare for the 
government and for everyone involved. And the last one had a 
number of problems. So I think we’re starting, hopefully, in the 
right direction to address that. 
 
So one question I had, Mr. Minister, any changes in here that 
directly will affect SAMA right away, like in this legislation 
that we’re changing right now from what it was before to what 
it is now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, just for clarification, 
there’s no way that these amendments will be affecting the 
governance of the board. And I’m not sure whether the member 
was asking that specific question. But it will allow the SAMA 
board to proceed with implementing the new assessment 
manual and including the process to be used for the income 
approach and move towards the agricultural production base 
evaluation as well. So it will allow them a little more latitude in 
that respect. It will also allow the assessors the opportunity to 
access or request more information. 
 
Those are basically the immediate changes. It will in effect 
make it a little bit easier for the assessment board. And I 
appreciate the member’s comments with respect to the direction 
being taken because I know there is a genuine interest by the 
board to ensure that we have parity in our assessments. But as 
far as any significant immediate changes other than those that I 
mentioned, it’ll just open the door a little more for allowing us 
to proceed in the direction that I’m sure we agree we need to go. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
anywhere in this Bill, and I don’t know, I haven’t seen exactly 
where it might be affected, but I’m sure you’re well aware and 
you’ve had many concerns brought to you between resort 
villages and RMs and the problems that they are having out 
there. 
 
Have you anywhere in this Bill tried to address any of those 
problems and are you getting those same concerns from resort 
villages and from RMs whether services have to be provided by 
the RM, what the resort villages are planning on doing? I know 
they both have concerns, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that there’s 
nothing in the Bill that deals with the incorporation of resort 
villages. What the Bill has included is the opportunity and the 
removal of impediments for small communities, hamlets, 
villages, and even resort villages to restructure. And that will 
give them the opportunity under the new legislation. 
 
The intent again being that the department will be working with 
these communities in their best interests, the direction that they 
see would benefit them in whatever way they take, but 
weighing the interests of both rural municipalities and resort 
villages. And a lot of that needs to come from the type of 
discussion and consultation between those two entities. 

But from the Government Relations perspective, we’ll be there 
to assist them in any way that they feel they may change or 
restructure for the benefit of the citizens that they represent. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Because we have 
heard and are sure you have heard the same concerns brought 
forward by resort communities. And a number of them may be 
banding together to form village, towns, even if they got to that 
point. 
 
But I certainly understand the concerns of the RMs out there in 
many cases that may have to provide fire services, roads, and a 
number of other things. So it’s a problem I don’t think that’s 
going to go away very quickly. And I think we have to try and 
find a happy medium there where we can appease both sides. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other concerns that many 
municipalities have out there, and it’s been talked about in this 
House a number of times now this session, is the accountability 
to do with water and sewage treatment, and stuff like that; the 
accountability on councils. And I guess where my concern 
comes in here is that in many cases right now we have a hard 
time finding enough people to serve on councils there. And I’m 
somewhat leery that if we go too far with something like this it 
will be virtually impossible to find people to fill those spots. 
We’ve saw the problems that North Battleford’s had and other 
communities have had boil-water advisories and things like that 
go on. So it is a grave concern out there. Would you care to 
comment on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And the 
member asks a very valid question. And the concern that 
perhaps exists as a result of the responses and reaction to the 
direction that’s being taken to ensure a good quality and safe 
drinking water. The intent is not to discourage people from 
wanting to serve in public office to meet those types of 
responsibilities. And it may be seen as added responsibilities, 
but they’re not. Those responsibilities I believe have always 
been there, and people which I commend a great deal for 
stepping forward to serve in public office to make some tough 
decisions and look after the safety of the citizens that they 
represent, I commend them a great deal. 
 
The concern I know was expressed that, oh my goodness, we’re 
. . . you know, who wants to serve now? Because if something 
goes haywire we could go to jail. That was never the intent. 
And I say sincerely that I do not believe that anyone, unless 
they willingly and knowingly did not carry out one of their 
responsibilities to ensure the safety of whomever they had in 
their charge, if you wish, if they willingly and knowingly 
ignored that responsibility or a particular requirement, then I 
believe there may be the investigation, the need to inquire as to 
why. But I don’t believe that anyone would willingly and 
knowingly want to do something to harm the people to whom 
they’re responsible or responsible for. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In this new 
section, 199.1, I believe it talks about the accountability and so 
on. But I think it goes on to state that these new rules will be 
brought in through regulation. When will this happen, Mr. 
Minister? When will these regulations be brought to light so 
people will actually know what is in them? 
 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2477 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that these 
regulations must be in place by 2005, in advance of that, and 
that gives us some time again to work with municipalities, with 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
with SARM and with the cities to make sure that the regulations 
that are in place are those that everyone will support, is 
supportive of, and that make sense to the approach that will be 
taken and the direction that the entire water strategy program 
for the province . . . the direction that it will be taking. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I always, and I 
think many on this side do, shudder when they hear the word 
regulations, because we’re being asked to pass a Bill and yet we 
won’t know what’s in it. So I’m very happy to hear you say that 
it may be 2005 before these regulations come in — maybe long 
after our time, Mr. Minister. We may not have to worry about it 
at that point. One or the other or both of us may be long gone 
from this fine institution. 
 
But anyway at least that way people will have time to possibly 
have input into what comes out in those regulations and I’m 
quite happy to hear that. 
 
Mr. Minister, that satisfies I think the questions that we have at 
this point. We’d be willing to pass this Bill on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — I don’t see any new officials so . . . same 
capable, competent officials. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just a 
few questions on this Bill. I believe we have many similarities 
between all three Bills so we have answered a number of our 
questions I think when we were talking about the urban Bill. 
 
Can you maybe explain the requirements around putting 
long-term financing in place for water and sewer systems 
contained in all three of these municipal Bills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it will all be part of the safe 
drinking water strategy that as far as . . . now unless I’ve 
misunderstood the question, as far as municipal financing board 
being available for access to assist in the financing of 
infrastructure or addressing water needs and concerns by 
municipalities. And that’s just part of the long-term strategy, 
using whatever resources that a community may require access 
to. 
 
If they do not have reserves to address any of the problems that 
they face, then the availability of the municipal financing board 
to access some long-term financing to address any immediate 
issues. I believe that’s . . . I hope that’s the gist of the question. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another area I 
believe in this Bill is where RM councils provide grants under 
this Act. What was the reason for this change, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that change was merely to 
bring it in line with The Urban Municipalities Act. There was 
that disparity, so that change was merely made to make it the 
same as the other Acts. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
again in this Bill I think everyone’s quite satisfied with what’s 
in the Bill. We didn’t hear . . . very few concerns with what’s in 
the Bill from municipalities, so at this point we’re quite . . . 
we’re satisfied with this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
necessity for ministerial approval of bylaws is now I believe 
being removed for northern municipalities. Are there any 
exceptions, though, to this? Does it . . . is it a broad coverage 
and has to do with all bylaws or is there certain ones that are 
exempted from this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there are no exceptions. 
And if there are some concerns, again just to underline that any 
of these communities or hamlets or villages have and require 
some assistance in determining the direction they might take, 
then that assistance would be available to them. But there will 
be no exceptions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
how would the changes in this Bill affect a town like or a 
village like Creighton, who sits on the Saskatchewan/Manitoba 
border? Can you maybe just touch on how this will affect them? 
 
(17:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, this will now bring 
Creighton fully under The Northern Municipalities Act. Before 
it was under the urban Act. And I’m also advised that it does 
not affect Creighton’s unique situation with respect to sitting on 
the border similar to what Lloydminster is. It will bring them 
fully — and it’s at their request — that it will bring them totally 
under The Northern Municipalities Act. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
then how . . . maybe I’m not sure if you have these numbers but 
the community of Creighton now under the new system, what 
would they be . . . what would they get this year out of the 
Northern Revenue Sharing Account compared to what they got 
before? Will that change? Will this see an increase for them in 
funding or will they stay at exactly the same rate they were 
before, the same amount of dollars? 



2478 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, nothing will change as far 
as their revenue sharing is concerned. They will get the same as 
everybody else — a portion of the increased funding for this 
year. But as far as a formula for the sharing, there will be no 
changes for the community of Creighton. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, just a question a bit off of . . . 
tied possibly a bit to this Bill. But is firefighting paid in the 
northern municipalities totally by the government where in the 
southern municipalities that the municipality actually, it looks 
like now, picks up the tab for firefighting? The northern 
municipalities that we’re dealing with here, do they . . . is it 
totally, when fire costs come into play, is that totally picked up 
by the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there’s a bit of a unique 
situation there, under the northern administration district is what 
the North is considered, which is totally a provincial 
responsibility. I will give that answer to the member, Mr. 
Chairman, and with some degree of confidence that the 
northern administration district, being a provincial 
responsibility to the province, would pick up all those 
firefighting costs. 
 
Now if I may, with all due respect, add a caveat. Given the 
seriousness and the severity of what’s happening with our fire 
situation this year, there may be some other considerations, but 
not lessening the provincial responsibility to the northern 
administration district. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So how far does 
that funding go, Mr. Minister, that if our community and I can’t 
. . . any community in the North, it doesn’t matter, if they have 
firefighting equipment and trucks and so on, is that supplied and 
paid for by the government of the day, Government of 
Saskatchewan, or is that picked up by the community and then 
the costs are paid? How does that work, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, once again I must 
respectfully request consideration for having that question 
asked of Environment and Resource Management. That falls 
more into their responsibility area with respect to protection 
under those kinds of circumstances. I’m afraid I can’t answer 
that question with any qualification. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I think if I 
gather right what you’re saying is that that’s not funded through 
Municipal Government, that’s funded through SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) or 
Environment and Resource Management? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I believe that’s right. It’s not funded 
through Government Relations, but I feel fairly certain . . . but 
once again qualify that by suggesting that perhaps Environment 
and Resource Management might be in a better position to 
respond to that particular issue. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, that 
satisfies our question with this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Cities Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
know this has been a long-awaited Bill for the cities. They’ve 
put a tremendous amount of work. The cities had give you a 
draft, presented all of us, I think, with a draft of where they’d 
like to see legislation go. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you just give me a quick breakdown on how 
the legislations you’re presenting today, that we’re passing 
today, varies from what the cities actually provided to your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps in response to the 
member again, if he’ll bear with me. If I could just refer to . . . 
and I agree, the cities worked long and hard on preparing some 
framework for now coming to this stage. And I’m pleased that 
we’re here able to discuss it. 
 
The replacing the prescriptive legislation that sets out in detail 
how a city’s authority is to be exercised, that’s the general 
philosophy of the Act itself. And basically that general 
philosophy presented to us by the cities remained the same. 
 
There was a little more detail as to how a city’s authority is to 
be exercised with more enabling legislation that allows a 
council to tailor its activities precisely to the needs and the 
desires of its communities. And I think that’s what the cities 
wanted, is to have some autonomy to take . . . to make some 
immediate moves in the direction that they felt was necessary 
and of an immediate nature for the benefit of their communities 
and their citizens. 
 
It’s reversing the traditional approach of itemizing a city’s 
administrative, regulatory, and service powers in favour of a 
natural person’s powers, which was a natural person powers in 
areas of jurisdiction, were a couple of the issues the cities felt 
would provide councils and administrations with a broader 
authority to deal with a wide range of local issues and matters 
within these powers and within these areas — and not 
increasing a city’s jurisdiction or responsibilities, but rather 
giving councils greater flexibility and discretion within the 
existing areas of jurisdiction. 
 
This was a process that was long and arduous and I once again 
commend the cities for their initiative in bringing their 
proposals forward. I also want to commend people within the 
Department of Government Relations that dedicated a great deal 
of time and effort working with representatives from the cities 
in achieving what was then felt to be mutually agreeable. 
 
There were some things that initially did not conform with what 
the province felt was adequate enough responsibility, or 
accountability rather, to the citizens of the communities. And 
there was — as you can appreciate, and it was no small task, 
given the size of the Bill and the extent of that particular 
legislation — and there was a lot of give-and-take, and the need 
to ensure again protection of citizens’ rights while at the same 
time allowing the cities more flexibility to react or act on those 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2479 

 

issues which were felt to be immediate of nature within the 
communities, that would make things better for the citizens in 
the cities. 
 
So I hope that answers it. I can’t underline enough how hard the 
people worked to make sure that this was all brought together 
and mutually consented to as a piece of legislation that would 
take us into the 21st century with a difference of approach — a 
partnership, if you wish, with the provinces and the cities. 
 
So I again, I believe it’s a good piece of work. I know that there 
was some concern that perhaps it may not happen. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I believe that I feel as strongly and as pleased as the 
member does that we were able to achieve this kind of mutual 
agreement with the cities in arriving at this, what I would say is 
significant, not only significant, but a historical piece of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I agree with 
you. Mr. Minister, had the cities at any point asked for special 
powers to be able to initiate new forms of taxation? And I’m 
thinking, for an example, of so much on a litre of gas. They’ve 
had other . . . We’ve heard other things in the media that 
possibly could have been used. Have they actually asked for 
those powers or was that not part of this package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the cities 
did not in fact specifically ask for any taxation powers. There 
was one area where they asked for the opportunity . . . or the 
right or the decision to go ahead and impose taxes on certain 
projects after notifying their citizens, and projects that would be 
paid for within a year. So the accountability aspect, again, was 
built in very strongly with the guidelines that they had for doing 
that for a particular, particular activity. 
 
But as far as, the member mentioned, the fuel tax — no, the 
cities were not adamant in that respect. They were more 
concerned about the minor tax that I just referred to. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if a 
city should wish to continue under the urban municipal Act 
instead of coming under the new Cities Act, is that a 
possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, by all means. The 
Cities Act will come into effect January 1, 2003. Councils must 
indicate in advance of that first day of the year their intention to 
opt into the Act. So it will allow cities to determine whether it’s 
in their best interests or not to opt into The Cities Act or remain 
under the urban municipalities Act. That was felt to be both 
beneficial to all the cities that are concerned to determine; again 
there may be some cities that feel that perhaps, at this point, 
they may want to remain under the urban municipalities Act. 
 
(17:45) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
once a city has, on January 2003, has gone under The Cities 
Act, I would presume at that point then they’re under The Cities 
Act and there’s no going back. Is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That’s right, Mr. Chairman. Once they’ve 
opted in, then there won’t be an opting out. 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, is 
there anything in this Bill that will change the level of funding 
that cities will receive in revenue sharing or any type of 
assistance that the government gives them before to what they 
will receive in the future after 2003? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the member 
and to the cities that no, there will not be any changes with 
respect to the formulas that currently exist in our 
revenue-sharing and grant programs. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another question 
is: now that the cities have their own Act and the towns are 
separate, have you been contacted by the towns that they might 
do work on their own to try and update their situation under the 
old Act? 
 
I know there was concerns with the towns out there when the 
cities were in the process. And I think it was understandable, 
but I think they felt maybe the cities were trying to get a larger 
share of the pie or getting priority treatment from the 
government rather . . . what the towns would get. 
 
I think it was a valid concern they had out there. Are they in the 
process of maybe looking at something like this and having new 
legislation drawn up that would affect them, that would remove 
a lot of the red tape and a lot of things that we’ve actually seen 
done in this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the SUMA does have a 
committee that’s looking at The Cities Act, and in an effort to 
determine whether there’s some of that legislation or some of 
the makeup of that, that Bill would certainly be applicable to 
the smaller towns and communities that SUMA serves. So the 
opportunities are there and we’ll help them any way we can. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does the passage 
of this Bill affect the way SUMA operates in any way because 
the cities are under one Act now and the towns, villages, etc., 
are under the old municipal Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to that is no. 
SUMA will continue to be representative of the urban 
municipalities. There have been no changes under the Act that 
would make it otherwise. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Does this Bill affect, Mr. Minister, in any 
way when a city wants to take on a project where they have to 
go in debt? Does this Bill have any effect on what . . . how they 
can do that now from what they did before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, virtually there’s no change. 
They still . . . it’s business as usual with the restrictions that 
currently exist under The Urban Municipality Act. They still 
have to be accountable for their citizens, to their citizens. So but 
as far as the process for the borrowing, nothing has really 
changed under that Act. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
when removing red tape usually means we’ve cut down on 
administration and things like that. Is there actually a cost 
saving because of this Bill? 
 



2480 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it’s difficult to specifically 
respond as far as savings are concerned. The cities tell us that 
they’ll be able to streamline their administrative processes and 
have a little more flexibility. 
 
If there are savings, it will be recognized by the cities. And 
once again, they’ll have the autonomy to put into place 
whatever administrative streamlined processes, they . . . you 
know, they feel is of benefit to them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I thank your 
officials. And I have to commend you for bringing this through 
as fast as you have. I think tonight if the mayors and aldermen 
of the cities of Saskatchewan out there happen to be watching 
or seeing that this Bill is passing tonight, there should be some 
pretty happy councils out there. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think at this point we will let 
this Bill pass on and make a lot of aldermen and mayors happy 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I want to sincerely thank 
the member from Saltcoats for the questions that have been 
posed on each of these Bills that have come before the 
committee. It’s a responsible exercise that we go through here. 
And I want to thank the member for his direct questions, for the 
concerns that have been brought here on behalf of the people 
that we all represent. 
 
And again, I want to thank the officials that have brought us to 
this stage as well with all the legislation that is intended to be 
beneficial and of benefit and of assistance to the people that we 
are all responsible to in this great province of ours. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 421 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Cities Consequential Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Cities Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I believe 
— maybe the minister would just comment — but I believe the 
necessity for this Bill was brought about because of The Cities 
Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s correct, the 
French translation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And at this time I 
believe this is our last Bill, so I want to thank your officials for 
their help tonight in explaining to us some of the parts of these 
Bills, and thank you for your time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act 
 

The Chair: — And I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce to my immediate right, Mr. Stuart Kramer who is the 
president of the Sask Water Corporation. Bryan Ireland is 
seated just behind myself; he’s a regional director, regional 
operations. Directly behind me is Mr. Michael McDougall, our 
general counsel. And to my further right is Mr. Greg Argue who 
is the director of marketing and business development. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have a few 
questions about this Bill. I want to welcome the minister here 
and officials today. 
 
Now this is quite a lengthy Bill. And it also, I think, deals with, 
I believe, with kind of a giving a . . . splitting up Sask Water 
Corporation, I think, moving some of the irrigation is going to 
be going into under Agriculture. The conservation development 
authorities, I believe, will be moving under the Environment, if 
I’m right. And this particular Bill is going to be dealing with 
water and sewage. 
 
Can you go into a little more detail of this Bill, will it be . . . 
with your department, will you be increasing it with the 
engineering department right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the purpose of the Act 
primarily is to turn Sask Water into solutions providers in order 
to enable Sask Water to work with the communities, determine 
their needs, and as well, work with the private sector in 
addressing the needs of communities. 
 
So it’s a solutions provider basically. And the purpose of the 
Act primarily is to set it up as such. 
 
(18:00) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Will your 
department be growing though with a . . . If you’re going to be 
providing solutions, a solution provider, does that means you’re 
going to be hiring more engineers, more consulting engineers? 
Will towns be able to come and hire that surface, or do you 
already have them engineers that they can come to? Or are you 
going to be increasing your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there are no immediate 
plans to move in that direction. What we want to make sure that 
the department is capable of doing is responding to 
communities to assist them in identifying what kind of 
problems they may have. But as far as the immediate plans for 
increasing the staff or engineering staff or otherwise, that’s not 
in the immediate plans. 
 
There are adequate, capable people, technical people now that 
are able to do the kind of work that’s expected of Sask Water at 
this point. If down the road, who knows? There may be some 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2481 

 

opportunities for more work with the private sector to address 
some of the communities’ needs. But again it will be based on a 
determination, perhaps decisions that communities themselves 
may wish to make as far as their choice of solutions to their 
problems and who they want to partner with to solve those 
problems. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, didn’t Sask Water do this before? 
And what’s the thrust behind this Bill? Because I believe they 
already provided the services. They would come out to towns 
and provide some consulting information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the intent will be the 
same as it always has been, to be available to help communities 
and provide whatever assistance they may require in any 
immediate situation. 
 
The corporation as a whole — Sask Water Corporation — was 
something like 240 employees, 70 of which will be going 
directly to the Water Corporation to deal with the types of 
issues that will require some immediate response or assistance 
to communities that may be faced with difficulties with their 
water projects. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Will this Bill be 
setting up a separate Crown already? Will the company . . . 
How is Sask Water splitting up? You said 70 employees will be 
coming over directly to Sask Water Corporation. How is the 
rest of Sask Water being split up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The 70 employees will continue with the 
Sask Water Corporation, and it will remain the same. It’s the 
next Bill that we’ll be dealing with, the Watershed Authority, 
that will be . . . will involve the balance of the people that are 
now coming out of what we knew as the Sask Water 
Corporation. So the corporation will not . . . the name will not 
change. We will remain a corporation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then the 
conservation and development authorities, they will be going 
over underneath the Watershed Authority, I believe. Did Sask 
Water do any consulting with the president, with any of the 
association itself? Have any meetings with them informing 
them that they will be falling under the Environment and not 
under Sask Water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, this move is essentially all 
part and parcel of the long-term water strategy program that was 
announced previously, I believe sometime in April. And there 
were consultations and discussions and deliberations about how 
the response . . . the response departments, if you wish, could be 
better equipped or better organized to deal with specific issues, 
right from the protection of sources of water right to the point 
of the drinking tap — turning on the drinking tap and ensuring 
all along the way that there were various responsibility areas 
that needed to be adhered to, and again with the bottom line 
being quality, good, safe drinking water for all the people in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, what did the conservation and 
development authorities, what input did they give you and 
information? Did they tell you that they would sooner be under 
Environment or would sooner remain under Sask Water? 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — The conservation and development folks 
will be moving intact so there is no threat of reducing numbers, 
and I’m not sure if that’s what the member is concerned, Mr. 
Chairman. But there was no ongoing or lengthy consultation in 
that respect, but the determination as to how, once again, 
qualified people, dedicated people within the corporation and 
within the organization could best be utilized to meet the needs 
that were being determined through this long-term water 
strategy. 
 
It’s not unlike we have a lot of good people in a lot of places 
and when it comes to a time of determining — not unlike 
restructuring — where can we best use people that we already 
have to our best advantage to meet the needs of people that 
we’re responsible for. So with some . . . There were some 
discussions but no lengthy deliberations. It was a matter of 
determining people with certain qualifications, where they 
might best be used. 
 
And I think that’s probably a responsible approach to take, not 
unlike restructuring within . . . within our Department of 
Government Relations, which now identifies specific areas 
dealing with our responsibilities to and for our municipalities, 
both SARM and SUMA and towns and villages. 
 
So it’s . . . again, it’s a long-term water strategy. So within that 
strategy is how can we strategically utilize the best people we 
have — and we have a lot of them — and their talents to meet 
our objectives in this particular issue for the long term. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You also have some 
very good people in the C&Ds (conservation and development 
authorities) and since they deal basically with drainage of water, 
the ones I talked to felt they should stay under Sask Water 
Corporation rather than the Environment even though Sask 
Water had been underfunding them for many years, same as 
they had been for irrigation. 
 
But they still felt they should still feel under Sask Water — the 
ones I talked to anyway. So I was just wondering if any of the 
presidents of the C&D associations or the actual president, if 
you’ve talked to him and what his thoughts were on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The C&D people will be with the 
Watershed Authority, and again that’s the Bill that will be dealt 
with later. But once again . . . And I’m sure, Mr. Chairman, the 
member will agree with me, that regardless of the determination 
and the very best efforts to address a long-term objective, there 
will be some that may agree or rather, some that will disagree 
with the direction being taken. 
 
At the end of the day the decisions that are made, as they are in 
this venerable institution, are made in what’s believed to be the 
best interests to meet long-term objectives and meet 
responsibilities to those that we’re responsible to. 
 
However, Mr. Chairman, as the member recognizes as well, for 
some reason or another we don’t always get 100 per cent 
approval. So hopefully we do have the approval of the majority 
or support of the majority in our efforts to address what is very, 
very important to issues that are facing our province with 
respect to our most important and most valuable resource, and 
that’s our water. 



2482 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You also . . . There 
was a letter from the Consulting Engineers of Saskatchewan — 
there was concern with this Bill. 
 
Have you been talking to them? I think you have the same 
letter. And I’ve met with them and their concern was that you 
will be providing competition to them with your engineers out 
there with the towns. 
 
They provide a very excellent service now in the consulting 
engineering end of it and their concern was in the letter 
addressed to you was that there could be some engineers firms 
losing workers. And we already have an outpouring of workers 
leaving this province with the private firm. Have you met with 
them since then and tried to address their concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to answer that 
question for the member. As a matter of fact I have. I had the 
privilege of meeting with them on June 24. And we discussed 
those very issues that the member raises. 
 
I do want to assure the member that during our discussions it 
was more of a discussion about partnerships as opposed to 
competition. And as a result it may very well turn into more 
opportunities, I believe, for the professional engineers. And our 
meeting was very, very amenable. And I look forward to 
working with that fine group of people and addressing those 
needs of our communities. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just going through 
some of the Bill here, at the front here, on part VI . . . or no, I’ll 
go division 2 — I’ll get that later — “Provision of Services,” 
you have “Exclusive power to provide water, works.” You want 
to explain that part of the Bill a little more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, could I clarify? 
Was that part VI of the Bill? 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, it was under part V, division 2, 
“Provision of Services,” under 39, “Exclusive power to provide 
water, works” and the “Power to amend agreements.” Those are 
just two of the items there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, forgive me for taking a 
little bit of time. We had to chase that down a little bit. 
 
I understand that that provision in the legislation has been there 
since 1984. That’s not new. And again it empowers the 
corporation to go ahead and do as they feel necessary, whether 
there’s some construction needed for whatever reason — safety 
or otherwise — or making sure there’s adequate water supplies. 
So that right was there since 1984 and it’s a carry-over. So it 
remains, and for the purposes that I’ve mentioned, not for 
anything other than if there’s a need to go ahead and do 
something that’s going to benefit people or protect them, then 
that authority remains in legislation. 
 
(18:15) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now with this Bill, 
I take it you’ll also be . . . the intent of Sask Water is to provide 
more water pipelines to towns if that’s possible, to expand that 
end of it, to turn it to more of a money-making corporation? Is 

that the intent of this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the corporation will operate 
as a commercial entity might. And where there’s an 
arrangement with communities to . . . for services, then it will 
be dealt with as a commercial entity. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Does Sask Water 
intend to build more water pipelines throughout the province to 
supply towns if they’re willing to purchase the water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, where communities are 
desirous of having regionalized systems, and where a good 
business case might be made to move into that type of project, 
then by all means the opportunity . . . that sort of opportunity 
would be explored. But again, keeping in mind not as an intent 
to compete but as a commercial entity. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m also in . . . 
respecting water and sewage I suppose in the sewage plants 
would you be looking to build and operate them? Same as the 
water plants, would you . . . Let’s say a town of 5,000 people, 
whatever, they could basically hire you to build their plant and 
then you would run it. You would provide the safety, the water 
sampling, and they would have absolutely no liability. You 
would be basically providing . . . Would you provide that whole 
service package for them if they wanted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, once again, it would be if 
the communities would choose to have Sask Water do that, yes. 
And once again, it would be under a contractual arrangement 
that would be both . . . be amenable to both partners or both 
people working together on that kind of a project. 
 
So by all means, if the communities feel that Sask Water is the 
partner they want to do business with, then it would be on . . . 
again, on a commercial basis. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank the 
officials. I think that’s the questions I have on this Bill that have 
been posed to me by different groups that will be affected by it. 
And I hope when I pass the answers back to them, I hope they 
will be satisfied with them. So that’s all the questions I have on 
this Bill at this particular time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. 
member for the questions posed with respect to this Bill. Once 
again, part of our responsibility to ensure that that legislation 
has been scrutinized, and I want to thank the member for the 
questions that he’s asked this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 52 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 67 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act 

 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister whenever he’s ready to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Just 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2483 

 

to my immediate right is Terry Scott, who’s the deputy minister 
for Saskatchewan Environment. To my left is Michael 
McDougall, general counsel for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. Directly behind me is Bryan Ireland who’s the 
director of regional operations for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. And of course to my further left, next to Bryan, of 
course is Mr. Dave Phillips, the assistant deputy minister of 
operations with Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, 
Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have a number of Bills before us this 
afternoon that are the NDP’s direct response to the North 
Battleford water crisis. And as I’ve had it explained to me, this 
Bill is something that the NDP have crafted in hope that it will 
alleviate some of the difficulties that were experienced prior to 
North Battleford and subsequent to it, to North Battleford. 
 
The disturbing thing about this, Mr. Minister, is that even with a 
cabinet decision item that very, very clearly warned the NDP 
that this kind of crisis that we experienced in North Battleford 
was a possibility, there was no attempt whatsoever to be 
proactive. And not necessarily just proactive in terms of 
avoiding the kind of situation that we saw in North Battleford 
but proactive in terms of addressing an infrastructure in this 
province that through neglect has been deteriorating very, very 
badly. 
 
So perhaps with that in mind, Mr. Minister, you could give me 
what you think are some of the highlights of this particular Act 
and how the government sees it as being able to address some 
of the issues this province has had to experience over the last 10 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I just want to 
point out that the watershed management will certainly look at 
the involvement of all the environment and social . . . 
socio-economic aspects. It’ll certainly talk about watershed 
planning, groundwater management, protecting aquifers from 
depletion, encouraging conservation of wetlands, promoting 
sustainable economic development through the wise use of 
water and all, you know, the land resources, and to help resolve 
disputes over the use and diversion of water. So in summary, 
the Watershed Authority will manage the supply allocations of 
water in the province, and protect water at the source. That’s the 
primary focus. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that bits and pieces of various departments and 
agencies were brought together in the drafting of this Act. Some 
of those include Sask Water, Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management, and Saskatchewan Wetland 
Conservation Corporation. Could you briefly describe which of 
the areas formerly administered by those departments and 
agencies are now included in this Act. And could you also 
address the issue of funding. How is the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority to be funded? 
 
I understand that when the government depleted the surplus 
from the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, that while the 

bulk of that money was transferred to the General Revenue 
Fund, some of it was going to be used to fund other agencies 
such as the Saskatchewan Wetland Conservation Corporation. 
Will any of that money be used to fund the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to point out that the new Watershed Authority will be 
created by combining the existing watershed management 
responsibilities and associated staff of Sask Water, the 
Saskatchewan Wetland Conservation Corporation, and of 
course Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
There will be no overall increase in the cost to government, and 
the existing budget for the watershed management activities 
from the three previously involved agencies will be redirected 
to fund the new organization. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
there are some people who feel that the federal Department of 
Fisheries and Oceans has almost invasive powers now in this 
province in many areas that this Act addresses. Has there been 
discussion with the federal government, and how have you 
managed to develop this Act in a way that it will work 
alongside of Fisheries and Oceans and in a way that we won’t 
see conflict with the federal Department of Fisheries and 
Oceans? 
 
(18:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the question. There’s no 
question about it that DFO (Department of Fisheries and 
Oceans) is going to be an active part of the solution. As you 
know, that DFO hasn’t had a presence in the province for a 
number of years. Last year they’ve basically gone through the 
process of staffing up and we have developed a protocol with 
them to be part of the solutions that we’re trying to afford with 
this whole Watershed Authority. They obviously are involved 
with fish habitat, to protect fish habitat. 
 
So there is some collaboration that is necessary. And although 
we feel that we’re adequate to address some of the challenges 
with fish habitat, certainly at this stage of the game we accept 
that DFO certainly has a role to play and we’re trying to work 
with them to provide some good solutions overall. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
could you indicate whether there are any changes in penalties 
with the new Act? I’m assuming that there were penalty 
sections in some of the other Acts that you have borrowed from 
in order to develop the watershed corporation Act. Could you 
indicate as to what those changes might be and what the 
penalties under this Act are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. What we’ll do 
is we’ll send you a copy of the penalties associated with the 
authority. And the penalties have not increased in terms of the 
monetary value, but they certainly increased in terms of the 
comprehensiveness. So there isn’t a whole pile of new rules and 
regulation. There’s certainly some additions to the process, but 
this is not meant to increase in a monetary form the amount of 
penalties that will be part of this Act. So we’ll send you a copy 
of that. 



2484 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

And I can assure people that the increase in the amount of rules 
and regulations are there to protect the water. This is not an 
exercise to increase the fine costs and certainly that’s something 
that we think is very important to go forward. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, this 
Act indicates that Crown corporation personnel may enter on to 
any land for a number of different purposes. When they do this 
and they are acting on behalf of the corporation, what is their 
legal status, Mr. Minister? Are they then immune to any kind of 
or from any kind of legal recourse on the part of owners of 
property that they may be going onto? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Certainly one of the things that the Act 
does, it certainly affords the authority for people working for 
the authority to go and inspect certain places. Those issues are 
clearly pointed out in section 90 and section 49. And there is 
certainly a process where we would act, reasonable to look at, at 
a potential violation of the authority and the intent of the 
authority. Like for example, instead of taking 100 pieces of 
equipment in there, one is necessary. That’s fine. 
 
But certainly I think the authority will have the provision to 
allow officers of the authority to enter on private property as 
long as they have a common sense process in terms of not 
having to bring in a whole pile of equipment and that they are 
there to protect the water at source. 
 
So those Acts . . . or those regs are clearly pointed out in section 
49 and section 90. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would just like to pass on to you an observation that was made 
to me at the SUMA regional meeting in Hudson Bay. The group 
from I guess all of northeast Saskatchewan at that meeting were 
very concerned about the Act in terms of it perhaps being a 
little too complex and perhaps in some ways very difficult to 
adhere to. 
 
Now I know in the second reading speech the former minister 
indicated that the hope was that it would eliminate any 
conflicting priorities, reduce duplication, and increase 
efficiency. And I think I would just pass on to you, Mr. 
Minister, that there are some people who are concerned that that 
may not have been accomplished. 
 
The question is — I notice that this Act is to come into effect on 
proclamation — when does your government intend to proclaim 
this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Certainly we want to basically have 
some of the Acts in place as quickly as possible. 
 
We plan on proclaiming the Act by this fall and it’s something 
that we feel is necessary to begin the process of implementing 
our water strategy. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Chair, I have no further questions. 
 
The Chair: — Members, this is a fairly lengthy Bill. Is leave 
granted to deal with it by part? 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 166 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my left of course, we have Bob Ruggles, and Bob Ruggles is 
assistant deputy minister for Saskatchewan Environment. 
Directly behind me is Lian Schwann, and Lian is the Crown 
counsel with environmental responsibilities at Saskatchewan 
Justice. Next to Lian, we have Scott Robinson, environmental 
planner with Saskatchewan Environment. And once again, we 
have the old faithful, Terry Scott, deputy minister of 
Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, this 
Act once again is another piece of legislation that was 
introduced directly as a result of the experience in North 
Battleford. Now I think on reflection, at the end of session, this 
will be considered probably one of the most important pieces of 
legislation to go through the House this session because this 
potentially can impact the way that municipalities govern 
themselves, the way that they provide services to their residents, 
and I think to a large degree will have some impact on their 
autonomy, as well, in the sense that there are some relatively 
onerous requirements being placed on them. 
 
Now with this Bill having been introduced so late in session, 
the one comment that I get a lot from communities is that they 
didn’t have — and haven’t had — much of an opportunity to be 
able to review it, to be able to fully understand it, and 
understand what the implications of having to meet the 
requirements will be. 
 
So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is what type of 
consultation did you and your department do prior to the 
drafting of this legislation? 
 
(18:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I’ll just point out that this changes to EMPA (Environmental 
Management Protection Act) primarily because of the water 
issue. What we wanted to do was, while we were dealing with 
the water issues, to do some minor improvements of the 
operation of the Act. There has been no policy direction change 
associated with this, but certainly the focus has been on water. 
 
And I’ll point out one of the challenges we had in trying to do 
timely consultation, and we done it as best we could. But the 
consultation was basically hampered somewhat, although we 
did go through a very quick process, a very thorough process as 
well, primarily because of the schedule of events. 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2485 

 

As you know, Justice Laing brought down his, his final report 
and we, of course, had to respond to that. And there was a 
whole pile of work being done prior to that. And so if you look 
at that coming down at the end of April, I believe, we had May 
and June — two months — to get all the legislation in place and 
the rules and regulations, to go through all that process. 
 
So there was a very tough time constraint. And as a result of 
that, we wish we had more time to do more thorough 
consultations. And of course we did the very best we can. 
 
And again, I want to point out that the whole issue is being 
driven by water, and the design and changes here are to improve 
the operation of the Act. But there’s no policy direction change 
associated with that. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the 
requirements is that community reporting is going to be more 
stringent. Could you describe what the expectations now will be 
of communities with respect to their reporting to the 
department? And could you also indicate why it is that the 
department determined that their own report, the state of 
drinking water quality report, would be an annual report instead 
of perhaps a quarterly report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think what we want to do is to point out that in terms of 
compliance, we monitor the water systems of the province 
often. There’s no question that what we want to do is we want 
to make sure that public safety or the public’s health is certainly 
paramount in terms of the concern to us. 
 
Prosecution is not the intended object here. What we are trying 
to point out is that absolutely everybody has a role to play. So 
we would say that on an annual basis, the people that operate 
water and sewer systems in the province must make a report to 
their citizens. I think that’s only fair that that be done so the 
citizens have, you know, a sense of comfort that their water 
systems are being operated properly. 
 
And certainly a state of the nation kind of a water report should 
be coming here to the Assembly to really begin to see and 
continue having a visual object here that we can look at and see 
if we’re making improvements. 
 
So I think there is a number of very solid opportunities for 
people to assess their own local drinking water and to also look 
at the province as a whole. And that I think compliance is 
certainly what we’re trying to achieve and a quarterly report 
would be . . . would just be not be feasible primarily because of 
the volumes. 
 
Certainly as capacity is built, perhaps there is quicker ways of 
getting things done. But at this stage of the game we feel that a 
quarterly or annual report is probably the best, the most 
pragmatic, way to go. And the compliance with the water tests 
are done on a regular basis. 
 
So given those two factors we feel that the quarterly report 
might be too cumbersome on the whole system. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
once again referring to the penalties section, this Act has some 

very serious penalties, including fines of up to $1 million or 
three years of incarceration. Could you indicate how that differs 
from the previous Act, if it does differ from the previous Act, 
and how this compares with other jurisdictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out that the fines are . . . haven’t been changed. 
They have been the same as the old Act had them at. And 
certainly I think in terms of the comparison with the other 
provinces, I think we’re probably comparable. There is no 
significant difference from other provinces. 
 
And of course the whole intent here is to make sure that people 
are working in concert with us in terms of water safety, and so 
the change in the . . . or the amount of fines is not changed from 
the old Act and it’s comparable with the rest of the provinces as 
well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, one 
of Justice Laing’s harshest criticisms of the NDP in his report 
was that a lot of what happened in North Battleford happened 
because the NDP were in a virtual state of paralysis as a result 
of turf wars between departments, agencies, infighting in 
cabinet. And I guess, Mr. Minister, we’ve had two substantial 
Acts here this afternoon that even with the best of intentions 
still won’t accomplish what they’re intended to accomplish if 
those issues aren’t addressed. 
 
Can you tell me how it is that the government intends to address 
some of those more political issues internal to cabinet and to 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Certainly I think one of the things, the 
intention that we have when we introduced our water strategy, 
to make sure that it’s effective is of course a . . . three 
components of that being the improved rules and regulations, 
the Watershed Authority, and certainly the CSIP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) program in 
which we would help a number of communities establish safe 
water systems. And that’s $170 million over a five-year 
program. So that three-pronged approach is very important that 
people be told about on a constant basis. 
 
I would point out that Environment’s playing a very strong role. 
We’re seeing efficiency in the rules and regulations. We’re 
seeing it being housed in one department. We’re seeing 
protection at source being a part of Environment’s overall 
effort. So I’m thinking . . . I believe that many people out there 
will certainly be assured that when it comes to environmental 
protection, Saskatchewan Environment is well positioned to do 
a very good job. 
 
But what I would point out as well is that this is a partnership 
mode. The communities have to do their water testing; they 
have to follow the processes and the protocol. So this is by far a 
very effective way of settling the issue. But we must constantly 
remind people to be diligent and be part of the partnership 
process to ensure safe water for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
think given the dramatic impact that this Act and the previous 
Act that we discussed will have on municipalities and the 
provision of safe drinking water in this province, we certainly 



2486 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

will have a lot of individuals, communities, groups, monitoring 
the implementation of the Act and with an eye to the 
effectiveness and the fairness of what’s contained in this Act. 
 
And my question, Mr. Minister, is once again we’ve got an Act 
here that comes into effect on proclamation — when does your 
government intend to proclaim the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — In the fall. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 85 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials when he’s ready. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, just joining us, we have 
Earl Bourlon, forestry policy analyst at the forest ecosystems 
branch with Saskatchewan Environment; and of course we have 
next to Earl, Lian; and of course to my left, we have Bob 
Ruggles; and of course to my right, Terry Scott. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here tonight. I have a few questions 
regarding Bill No. 65, The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act. 
 
But before I go into that, I just want to bring the minister and 
his officials up to par, that later on under “New Clause after 
Clause 32 of the printed Bill” I would like to propose an 
amendment at that time. And I know that the Clerk has just 
passed on a copy of the proposed House amendments for the 
minister and his delegates to read. And I hope that the minister 
and delegates will look at this amendment with some 
seriousness because in this Bill, after reading it many times and 
getting some opinions, there doesn’t seem to be any appeal 
process that’s in this Bill. And I find that somewhat strange that 
this Bill would not have an appeal process of some sort to deal 
with other people. 
 
I just want to also bring the minister and his delegates up to par 
in regards to my comments yesterday in regards to this Bill. 
And under some of the information that I got from people I’ve 
been talking to, there was a lack of some concerned areas. And 
some of the concerned areas was the practice surrounding the 
imposing of administrative penalties, is that the minister 
delegates his authority to the local Saskatchewan Environment 
office who are also charged on a day-to-day basis with directing 
forestry activities in the area. 
 
And another concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is where local 
forestry officials determined that a licensee has committed an 
offence; they will investigate the allegation, accept submissions 
from the licensee, and will therefore either accept the 
submission or levy a penalty in accordance with the regulation. 

(19:00) 
 
There is no appeal process in place, other than by the way of the 
judicial review which initially only deals with questions of law 
and did the minister have the jurisdiction to impose a penalty. 
 
Essentially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is asking trust 
us, we will not abuse your authority. 
 
But there are others however who would say that while an 
appeal process will rarely occur, the right to an appeal to a court 
is the best safeguard, that none of this is required. This type of 
law appears to be a trend with government. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s just look at the Bill that was just 
passed by the hon. member from Carrot River, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 which 
was introduced the first week of June and just passed, where 
appeals from decisions of the minister are allowed only on 
questions of law. In existing Act, an appeal to the court is 
allowed on all matters. 
 
And this trend does not seem to be based on assessment that the 
court process does not work or it’s too expensive or it takes too 
long. Instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rationale seems to be 
that because they are doing this in Alberta and British 
Columbia, we should also be doing it here. 
 
So that poses the question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister and his 
officials. Why did the department neglect to put an appeal 
process into this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for your 
information and your question. I would point out that in the 
overall scheme of things, in terms of looking at the whole 
process to appeal, I’ll point out that companies seem to have 
accepted the Act as it is being proposed. And these are 
relatively small penalties, they are not huge penalties. And so 
far we haven’t had any major problems that would identify that, 
this being a problem. And there’s about, maybe from the 
administrative perspective, I would say about 80 over a 
three-year period that have been assessed. 
 
And there’s also a judicial review simply because a statutory 
appeal remedy isn’t set out in the Act doesn’t mean that the 
aggrieved parties don’t have access to the courts. A person can 
bring their matter before the courts and the court has the power 
to set aside ministerial actions or decisions where the minister 
has exceeded his jurisdiction or the proper process hasn’t been 
followed. So that’s . . . currently that option is available. 
 
So while I appreciate what your point might be, I would also 
say that we haven’t had no advanced copy of the amendment 
and certainly the process there is also available. So we can’t 
accept the amendment as part of this Act, but I would point out 
for your information that there is certainly these processes for 
people to follow if they feel that they haven’t got the option to 
appeal. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think in fairness, Mr. Minister, in regards to the 
amendment to the . . . or the proposed House amendment is the 
fact that this Bill was introduced not that long ago. And by the 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2487 

 

time the information got out to the suppliers or to the people 
involved in regards to this Bill, and by the time the information 
came back, which they had time to read up on it and find where 
there is some loopholes or some deficiencies in the Bill. That’s 
why I think the process is somewhat done in a haste. 
 
And that’s why just today that we got together to draw up this 
amendment because there is some deficiencies in this Bill, and 
that deals with the appeal process. 
 
I know it’s short term coming, but you’ve mentioned that 
there’s only a few, or very few people have had this problem. 
But wouldn’t it be in a safeguard position to put something of 
an appeal process into the Bill now, while it can be still done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Just for the 
record, it should be noted that we can’t add the amendment 
now; there wasn’t due time. But I would point out that we have 
been working with the industry since last fall, and a judicial 
review certainly allows the process for people out there that 
may have . . . feel they have a case. That option has always been 
there. 
 
So I would point out that the review is there, the consultation 
with the companies has been last fall, and the amendment 
certainly hasn’t been timely since . . . (inaudible) . . . lost the 
opportunity. So you factor those three considerations, and that’s 
why we feel the Bill as it is now addresses some of the 
challenges that you may have on the appeal front, to make sure 
that it’s effective and it’s fair. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. With that I’ll go on to asking questions regarding 
section 17 where it’s talking about the harvest of trees. And it 
points out any person may, without a licence, harvest a 
reasonable number of trees for his own personal use if the trees 
are harvested for the purpose of being used as Christmas trees. 
 
What happens, Mr. Minister, if a person goes out and cuts — 
and it happens many times — a load of Christmas trees and 
takes them to a city or a village or whatever and sells them? Do 
they need a licence or a permit to do this still, or is this not 
what’s supposed to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I think one of the most important things 
to know is that if somebody’s out there harvesting forest 
products and making it a business and certainly making profit 
on it, that they would be expected to find a . . . or that there 
would be a fee attached to it. 
 
One of the things when we talk about Christmas trees is 
families, of course, as you know have been harvesting 
Christmas trees for years and this provision certainly allows 
them to continue. 
 
What we want to do is again make sure that those businesses 
that are making profits from the sale of trees, if they’re 
Christmas trees, then of course they’d have a permit or a fee to 
pay. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker. In 
regards to the trees, as you know, there are families that go out 
and cut a Christmas tree and one person will say, well while 

you’re out there cut me a Christmas tree and the next one, well 
cut me a Christmas tree. And pretty soon they’ve got 10 or 12 
trees on their truck when they come back. 
 
Is there a number that you would put down as being a number 
of trees that would be for sale or is it wide open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just for the record, I’ll explain to the 
member that I have a fairly large family — there’s 24 of us in 
the family — and every year they appoint me to be the tree 
searcher and harvester. So I take my Volkswagen and load them 
all up. 
 
No, and in all seriousness, there is a reasonable expectation that 
people would use common sense and reason. 
 
If it’s for a family, it’s for a family of four or five people and 
they all go out and harvest each one for their homes . . . Like 
this is not about trying to dissuade that. What we want to do is 
make sure those folks that are out there harvesting Christmas 
trees are using that . . . those trees for personal and family use 
and that they’re not using it for profit. And that’s the most 
important point here. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Thank you for that answer. I also have a large family, and I was 
at that time delegated to cut Christmas trees. 
 
I’d like to move on to section 78, and 30(1). And it states there: 
 

The minister may assess a penalty in the amount prescribed 
in the regulations against any licensee if the licensee: 

 
And then you go down to: 
 

(f) grazes livestock in contravention of the terms of a 
licence or an approved plan. 

 
And I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, what do you mean by this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much for the 
question. The purpose of this is to have some administrative 
penalties available to folks that may be exceeding their permit 
or may not be permitted in that area. 
 
It’s intended to avoid criminal charges. It’s more of a 
administrative penalty option. And of course those penalties 
will be defined as we go down the path to try and rectify the 
problem. And we don’t suspect that will take long. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
You’ve stated that if they’re over their limit they’ll be 
penalized. Does that mean . . . Does this have something to do 
with the forest fringe land? I know that you don’t want to go 
there and neither do I but — I know one of your members is 
winking — but has this got something to do with the forest 
fringe land, with the permit system, where cattle grazing is 
allowed and if they go over their numbers they will be 
penalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — It’s only applicable in provincial forest 
lands. 
 



2488 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — But is not the forest fringe land provincial 
lands also? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer would be no, they have to 
be designated as provincial forest lands. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Designated forest lands. But is not forest 
fringe land, which is that area of land between forestry and farm 
land, it is called designated land also and it is forestry fringe 
land. Now would that part of the land be affected by this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out that the forest fringe land that you’re talking 
about is also administered by other government agencies, and in 
this case Ag and Food are also involved here. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — So then, Mr. Minister . . .or thank you, Mr. 
Minister, and Mr. Deputy Chair. So what you’re saying, Mr. 
Minister, that forest fringe land, designated forest fringe land is 
not part of the area that falls under this Act? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I’ll just clarify that it is only applicable on provincial forest 
land. And of course the forest fringe area is not considered 
forest land so it is . . . again there is some other conflicting uses 
and there’s another . . . Ag and Food is also involved. 
 
So I think the grazing authorization on the forest . . . or 
provincial forest land, it simply points out that no person shall 
graze livestock in a provincial forest without a forest product 
permit or a term supply licence issued pursuant to section 9. So 
that basically talks about the provincial forest land. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then, Mr. 
Minister, you’re saying that the forest fringe land, which you 
know what I’m talking about, is not part of the provincial land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I’m advised that the forest fringe land 
that you’re speaking about is not part of the provincial forest 
land designation. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. At that time I 
don’t have any more questions regarding the Bill, and I’ll let it 
go on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 36 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you. At this time, Mr. Speaker . . . or 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to propose a House amendment: 
 

Amend the printed Bill by adding the following Clause 
after Clause 32: 

 
“ ‘New Sections 94.1 to 94.3 

32.1 The following sections are added after 
section 94: 

 
‘Appeal to Queen’s Bench 

94.1 Any person aggrieved by an order made 

pursuant to this Act or the regulations may appeal to 
a judge of Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench 
for Saskatchewan at any time within 30 days after 
the date of the order. 

 
‘Appeal to Court of Appeal 

94.2 Any person who: 
 

(a) is a party to an appeal pursuant to section 94.1; 
and 

 
(b) is aggrieved by a decision of the judge of Her 
Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for 
Saskatchewan pursuant to section 94.1; 

 
may appeal to the Court of Appeal at any time 
within 30 days after the date of the decision. 

 
‘Appeal does not stay order, etc. 

94.3 The taking of an appeal pursuant to section 
94.1 or 94.2 does not stay the operation of the order 
with respect to which the appeal is taken, unless a 
judge of the court to which the appeal is taken 
orders otherwise’. ”. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, I would point out that 
we just got the amendment less than 15 minutes ago. We 
haven’t had time to have adequate scrutiny of the amendment. 
We feel that that’s very important in terms of the ability to be 
given the time to look at all these amendments. And primarily 
because of the time constraint, because of the other processes 
that are available that doesn’t compromise what the intent here 
is, that I’ll be voting against the amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — Does the minister have any new officials he’d 
like to introduce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Again to my immediate right we have the deputy minister, 
Terry Scott; to my left we have Bob Ruggles. Directly behind 
me we have Lian Schwann; and joining me is also Conrad 
Olson, the provincial wildlife habitat specialist with 
Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
once again welcome, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you briefly describe the process for 
identifying and acquiring wildlife habitat land and who is 
involved in the consultation and decision making? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2489 

 

And I’ll just point out that the process of looking at the wildlife 
habitat value is it’s Crown land that’s important to wildlife, and 
generally, we consult with the lessee. There is generally no 
consultation with neighbours, so the primary consultation with 
this process is with the lessees. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I’ve 
had a number of individuals ask me just exactly how much 
wildlife habitat land we have in the province, where is it 
located. And I’m curious, Mr. Minister, is there a directory, a 
list, a map? Is there any type of information that people can 
access in order to get some sense of just how much wildlife 
habitat land there is in the province, where it is, and how might 
they go about doing that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
There’s 3.4 million acres of natural upland and natural wetland 
in the agricultural area that will certainly encompass The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and its purpose. 
 
And that information is available on a Web site through 
Saskatchewan Justice. But there are maps available and — you 
know, I believe there are maps available — and we will 
certainly get that information to you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, one 
of the concerns that the steering committee to the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund had, after the government 
transferred the surplus from the fund to the General Revenue 
Fund, was that that fund has been used to purchase some of the 
habitat land over the years. And they were wondering if that 
would perhaps compromise the schedule of acquisitions that 
they had laid out over the next period of time. 
 
And could you tell me, Mr. Minister, is there going to be any 
change in terms of how much habitat land is purchased or 
acquired in the foreseeable future because of the loss of the 
surplus to the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I would point out, you know as it 
relates to this Act, no it doesn’t have any effect from this 
particular Act and I just . . . to separate and to answer the 
question as quickly as I can here. 
 
In the future it is anticipated at least 800,000 will be allocated 
towards wildlife habitat purchases annually from the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as I 
understand it, and given that we are discussing an Act here with 
respect to habitat land, as I understand it the surplus from the 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund was actually used in some 
instances to pay taxes on land already acquired and perhaps 
even some of the land being discussed in this particular Act. 
Will there still be the ability to be able to pay those taxes? And 
could you perhaps clarify the whole issue of payment of taxes 
on wildlife habitat land. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again to point out that the question that 
you have really is not part of the Act that we’re proposing here. 
 

 There is the connection in the sense that it is wildlife habitat, 
but there are two separate Acts that we’re dealing with here. But 
as usual being fair, we’ll provide you with the answer as quick 
as we can here. 
 
The Fish and Wildlife Development funds pay a grant in lieu of 
taxes. This is made possible by utilizing interest incurred on the 
$2 million in the municipal habitat conservation fund and 
revenues collected from haying permits on fish and wildlife 
development lands. Despite that money being spent, that still 
allows us to, in the future, anticipate spending $800,000 
towards wildlife habitat purchases annually from the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
would like to thank the minister and I would like to thank his 
officials. They have been extremely helpful and professional 
and I certainly appreciate their patience. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Benefits Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



2490 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Local Government Election 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Cities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to move 
that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Cities Consequential Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Cities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 67 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Monsieur le president, I move that this 
Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(19:45) 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 19:51 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 34 - The Education Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 

2002 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
Bill No. 46 - The Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 
Bill No. 30 - The Liquor Consumption Tax Amendment Act, 

2002 
Bill No. 58 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 73 - The Status of the Artist Act/Loi sur le statut de 

l’artiste 
Bill No. 35 - The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Amendment Act, 

2002 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2491 

 

Bill No. 36 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 
2002 

Bill No. 78 - The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Benefits Act 

Bill No. 66 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 
Act, 2002 

Bill No. 52 - The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment 
Act, 2002 

Bill No. 45 - The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 
2002 

Bill No. 54 - The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 55 - The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 56 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2002 
Bill No. 75 - The Cities Act 
Bill No. 76 - The Cities Consequential Amendment Act, 

2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Cities Act 

Bill No. 68 - The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act 
Bill No. 67 - The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act 
Bill No. 71 - The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 
Bill No. 65 - The Forest Resources Management Amendment 

Act, 2002 
Bill No. 47 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 

2002 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 80 - The Appropriation Act, 2002 (No. 3) 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 19:55. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce Harvey Brooks, who is on my left. Harvey is deputy 
minister of Highways and Transportation. On my right is Barry 
Martin, who is the assistant deputy minister for operations. 
Right behind me is Don Wincherauk. Don is the assistant 
deputy minister, corporate services. And beside Don on his 
right is Fred Antunes, director of operations, planning, and 
business support. Next to Don Wincherauk, on this side, is Carl 
Neggers, assistant deputy minister for policy and planning. 
Stella Madsen, next to Carl, is manager of sustainable 
infrastructure. And in the back row, Cathy Lynn Borbely, leader 
of budget development. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. A good 
evening through you to the minister and to his officials this 
evening. We have a number of questions we want to pursue, a 

number of areas that we hope to develop with the minister and 
his officials. And we’re looking forward to an informative and 
lengthy event tonight. 
 
To start though, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would like to turn the 
questioning over to the Leader of the Official Opposition, the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I assure 
the minister and his officials that I will be fairly brief. I just 
wanted to ask a few questions pertinent to the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency when I had the opportunity to do that. And as I . . . 
The minister is certainly aware of the highways in my riding 
because I know he does have family that lives in that area. 
 
I wondered if the minister could just give me an update on the 
construction on Highway 342 — what will be accomplished this 
year, and whether the project is still on budget, and what future 
plans are in store in future years for Highway 342? 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With regard to Highway 342 and the 
construction there, this is one of the highways where we’re in a 
partnership agreement with the RM. They are constructing it for 
us. 
 
For this year we’re looking at about $650,000 of investment, 
and 500,000 for next year, which should complete the work on 
342. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I just wonder if the minister then could 
explain what phase of the work will be completed this year and 
what phase of the work is . . . will remain next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Because of the nature of the 
partnership agreement, we can’t give you a real clear level of 
kilometre . . . kilometre detail. But we can say that this year it’s 
anticipated that surfacing will be completed; next year, grading 
and paving. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then the other 
highway that is a major concern in the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency is Highway 44, which serves communities of 
Elrose, Dinsmore, and it goes on to Macrorie, then across 
Gardiner dam to that new terminal east of Gardiner dam. I’m 
sure the minister knows of that, that that highway is in bad 
repair in many sections. It serves an increasing need with the 
terminal being on the east side of Gardiner dam. 
 
What prospects can I assure my constituents . . . What are the 
prospects for the highway that I can assure my constituents that 
that highway will improve in its condition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Within your constituency there will be 
no more than routine maintenance on 44. On the other side of 
the dam from Davidson to 219, there will be . . . there is work 
going on with the RMs there, they’re managing the roadway 
over there. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. I’m not sure that’s the news 
that my constituents wanted to hear. That’s not encouraging. 
 



2492 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Highway 7 east of Rosetown was . . . there was a short portion 
of the highway twinned. It was paid for, I believe, primarily or 
maybe entirely by CN (Canadian National) Rail to 
accommodate the grain terminals on the east side of Rosetown. 
Could the minister report on whether or not that short stretch is 
accommodating the large amount of truck traffic that’s handled? 
What is the impact of turning prior to the divided stretch where 
there is another seed processing plant? 
 
There was some concern expressed to me prior to the 
construction project that the section of twinned highway was 
not quite long enough and should have bit a bit longer to 
accommodate the increased truck traffic in a highway that is 
fairly heavily travelled at any rate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The recognition is that CN built what 
was ordered by Transport Canada and we’re not willing to build 
any further. I think also the monitoring of that area would tell us 
that along No. 7 all of the rest of the intersections will be 
handled by normal intersection treatment and the volumes at 
those turnoffs don’t justify twinning at all in that area. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Minister. The other . . . the 
last specific highway question is not a highway in my riding, 
but it is Highway 7 coming out of Saskatoon and it has been 
twinned, I think, for about 10 kilometres out of the city of 
Saskatoon. I was looking at the highway traffic numbers out of 
Saskatoon, it’s high in every direction. The traffic is increasing 
in the Saskatoon area with the two potash mines on the west 
side of Saskatoon serviced by Highway 7. The first one of 
course is serviced by the twinning but the second one isn’t. Is 
there any thought to extending the twinning any farther west on 
Highway 7 to accommodate increased traffic? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In terms of our long-range planning it 
would not be out of scope for the upcoming five years. I think 
it’s very important to note the emphasis that we have put on 
twinning No. 1 and No. 16, that those are part of the national 
highway system and that’s got our priority. And if the federal 
government starts funding the national highway system that 
enables us to change our priorities. Right now it’s not on scope 
for at least five years for further twinning on 7. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Minister, for that answer. 
Again, probably not the answer some of my constituents would 
have liked to have heard. The final area that I want to touch on 
is the issue of additional fees that are charged for hauling 
primary weight loads on secondary highways. It’s an issue 
that’s been around for a long time. It’s an issue that certainly 
affects the devastated potato growing area of the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency where it is impractical to load 
light loads and increase that load weight once you reach a 
primary highway. 
 
The potatoes, for the most part, are exported out of the 
province. Under the current regulations the extra penalty or the 
fee or the tariff — I’m not sure what the correct terminology is 
— but whatever that tariff is called is charged on a per 
kilometre basis, not until the load reaches a primary highway, 
but until that load leaves the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That has been a prohibitive cost for the potato industry, and I 
have been informed that other industries and haulers throughout 

Saskatchewan are impacted very negatively. It’s not certainly a 
practice that encourages rural revitalization. It’s an issue that I 
have raised before. 
 
I wonder if the minister could inform me as to whether or not 
that policy will be changed so that the tariff will only be 
charged on the kilometres reached to . . . travelled to reach a 
primary highway, which seems far more fair for one thing. 
Because I mean one load may be a short distance from the 
Alberta or Montana or Manitoba boundary, where another load 
in the middle of the province may have to travel several 
hundred kilometres. 
 
There’s no rhyme or reason to this tariff being charged on a 
load, an overweight load, for secondary highways on its trip out 
of the province versus the trip to a primary highway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — This program was developed a number 
of years ago basically to give producers in those areas access to 
heavier weights. And certainly in discussion with producers and 
discussion with our transportation partners, there’s a 
recognition that the policies need to be reviewed. 
 
And in recognition of that we’ve been working on a review, but 
we’re also working with the area transportation planning 
committees, taking advice from them. We’re meeting with 
producers. We have been meeting with them over the past year 
and seeking their advice as we’re conducting review. And we’re 
also waiting for the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) transportation subcommittee report. 
 
But all of that will be fed into the review that we’re in process 
with and we’ll be bringing forward recommendations on 
dealing with primary weights and doing . . . making the 
necessary changes to enable producers and to make it as fair a 
system as possible and to also make sure that we’re caring for 
the roads as fully as we can. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well I thank the minister, but the 
industries involved I guess would like to have something a little 
more clear in the way of an answer, particularly since this issue 
was raised a couple of years ago. It was identified as a problem 
quite some time ago. Obviously industries like the potato 
industry don’t want to have to wait another two years and still 
not have an answer. 
 
Perhaps just to make it really clear to the minister how unfair 
this is, a load of potatoes at Lucky Lake would pay this tariff 
not only the 100 or so kilometres, or less than 100 kilometres to 
Highway 4, but they pay it on the stretch from . . . on Highway 
4 from Kyle to Swift Current, from Swift Current to the Alberta 
border, which is another 2 or 300 kilometres of additional tariff 
they have to pay to ship this load which is not overweight on 
the primary highways, only overweight on a short stretch of 
secondary highway to reach No. 4. 
 
If that same industry was say located at Maple Creek, they 
would only have to pay the penalty for, you know, 50 
kilometres or so until they got to the Alberta border, even if 
they use Highway 21 for just a few miles. 
 
So I’m sure the minister sees the blatant unfairness of this 
policy and I would ask if he could give me some hope that I 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2493 

 

could take back to constituents of mine that are terribly 
concerned about this problem, that it will be resolved in the 
very near future, and will not be left hanging over their heads 
for months and perhaps even years to come. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have, of course, met with 
producers from your constituency and the area around there. We 
recognize, very clearly, how important this matter is, how 
important it is, not only in that area but throughout the province 
in terms of rural development. 
 
And we, as I say, we’ve got a number of discussions that are 
going on out there and we, in those discussions, we recognize 
how important timeliness is on this and the best decision that 
can be made in a timely manner as possible will be made and 
will be conveyed very quickly to all producers involved. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I want to thank the minister for answering 
some specific questions regarding the riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar, and I will turn the questioning over to my 
colleague, the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Following 
up on the line of questioning that was just presented to the 
minister, I would like to refer to a letter that was sent to the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation and to the Deputy 
Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization, from a gentleman by the name of Neil 
Thompson, based out of Riverhurst. 
 
And in the letter we received from this gentleman, he reminded 
us that he had had a meeting with the ministers on January 30 at 
which time the Saskatchewan Seed Potato Growers Association 
brought some issues of similar concern to those raised by my 
colleague, the Leader of the Official Opposition. 
 
And he was looking to us for support for his position, and to 
this day, I have not been made aware of whether or not the 
issues that were raised at that particular meeting were 
addressed. 
 
If I just could quote, Mr. Chairman, a brief paragraph from the 
brief that was presented to the ministers at that particular 
meeting, I would like to read that into the record right now. 
 

Now that the construction of Highway # 19 from Chaplin to 
Central Butte, and Highway # 42 from Central Butte to 
Riverhurst is completed, and according to a letter dated 
January 11, 1999 from Ted Stobbs . . . stating that this 
highway system will be built to primary weight standard, 
we propose the Transportation Partnership Agreements and 
the permits associated with it, remain in place, but the costs 
of these permits be abolished. By cutting the permit costs, 
this would allow rural economic development to flourish. 
This proposal could be accomplished by the government’s 
stroke of a pen, without incurring any major expense. 

 
The question for the minister tonight is: have you addressed this 
particular issue specifically and directly, or is it part of the 
overall review? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, the meeting was held with seed 
potato growers and potato growers. And it was actually a very 
interesting meeting to hear the tremendous success that they’re 
having in their industry in that area of the province, and we 
were pleased to see that. And as I said earlier, we are looking 
forward to giving them what support we are able through the 
development of our transportation partnership programs. And 
that’s why it’s under review. 
 
The specific questions that you’re referring to and the questions 
that were raised in that meeting, we informed them at the time, 
and we’ll inform you as well, member, that they are in the 
review and are a definite part of that, and the consideration of 
our desire to support the agricultural growth and industry in this 
province is very important. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that the 
importance of this type of a review and accommodating some 
of the requests that have been made available to the minister 
and to those of us in opposition are significant to the extent that 
in this particular brief you may recall the author indicated that 
they had entrepreneurs from Alberta that were looking at 
establishing a feedlot industry in the immediate area of Outlook 
but that the cost of permits for transportation purposes would 
affect his bottom line by about $150,000 per year, which was a 
significant sum by anybody’s estimation and enough to bring a 
complete halt to that proposal. I think that the province can ill 
afford those kinds of losses. 
 
Another individual from the Moose Jaw area was talking about 
establishing a 10,000 head feedlot in that same area. And 
Outlook, as you are probably well aware, presents almost a 
perfect location for that type of operation because of its access 
to irrigation and additional feed and those types of 
complementary enterprises. But if the Highways policies 
remain in place and continue to negatively impact decisions of 
those types, we aren’t going to see the rural revitalization that is 
so desperately needed in this province. 
 
And it’s a role that I think the Department of Highways and 
Transportation would like to complement and be part of 
producing as opposed to being an obstacle to that type of 
success. So I would encourage the minister to move that process 
of review ahead as quickly as possible and see what 
accommodations can be made for just these types of ventures. 
 
I know that there have been other similar issues raised with 
members of the official opposition and no doubt with the 
minister in other areas as well, but this Outlook area seems 
particularly and specifically hard hit by the current policies that 
are binding the government operations. 
 
I want to move if I may briefly, and the minister will forgive 
me, I hope, if I move from area to area fairly quickly and maybe 
even disjointedly from time to time, because there are so many 
different subject matters that I want to raise tonight. And 
frankly we have eight or ten people who want to participate in 
this question period as well. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d like to go to the construction projects 
listing 2002-2003 which your department put out and made 
available to me. And as I was looking through here, something 
caught my eye. And it has a summary of the road activity 



2494 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

planned by the department for this current year. It lists every 
project that the department plans to undertake in terms of major 
highway and bridge improvements. 
 
And without going into a lot of detail of what these projects 
include, I notice that the heading it says: 
 

There will be over $124 million invested in 114 major 
highway and bridge improvements . . . (in the current year). 

 
And then at the bottom it says: 
 

An additional $129 million will be spent on smaller 
highway and bridge improvements, routine surface 
maintenance and other traffic safety activities like mowing, 
signing, pavement striping and transport compliance. This 
also provides for the operation of our 13 ferries and 18 
northern airports. 

 
It sounds like a fairly complete listing, Mr. Minister, but if I add 
those two figures together I come up with a total of $253 
million instead of the $300 million that were budgeted. What 
and where can we account for the balance of $47.3 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The figures which you quoted did not 
include figures for accommodation, for operational services; did 
not include the revolving fund for equipment replacement, 
administration, engineering services, some of the regional 
services. And basically, it’s . . . the rest of those funds come 
through in terms of this overall administration component. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
chairman to the minister, are you suggesting then that the 
department requires approximately 15 per cent or a little more 
of its budget to achieve administrative activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, I can provide 
significantly more detail, but it’s not just 15 per cent you know, 
not casually 15 per cent for administration. There are items like 
in terms of accommodation, that’s cost for our buildings, SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) costs, 
engineering services. We have engineers who are on salary who 
are working continually and their work is not charged directly 
to a particular project. 
 
But I’m quite happy to provide you with a more detailed 
breakdown. But it is . . . that amount is accounted for in that 
side of our operations. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, if I was to look at this listing of 114 
major highway and bridge improvements, and look at the costs 
associated with it, what figures are ascribable to engineering 
and equipment usage and all the rest of those kinds of things 
that go into building roads? 
 
I assume that there would be salaries associated with this in 
terms of engineering services, maybe project management or 
construction management, the equipment costs and so forth. So 
when you have a project here that it says you’re going to do 160 
kilometres of grading on 16 projects on 12 highways, and gave 
me a dollar figure for that, what would that dollar figure 
include, if in fact you’re holding $47 million back for 

administrative and other types of expenses? 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — So if you look at the breakdown in 
terms of those costs, the largest payments that are made are to 
the contractor. They’re payments for sand, gravel, they’re 
payments for purchase of property, for movement of lines — 
power lines, telephone, etc. There is direct engineering costs, 
which would be the costs of surveying. There are direct costs as 
well that are charged to that project that are for soil sampling 
and that side of the engineering work. 
 
But on the other side of it is a project manager who might be 
working on two or three projects at one time and that would be 
charged to the department’s administrative side. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I simply have to 
indicate that I’m somewhat confused by the way the 
bookkeeping happens on those types of projects because you’ve 
said that the $47 million we talked about, not being referenced 
in this particular edition on the construction projects pamphlet, 
is partially made up of wages. And yet, I guess when I looked at 
the budget from this spring and added up the salaries as 
indicated in this particular document, they accounted for $60 
million. 
 
So I’m wondering, now where does the difference between the 
47 million come from and the possible $60 million for salaries, 
the figure that I lifted right out of the budgetary documents 
from this spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I understand there can be some 
confusion in that, but the way that the budgeting is done for the 
estimates, you’ve got that 60 million overall figure that you 
referred to for salaries. And I think if you look, the $47 million 
that you’re referring to in the earlier document, as I indicated, 
there would be, say, a $9 million cheque right away for SPMC. 
You’ve got, as I indicated as well, you’ve got the cost for 
revolving fund for replacement of equipment. So that $47 
million of course is not all salary. 
 
But when we’re doing the estimates we’re accounting for the 
whole thing under salaries. That’s for all the salaries, be in that 
60 million. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So the partial amount attributed to salaries, out 
of the $47 million we talked about earlier, is reflected in the $60 
million that are indicated as amounts going to salaries in the 
budget documents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes. Yes. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Going further with 
this construction projects document, I want to turn to page 4 
where it talks about Centenary Fund projects. There are five 
projects listed in this particular document and they don’t total a 
whole lot of length in terms of kilometres. Would you please 
enlighten us as to why these projects qualify for centenary 
funding versus other projects of a more significant impact? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In putting the request forward for 
centenary funding, some of the criteria that were involved were 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2495 

 

. . . particularly with no. 6, we’re looking at a major north/south 
corridor that we want to have there both for commercial reasons 
and for tourism. 
 
You’ll notice on the other ones that tourism will be a key factor 
to help build that. And so when we’re selecting particular 
projects, it was to help build the province, emphasize tourism, 
and bring people in for centennial year as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, is that the decision taken within 
the department alone or do you have some other input, some 
other source for making those requests and decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, the fundamental 
principles in the Centenary Capital Fund were projects that 
would advance the government’s strategic priorities and 
projects needed to clearly demonstrate a provincial interest in 
terms of employment, the economy, the environment, cultural 
development, and/or other social benefits. 
 
Primary criteria for allocating the Centenary Capital Fund were: 
projects must exist on the department’s future initiatives list, 
projects must have a significant content of physical 
infrastructure, and projects must be for public infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving to another 
specific project, if I may. 
 
Back on January 14 I, as well as the existing or then member 
for Kindersley and the former minister of Highways, attended 
the Highway 51 action committee tour in the Kerrobert area — 
between Kerrobert and Major and the Alberta border. And they 
had a very, very positive response to this tour from local people, 
local business people, community leaders. 
 
There was a fairly large crowd that attended that particular tour. 
They hired a big bus and loaded us all on it. We took a drive 
down Highway 51 and looked with some dismay, I think, at 
significantly deteriorating conditions as we went west. The road 
was very, very narrow, very rough. There were potentials for 
serious accidents just judging by the traffic that we met while 
we were on that bus heading west. 
 
And I think that after the tour nobody could have mistaken the 
need for some significant attention to that stretch of road. 
 
I was fortunate enough to be able to speak to the assembled 
community leaders after the tour, and between myself and the 
member for Kindersley at that time, you know we 
acknowledged publicly the need for some significant 
improvements there. 
 
And the previous minister of Highways indicated that she could 
see that there was a definite need as well and that she would 
talk to you, Mr. Minister, about that particular section of road. I 
believe, if I remember correctly, her comments at the public 
meeting were that it was not possible for her to commit to 
action on behalf of the government but that certainly Highway 
51 would be one of those highways that would make the list of 
to-do projects. 
 
Now I was looking with some expectation at that happening this 
year with the introduction of the Highways budget for the year 

2002-2003, but having gone through this construction projects 
list, I can’t find Highway 51 anywhere. 
 
Now I understand that there is some expectation of work out 
there if it isn’t already underway. So would the minister and his 
officials give us an understanding of what has happened or what 
will happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, yes. To the member, I was 
able to watch the video, though I couldn’t attend that, and I was 
kind of amused when I heard the member say that it takes him 
10 minutes just to say his name. But it was a very informative 
video and I met with folks from the Highway 51 committee and 
had a good informative meeting with them. 
 
During the past year we stockpiled approximately 26,000 
tonnes of gravel in preparation for a partnership agreement. 
That’s about $300,000 worth. The department has committed 
$500,000 to start rebuilding a 7.1-kilometre section from the 
Alberta border, and it’s my understanding the agreement is 
signed and that that work is probably underway as we speak. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I know the members of the local community 
there were so desperately in need of attention in terms of the 
impact that they wanted to have on that particular project that 
they were prepared to commit financing to that stretch of road. 
Is that, Mr. Minister, the single most important factor in the 
willingness of the department to get that project underway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think one of the really tremendous 
things that’s been happening not just under my time in this 
department but earlier on for the previous minister and others 
have worked at building partnerships with many of the RMs in 
order to meet some of the needs. 
 
The reality is that we have thin membrane surface highways 
around this province, many of them which need a great deal of 
work. And in working out the partnerships, we’re also able to 
set up alternate routes so that when we fix those TMS (thin 
membrane surface) roads, they stay fixed as dust-free, mud-free 
surfaces. And there’s been a tremendous development in the 
level of co-operation with the RMs. 
 
And so when that co-operation is available, it enables us to do 
more work and to spread the work more broadly across the 
province. We are able, through the strategic grow roads 
partnership program, to put significant dollars into this, and 
when the RMs co-operate it enables us to use these funds more 
broadly. 
 
These RMs I think have really . . . The RMs in the area there 
have indicated that this is an important piece for them. It helps 
in the development of their economy. And so with those kind of 
indications, we were able to bring money from the partnership 
fund to help get this work done because we realize how 
important it is to have safe, good roads in this province. 
 
And I would just say that I commend the municipalities who 
have come forward and said look, it’s important to us, it’s 
important to you; when we work together, we can do a lot more. 
And I tell you, there’s been some tremendous work in this 
province with the RMs and it’s something we should all be able 
to celebrate. 



2496 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
couldn’t agree with you more that, you know, co-operation is 
what is going to help us achieve many of the urgent and 
pressing priorities of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The project you talked about on Highway 51, however, is rather 
short. Will that 7 or so kilometres of road work that you’ve 
talked about, will that effectively reach the most dangerous part 
of that road? 
 
When you come into Saskatchewan from the Alberta border, 
there’s a fairly straight stretch for a few kilometres, but after 
that you find yourself along a very kind of tortuous and winding 
narrow road, the scene of which was where several deaths have 
been recorded in the last few years. 
 
I think if there’s any part of that road that really needs attention 
it is probably that winding, narrow, and curvy, hilly stretch in 
that particular brief interlude there. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I’m very happy to report to the 
member that that curvy, windy road is covered by the 7.1 
kilometres. It was the area that was highlighted by the RMs and 
as I say, working in co-operation with them we’re trying to hear 
what those needs are and respond as effectively as we can. 
 
And just to further elucidate on this, in 2001-02 the department 
worked with 51 different partners on 32 initiatives that 
addressed 550 kilometres of low volume highway at a cost of 
about $6.1 million. In 2002-03 we are committed to 25 
initiatives with 45 different partners to address another 550 
kilometres of low volume highways. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I’m glad to hear that that 
particular part of the road was the first part that was addressed 
by your construction initiative there because, as I said, it was a 
deadly stretch of road and had taken several lives in the last few 
years. 
 
The opportunity that we had to visit that particular stretch really 
put the fear in a number of the passengers on the bus because as 
we were approaching it, we were met by a loaded highway 
tractor pulling a four-wheel drive on a flat deck that was 
mounted with a large snow blade; I would suggest probably at 
least a 12- and maybe a 14-foot blade. 
 
When we got out and measured the width of the pavement at 
that point, it was only a 19-foot surface. So most of the surface 
was being taken up by that truck with its load of tractor and 
blade, and there wasn’t much room for those of us on the bus to 
get by. And I understand why the local people would have been 
so concerned, given the conditions and the narrowness of that 
particular stretch of road. 
 
Mr. Minister, since the Highway 51 project is underway but 
didn’t show up in the construction list here, how was that 
accomplished? What happened? How did that get underway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — One of the things that our budgeting 
has provided is some level of flexibility. And I need to say that 
one of the members of the tour on Highway 51 was our former 

minister of Highways and Transportation, the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana who came back and gave a very good, solid 
report on what she had experienced and seen there, and 
encouraged us to move forward with co-operation plans. 
 
In terms of the way that it’s budgeted, the $6.5 million that is in 
the strategic rural roads program enables us to have some 
flexibility. So those pieces that we know about ahead of time, 
that are agreed upon, can be incorporated into the budget 
document that you see. 
 
But we’re also allowing some flexibility for our regional offices 
to work with the rural municipalities to come to agreements, 
and it’s accounted for overall in terms of the funds for that . . . 
from that $6.5 million. 
 
So it’s just allowing some flexibility so that we can develop 
these partnerships, and so that we can take action as soon as 
agreements are signed. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through you, Mr. 
Chairman, to the minister. You probably know this after being 
heavily lobbied by the former minister of Highways for that 
project, that that 19-foot width that that particular stretch of 
road wasn’t even up to the standards of 1952 when that road 
was built. The standard width was 22 feet, and at 19 feet it was 
substantially under that, let alone the current standard. Today I 
believe a road of that type would be somewhere in the range of 
28 feet. 
 
So I think that probably is representative of a number of 
highways in our province that have similarly difficult and poor 
conditions for travellers in this province. 
 
I think the people of the Major and Kerrobert area will be 
especially grateful that the department moved on that area of 
need. 
 
Are you prepared to commit to continued improvements on that 
road, and if so what would the timetable be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — A couple of things to the member. 
First of all the note of the width of the highway and how the 
thin membrane surface highways break down is very 
significant. 
 
I was actually shocked when I was up to the wildlife warning 
system project at Harris. And there’d been a fatality there just a 
few days earlier on, and the highway had been diverted . . . 
traffic had been diverted from Highway No. 7 on to a TMS 
right by the Harris golf course. 
 
And it was only diverted for three hours, and at the end of three 
hours, that TMS was beaten. There were holes in it; there were 
chunks of pavement off to the side on what had been a good 
piece of TMS giving access to their little park there. 
 
So the awareness that any kind of heavy traffic can beat those 
roads down very quickly and make the repairs and the work 
that’s been done almost non-existent in very short order, that’s 
just a fact that we deal with in terms of these roads. 
 
But in terms of your question about the longer term plan for 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

 

Highway No. 51, again we work very closely with the RMs in 
that area and it will be . . . the work will be . . . We anticipate 
the agreement in principle is there and we anticipate confirming 
that agreement and continuing the work on to the junction with 
317. And from that point on, the RMs are still trying to 
determine what they would like to see done in there. But we are 
continuing to work with them and try and fill the needs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister and his officials, I’m glad you 
brought up the name of Harris. We’re going to move from 
Highway 51 to the community of Harris because I just received 
a note from an individual in the Harris area that is quite 
concerned about Highways department sign policy. 
 
And maybe before we get into the specifics of this particular 
issue, would you tell us, Mr. Minister, what the department’s 
official policy is regarding signs along highways, whether 
they’re primary or secondary highways? Is there a sign corridor 
policy and how does the department determine which signs are 
acceptable and may remain in their positions and which ones 
will be removed on the insistence of the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There may be some need for 
clarification but I’ll just try and paint the picture that within the 
urban area itself, the community does have control over what 
kind of signing. And I think an example you’ll be familiar with 
is along Belle Plaine where the community itself has 
jurisdiction over those signs. You see a number of commercial 
signs in that area. And that is for the jurisdiction of the urban 
. . . of the community. 
 
For the signs within the Highways jurisdiction — and there are 
standards that we have there — but for the signs within that 
jurisdiction, those follow a national standard. 
 
And one other piece, I think it’s important to note, is that we 
have an increased budget for enhanced signage programming 
this year and we’re also looking at reviewing the policy around 
tourism signing and we hope to have some enhanced sign 
projects over the coming years. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister. I can understand where a small 
urban or a larger urban community would have full jurisdiction 
over the signage within their boundaries. And in the Belle 
Plaine example, I think we’re looking at signs primarily on the 
north side of the highway which is within the town limits. But 
what about the land on the south side of the highway there 
where I don’t recall seeing any signs at all? 
 
Another example I might be more familiar with. I believe it’s in 
the Craik or Davidson area along Highway 11 where there is an 
extended group of rather large signs that may or may not be 
within the town boundaries. I know for a fact, having just 
driven No. 1 from Alberta back to Regina, that there are a 
significant number of commercial signs along the south side of 
Highway No. 1 just prior to reaching the community of Piapot. 
There is also a similar sign corridor along the highway for the 
community of Tompkins, and I also believe there is one for the 
community of Gull Lake. 
 
Now these are rather extensive lengths of signs and they’re not 

within the community boundaries per se. And they are right on 
the edge of the Department of Highways right-of-way. Would 
the minister please tell me how that’s accomplished. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think the member may be referring to 
a particular sign corridor. And I think if you look when you go 
by Belle Plaine, you’ll see that on the south side that there are 
signs there as well. That’s because even though it’s not 
developed it’s within the corporate limits of the community; I 
think the same along No. 11. 
 
But if you’re referring to sign corridors, there are agreements 
that are struck between the urban community who would apply 
to the RMs and to particular landowners for permission to be 
able to develop a sign corridor. And then in agreement with the 
department they can do that. They can set up a sign corridor but 
it has to be at least a half a kilometre distance from the 
community itself. And the urban community would set the 
standards and say who could and could not have signs within 
that corridor. 
 
But that’s basically the way that it’s done. It’s by agreement 
and the urban community is charged with managing those signs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, in those kinds of agreements 
would there be a minimum setback requirement for that type of 
signage? Is there . . . like I understand that the Highways 
department has a right-of-way that they measure from and they 
determine what is acceptable within that right-of-way and what 
isn’t. Nothing of any permanence generally is allowed to be 
built within that right-of-way. So are there exceptions made for 
that type of signage given the conditions that prevail otherwise 
for Department of Highways right-of-ways . . . rights-of-way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, the signing policy 
would be that they cannot be within the Department of 
Highways right-of-way. The signs are also limited in terms of 
their spacing so that one is not blocking others. There is a 
certain distance depending on the, on the size of the signs. 
 
But the signs cannot generally be put within the Department of 
Highways right-of-way. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me how far that 
right-of-way extends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I have to acknowledge that there are a 
variety of different highways that we have, so I’ll give you the 
general so that you’ll have it that, generally, for our major 
two-lane highways, it would be about 200 feet wide of 
right-of-way. And on any one side, you go from the centre line 
out about 100 feet would be the general rule for our 
right-of-ways. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, if I, 
if I may, I’d like to read a little bit of this letter that came to us 
about signage. And this letter indicates that they feel that there’s 
a double standard, frankly, in terms of signage requirements. 
 

2 businesses (involved) in a community venture berry farm 
had a sign on their fence (approx 300 metres from the main 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

highway — across the train tracks & the old highway) (in 
the community of Harris). 

 
A farmer . . . The second example was: 
 

a farmer advertising game meats available at the town’s 
grocery store had signs on round bales sitting in his field — 
well off the highway — (and) across a fence. 

 
(Now) Hiway’s department official has told both 
businesses that they have to move these signs as they are 
too close to the highway. These signs are outside (on the far 
side) of the designated highway corridor — so how can 
they be to close?? 
 
Local people feel this is another attempt to try and stifle 
small business in rural . . . (Saskatchewan). 

 
I’m reading verbatim. I’m not saying that personally. 
 

Businesses like Cargill & Wheatpool have elevators with 
signs on them closer to the highway than these signs — 
why aren’t they subject to . . . (these rules)? Businesses 
right in the town of Vanscoy & Delisle also on highway 7 
. . . are situated right on the hiway and they have signs? 
 
Why the double standard? The same situation exists at 
Rosetown where businesses are right on the highway & 
regularly display signage. 

 
Mr. Minister, I think you’ve addressed some of that in your 
earlier response to questions that I posed. But here we have a 
situation where we have basically non-permanent signs, signs 
that are attached to round bales that are going to be probably 
picked up and moved out of the field, and as far as these people 
are concerned they’re outside of the Highways corridor. Why 
would somebody from the department insist that these signs be 
removed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, there’s significant 
detail in that, and it’s to a particular situation. I think in terms of 
our general signage policy, you know, we’ve outlined that and 
if you would like a written response to that we’d be happy to 
take the particular issue into account, deal with that, and give 
you a written response to that and respond to your 
correspondent as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I would appreciate that effort on 
behalf of yourself and the department because I think this kind 
of goes to the heart of the ability of very small, new businesses 
attracting clients and customers to their businesses. And they 
probably can’t afford maybe the signs that would ordinarily 
qualify for acceptance in a sign corridor or maybe there’s no 
sign corridor agreement in that given community. 
 
I’m not sure what the circumstances are in that particular 
instance, but I do know that these kinds of informal signs pop 
up frequently around the province and they’re often outside of 
the right-of-way that exists for department approval and/or 
permission. So I would appreciate any response you could give 
that might give some encouragement to these particular cases. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would like to indicate now that there are 

several members of the official opposition that would like to 
participate in the questions in Highways estimates tonight, and 
for that purpose I would like to turn the next few minutes over 
to my colleague from Weyburn. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have a 
few questions about the highways in the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. And first of all, I’d like to ask you about 
Highway No. 13 by Trossachs, between Weyburn and 
Trossachs, that was scheduled for resurface . . . or for surfacing 
structure last year, and as I’m sure you are aware, a very 
inadequate job was done. The highway is in as bad or worse 
condition that it was before it started, this project was started. 
The project was . . . $1.7 million was the estimated cost. 
 
My question is: first of all when will this highway be repaired, 
and who will bear the cost of this repair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s important to note that we 
recognize that highway is not performing as it should have been 
and the contractor was responsible for planing bore most of the 
responsibility for re-planing that seal coat that was put on there, 
for taking that off. 
 
Another seal coat was put on this year and we found that there 
was an electrical charge in the gravel that was rejecting the seal 
coat, and another seal coat we anticipate will be put on next 
week. And the contractor is adding a chemical to that so that it 
will adhere to the gravel in the surface. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you please 
break down then who is paying the cost for repairing this road, 
what that cost is, and exactly how much is being borne by the 
contractor and how much is being borne by the taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We won’t have those figures until the 
job is completed, but we will — I’ll try that again — we’ll 
provide that in a written reply. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I guess just for the taxpayers’ information, Mr. 
Minister, was this — I don’t know what the word, 
mismanagement or however this failed to be done properly — 
was this responsibility, was this because of the contractor not 
doing a proper job, or was it the responsibility of the 
department, or who took responsibility for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The responsibility is primarily with 
the contractor, but it’s somewhat shared and the department 
carries some of the responsibility for that. But proportionately, 
the contractor is carrying more of the responsibility. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — And, Mr. Minister, how is it that the 
department is responsible for this? Where did the breakdown 
occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — For the seal coat itself, the contractor 
is primarily responsible. And the department would pick up 
some of the load because the electrically charged gravel is 
something that was not anticipated at all and so we just . . . it’s 
one of those anticipated things . . . unanticipated pieces that 
happens, and so we pick up some of the responsibility for that. 
 
But for the workmanship itself, that is not the department 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

 

problem, that was the contractor problem. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess not being an 
engineer myself, just for interest sake, how would this happen 
that gravel, inappropriate gravel, would be used for a project 
that would not meet the criteria required to be satisfactory? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, this would be an 
occurrence that would happen very, very rarely. And usually the 
gravel, the aggregate, could be used for a variety of different 
purposes and there would be no problem even if it was 
electrically charged. 
 
But in the rare cases when it happens, you just have to cover the 
costs of it. And it hasn’t happened for years. This is the first 
time in years, and it just reacted with that seal coat because of 
the electrical charge. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there a test that 
should be performed prior to the gravel being used or is there 
any way of knowing this could happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, there is a test for this and they’re 
of course testing the area to find out why the seal coat didn’t 
operate properly. But as with all testing, there is significant cost 
in that. And the reality is that this is a very, very rare 
occurrence. It just doesn’t happen very often. But there is a test 
that can be done to see if the gravel is charged. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
guess in light of the fact that this project cost $1.7 million, and 
in all the additional work now that has had to be performed, 
some of which is going to be borne by the taxpayers of this 
province, I would like to know does it make sense to do the test 
rather than take the chance of this happening in regard to cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s our understanding that other 
jurisdictions are not doing this testing either. And again, it’s 
because of the rarity of these occurrences. 
 
If there were more occurrences the department would determine 
that it would be a necessary test to do regularly. But because of 
the rarity and costs involved in testing as well, and the fact that 
no other jurisdiction or at least our neighbouring jurisdictions 
are not doing it, it’s just determined that even given the costs in 
this case — and if there were another case at some point — 
doing the regular testing really wouldn’t be justified at this 
point. But if it was a regular kind of an occurrence and the odds 
were high of running into that, the department would say yes 
we should do it more often. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you indicate 
for the people of Trossachs area when this project will be 
completed, when the resurfacing will be finished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — If the weather holds we expect to do it 
next week. The contractor would come back to do the second 
coat starting on Monday. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’ll look 
forward to getting a breakdown of the costs when this project is 

completed so . . . (inaudible) . . . Thank you. 
 
Another highway in the constituency or the same highway but 
further west is No. 13 by Ogema. Could you indicate when this 
project will be started and exactly . . . there’s been some 
conflicting stories of whether it’s going to be east of Ogema or 
west of Ogema, and what the actual distance is going to be, and 
when the project will be underway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Two parts to the answer. I’ll give you 
the first part while they’re looking for the second. First part is 
that there are actually two projects, so that might be why they 
are getting some conflicting timelines. 
 
The first project is from on the east side of Ogema and that 
piece there is a resurfacing being done by Carmacks. On the 
west side, there’s the TMS is being upgraded to a granular 
pavement. And we’ll get the timeline on that for you in just a 
moment. 
 
The first project on the east side of Ogema is, the cost is 
$1,582,979; that is . . . should be underway now and should be 
completed by mid-August. 
 
On the west side of Ogema to Horizon, the paving project 
should begin mid to late August and should continue until the 
end of the season. And the cost on that is $2.77 million. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So these projects 
will be started and they will be completed in their entirety this 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That is the project plan barring 
unforeseen circumstances. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And what is the total 
kilometres that will be — both east and west — that will be in 
this . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s approximately 42 kilometres. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d now like to ask 
you some questions about Highway No. 6 by Minton. This, of 
course, as you are, I’m sure, you are aware is a very hot issue in 
that area because this project was started last year. The people 
of the area believed that the project would be finished last year. 
It has not been finished. And I, as well as many members of that 
area, have called various people within the department and in 
the Minister’s office to try and find out what is happening here. 
 
The last information I received is that there was no decision 
made yet whether the part of the highway north of Minton was 
going to be completed this year. It is now gravel. It is being 
bladed, and the people of the area are very upset about this. It’s 
creating dust. In the winter it was a maze of potholes. It is 
unsafe for buses and ambulance and just the general economic 
activity of the area. And so if you could please tell me what is 
going to happen north of Minton and how soon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well I’m happy to report that this 
contract will be tendered. It’ll be in the paper this Saturday and 
it will be let mid-July. A dust-free surface will be provided this 
summer, and we should see good progress in construction and 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

the project should be completed by late fall. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, so on the letter received from 
your department, it indicated that there was a question about 
whether it would be surfacing or an interim seal. Which are you 
indicating that will be taking place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The surfacing will be done. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the highway 
now that is . . . the proposal that is for south of Minton, will this 
be started this year and will it be completed in its entirety? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — A contractor will be moving over from 
No. 8 very soon. It will be graded and a seal put on for this 
year. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So it will not be 
completed this year is what you’re telling me, that the final 
pavement will not be completed till when? Is that what you’re 
telling me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Paving and grading contracts are 
always separate and the paving contract will be for next year. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess this is one of 
the major concerns that I’m hearing from people in my area and 
throughout the province, is that when these projects are put 
forward people believe that they are going to be completed in 
their entirety in the year that they are announced. And so people 
are concerned about that and I don’t blame them. 
 
I was with the understanding as well when this was announced 
for Minton area that last year the project would be completed 
and the one announced for this year would be completed within 
that year. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have another couple questions. One is about 
signage, and there’s concern in my constituency about the lack 
of signage especially for some of the smaller areas. People 
travelling from Regina to Weyburn do not know how to access, 
for instance, Radville. And there’s been considerable number of 
articles in their paper and so on about the detriment to economic 
development in their area because people can’t even find them. 
 
What is criteria . . . how do people in these communities go 
about accessing proper signage from the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Recognizing the importance of our 
communities, our desire for encouraging rural development, 
we’re . . . we have a review of our signage policies underway 
currently. 
 
And the communities that are interested in changes in signing 
it’s advised that they would communicate with the department 
and let them know what their concerns are and the kind of 
signage that they would be looking for. 
 
That will be a part of the review and we see that there is need 
for very clear policies so that all the communities will have a 
good understanding and so that communities aren’t missed. We 
don’t want communities like Radville to be missed and so that’s 
why we’re engaged in the review at this point. 

(21:30) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess what I would 
like to know is when these communities contact your office or 
your department, can they be assured that they are going to get 
a direct answer and a direct agendum; how they get from A to 
B? 
 
They seem frustrated. They phone and they’re . . . and, you 
know, they’re put off or they’re led somewhere else or phone 
someone else. What they want to know is how do they access 
signage? 
 
I’m not clear myself of where I would phone if I wanted to get 
signage for my constituency because I have tried it and it hasn’t 
worked. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Given our concerns around signage — 
and I think it really is important to note that there is a branch 
within the department — contacting the department . . . 
anybody who’s inquiring about signage in a community should 
be directed to that branch that knows what the current 
regulations are and is engaged also in the review process. 
 
But in the meantime, we also have put significant dollars into 
an enhanced sign rehabilitation program, $150,000. And into 
our annual sign replacement program, $950,000 plus inflation. 
So that by the end of ’02-03, we’ll have an incremental $2 
million investment in sign replacement throughout the province. 
 
So we’re working at upgrading our signing, making sure that 
we’re listening to what the concerns of the communities are, 
and the direct access is to the department through to the sign 
branch. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, would you be so kind as to give 
us the number that people can . . . communities can call to 
access the signage branch in the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well first of all to the member, I have 
to commend this department on how well equipped and 
prepared they are coming here, even with the phone list. The 
person’s name is Dawn Schmidt. Dawn is a sign standards 
analyst. The number is 787-4754. Okay. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I’m sure 
that this . . . is it Ms. or Mr. Dawn, I’m not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ms. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Ms. will be receiving several calls in the next 
few days, I’m sure, now that her number’s out. 
 
One more question about signs, Mr. Minister, is there any 
criteria . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I’m having a bit of 
difficulty hearing the member asking the question and the 
minister answering the question. So if the din could be lowered 
a little bit it would be greatly appreciated. Would the member 
for Regina Dewdney please come to order? Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Is there any criteria 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

 

surrounding the number of signs — no parking signs — that are 
put within a town? On one stretch of highway I believe the 
stretch is only about . . . it wouldn’t be any more than a mile, 
and how many signs would be reasonable to put up indicating 
that no parking is allowed along the highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, really within the 
community they could put up whatever they want but we do . . . 
would try and negotiate with them around the signage that they 
will be putting along the highway. But within their jurisdiction 
they could put up whatever number of signs they chose to. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. These signs were put 
up by the Department of Highway and . . . pardon me, in the 
community of Avonlea. And I believe it’s about a mile, it might 
be a little bit more. It’s from the junction of the highway to the 
railroad track. 
 
And I counted them. I believe there’s 40-some signs, including 
the no parking signs. There’s at least a dozen no parking signs 
directly across from each other and then with the stop signs and 
indication of what highway they’re on, there’s 40-some signs. 
It’s like running the gauntlet. 
 
I’m just wondering what your . . . what the rationale would 
possibly be for putting up that many signs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The signing in that particular case was 
negotiated with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 
and the community, and the department. And it had to do with 
effective enforcement. 
 
There were parking problems along those corridors by the 
intersection. People were pulling in there and parking and it was 
also damaging the edges of the roadway. 
 
So the determination was made, you might have had one truck 
turning in and to have one sign wasn’t effective enough; there 
needed to be another one. 
 
But all this was negotiated. It was due to specific parking 
problems that they were encountering in that area. And the 
number of signs, location of signs, was negotiated with the 
RCMP, and with the community, and the department working 
together. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would suggest if 
you have the opportunity or some of your officials, that if you 
looked at the situation I believe that you might want to review it 
and put some second thought into it. Well it’s overdone, and I 
would say there’s more of a safety problem now than there 
probably was before, if that was the concern. 
 
One last question, Mr. Minister. In my constituency there have 
been a lot of accidents that have been the direct result of the 
condition of the highway. And there’s been many cases of 
individuals writing to yourself and the former minister of 
Highways because of damage to vehicles and so on and asking 
for reimbursement. And in some cases I’m happy to say that 
people have been reimbursed for the damages caused to their 
vehicles, but in other cases they have not or they have been 
partially reimbursed. 
 

How do you justify the double standard of reimbursing some 
when the damage was caused by no fault of their own but 
because of the highway condition, and in other cases they have 
not been reimbursed in total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Basically the request for payment . . . 
or the complaints are launched on a case by case basis and each 
case is looked at in terms of the potential for avoidance by the 
complainant. 
 
The department officials look at the situation and would go to 
the site to see what the problems were as they were doing their 
analysis. And according to the levels of potential avoidance, 
according to what is determined to be our fault after the 
analysis, looking at the complaint in detail, and looking at the 
situation, then the department would pay according to that. 
 
There is also an appeal process for people who disagree with 
the analysis the department has done and people are able to 
follow up on that. And that’s the process that we use. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
other day I got into, had the opportunity after discussing a few 
questions before the House Leader so rudely interrupted us and 
decided that it was time to adjourn the House . . . I’d like to 
complete some of the questions that I had at that time and the 
questions relate to highway construction down in the southeast 
corner in the Moosomin area, Mr. Minister. 
 
But first of all, I want to talk a little bit about 48 and 
construction. I believe there’s supposed to be some construction 
beginning from the Manitoba border through to No. 8 under the 
— what was it? — it’s the regional transportation authority 
came up with a recommendation. The RMs and towns have . . . 
are somewhat involved. They put together a plan to work with 
the department. And I believe there’s also some federal money 
as a result of grains funds. 
 
And so I’d like to know, Mr. Minister — the contract’s been let 
— when construction is going to be started. And then also what 
I’d like to know, what the long-term plans are to complete No. 
48 through to Highway . . . actually right through to Kipling. 
And we look to No. 9 and then to Kipling. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, I don’t know if your department has taken 
a traffic count or whether or not they’ve even sat down and 
assessed what the potential for tourism traffic on Highway 48 
from Virden, Manitoba through to pick up the Moose Mountain 
Provincial Park. And in some cases actually if that highway was 
completed right through up to No. 48 at Kipling. I would think, 
Mr. Minister, it may alleviate some of the traffic even on No. 1. 
 
So first of all can you give me an update on construction from 
the Manitoba border to No. 8, and then what’s the long-term 
goal and objectives or projections as far as completing the 
construction of 48 if there’s any thought has been . . . gone into 
that in view of the recommendations of the southeast 
transportation authority. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, the section of 48 
between the Manitoba border and No. 8 will be graded this year 



2502 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

and it’ll be paved next year. That’s under the Prairie Grain 
Roads Program. 
 
The section over to Wawota and the piece over to Kipling are 
not within the three-year projections now under Prairie Grain 
Roads Program but there are still some projects to be approved, 
some room for improvement of projects. These are on the list of 
projects to be looked at under that program and could still yet 
be approved within that three-year framework. But they are not 
there at this point. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. The reason I 
ask that is not only because it’s part of the constituency and a 
number of concerns — and actually the member from 
Cannington now has some of that in his constituency — but 
also we just happen to live on one of the grid roads that an 
agreement has been reached with the RM for heavy traffic. 
 
And the grid roads right around our area have taken a fair bit of 
a beating in some cases, especially just east of Kipling, as a 
result of trying to move the heavy traffic. And there is . . . It’s 
surprising how much heavy traffic is on there. We probably 
didn’t realize how much traffic was going on, travelling 48 
through to Highway No. 9. 
 
So I think, I hope, Mr. Minister, that you can give serious 
consideration to working and that the prairie grains program 
will continue and we can take advantage of that in using that to 
complete that project. 
 
On Highway No. 8, south of Fairlight, are there any plans . . . I 
know you’re doing some work. While you’re completing the 
grading and the pavement between 48 and No. 1, are you — 
and you’re doing some work on No. 8 further south, I think in 
the Redvers area, I’m not exactly sure — are there any plans to 
continue on to complete that project or that highway upgrade in 
the near too distant future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — First of all, just with regard to your 
reflection on the heavy traffic in your immediate area, we were 
a little buffaloed by that heavy traffic in your area as well. We 
hear that it’s crushing at times and we’re working on trying to 
alleviate that problem for you. 
 
Secondly, with regard to No. 8, there is . . . that section between 
Maryfield and Redvers is not yet approved under the Prairie 
Grain Roads Program, but it too might yet receive approval 
under that program. But it’s not there within the three-year 
projection at this point. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, on 48 from Wawota west to No. 9, 
the grade on that . . . Well it’s not the grade. It’s the dust-free 
surface actually is in very poor condition and many places 
where it’s broken out, they’ve been trying to patch it. And I’m 
wondering what plans the department has when they reach that, 
if there’s a matter of resurfacing that or ripping it up and 
actually putting a better dust-free surface on that section of road 
and levelling it out. Or in a situation of a road of that nature 
whether it just so happens — this is Wawota to No. 9 — but in 
similar cases, what does the department do to address that and 
to bring them up to standards again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That particular piece of road is really 

wearing like a thin membrane surface highway so we’ll just do 
the regular maintenance for the time being. But it’s the kind of 
road that would be . . . because it’s got a very good grade on it, 
it’s the kind of road that would be a very good candidate for the 
Terracem project that Pavement Scientific International is 
doing. 
 
So I think when the time comes we would certainly look at 
using that process to rebuild that particular piece of road. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, moving over to Highway 47, you’ve got some 
construction now coming north of Stoughton, and if I read it 
correctly — and just correct me if I’m wrong — I understand 
now there was a contract let to actually grade the 47 from about 
20 miles north of Stoughton right through starting at that 
intersection up through to Corning. And I believe there’s some 
more grading supposed to be completed to Highway 48 this 
year. 
 
And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, if that’s correct, if the 
grading has started on that, what work is being done. Although 
unfortunately it’s been fairly wet in that area and it may have 
slowed that down. I really don’t like to talk of wet being 
unfortunate when I think of areas of the province that really 
would love to have some moisture right now. 
 
But the question has been asked and I . . . just going through the 
project summary that you sent out, it seemed to me that’s what I 
was reading, but if I’m wrong, correct me. Because I know I’ve 
indicated to people that you are doing work there and I want to 
make sure that I’ve got my facts correct on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — This year the grading to gravel 
standard will be to about 14 kilometres south of Highway 48. 
And there is one more. That next piece is yet to be let and that 
should be let for next year. And so it will be upgraded to and 
graded up to gravel standard by next year sometime. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, when you say gravel standard, is 
that with dust-free surface anticipated in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Not in the near future, no. 
 
Mr. Toth: — What about No. 47 between No. 1 and Highway 
48? That road is really rough and it’s road that, I think, anyone 
. . . if you’ve got a fairly new vehicle, I would suggest you 
don’t even travel on that road. I know I’ve had a lot of 
complaints. 
 
Unfortunately a number of people live on that piece of highway, 
and while the Department of Highways has tried to patch it and 
every once in a while they run a patrol over it, due to how poor 
the condition of the road is, it doesn’t take very long to punch 
holes back into it. 
 
And I’m wondering what the plans are for 47 between Highway 
48 and No. 1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — At the present time we’re negotiating 
with RMs in the area to actually bring 616 into the highway 
system because it is a better road. It’s parallel to 47. And 47 
then would go to municipal road, is . . . yes, to municipal road. 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2503 

 

Mr. Toth: — Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, that’s just going to 
be another gravel surface, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — You’re right for the short term. But it 
would be anticipated that that would be surfaced in the future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Minister, that would go for . . . When 
you, you mentioned . . . or the 47 south of 48, you said that was 
going to be brought up to a gravel standard and you indicated 
not in the near future. But there’s a lot of traffic on there, 
especially with Louis Dreyfus right at that intersection, and 
traffic north/south and a lot of grain traffic on that, on that road. 
And when you’ve just got a gravel surface, you know what it 
does to windshields and the problems. And no matter how . . . 
While the speed limits are such . . . but travelling down these, 
these gravel roads doesn’t necessarily mean that people are 
always complying with that speed limit and the gravel that flies 
up. 
 
So you’re looking at 47, as well, being surfaced from 48 down 
through to that intersection just at the Ocean Man Reserve 
where you started construction eventually? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s really important to take a 
look at the big picture here, which is what we are compelled to 
do. And though it’s desirable, particularly for people who live 
in every particular area, to have their roads paved and surfaced, 
the cost is prohibitive. 
 
And to quote the member from Cypress Hills, building good 
quality highways and not being concerned about trying to get 
every road, the quantity done, that’s essential in terms of our 
overall planning. We have to make sure that we’ve got good, 
good roads that will handle the loads. And so working to a 
gravel standard, they’re grading to a gravel standard. We’ll 
make sure that the kind of traffic that is moving over that road 
can be handled. 
 
But we also have to be very, very sure that we are making those 
roads which are the key corridors for the economy, for tourism, 
and really to help build our province that those roads are 
priorities. And I’ve indicated earlier that we work very, very 
closely with our area transportation planning committees to 
help the people from those areas, to hear from them which are 
the vital roads so that when in our determination, it’s not just a 
central office that’s doing the planning. But we’re hearing from 
those people the roads that are essential. 
 
And so when I say that, you know, in time it may be surfaced, 
that’s accurate — in time, it may be surfaced. But in terms of 
the priorities, we have to be very careful to be good stewards of 
the resources we have, to make sure that the roads we have that 
are key in this province get the priority and are built to a 
standard that will handle the kind of traffic that is necessary in 
order to build our . . . and build and maintain our economies. 
 
(22:00) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. A moment 
ago you talked about discussion with the RM of Elcapo I 
believe it is on 616. The thing is what I found and certainly 
when we, when I travelled over to Grenfell, I’d just as soon 
travel on a gravel road versus the dust-free surfaces because of 

the poor condition of those roads. 
 
But at the same time if we’re looking down the road at putting, 
turning, actually making some of these roads dust free, while 
that grid is an excellent grid and a lot of work has been done on 
it, my concern is that that grid would not have had the same 
compaction that you would put into . . . And you talked about 
quality of your grades and what’s the important factor in a 
dust-free surface and in longevity is having a good grade 
underneath it. 
 
And my concern is that a road like 616, eventually if they, if the 
opinion was that we need to dust free this . . . surface this road, 
that you may not have, while you have a good grade, you may 
not have the type of grade that would really hold up on, with a 
dust-free surface on it or a paving surface on it. 
 
So I think we need to — before we just jump and look at some 
of the good grades that are out there, pick, transfer them to the 
highway system — we need to take a careful look as at in the 
long-term where you’re going to have your dust free and make 
sure that you do have grades that will certainly hold up under 
paving surfaces. 
 
A couple of questions regarding No. 1. Mr. Minister is there 
any construction plan for No. 1 east of — okay, we’ve now got 
to Wolseley — are you planning any further construction of the 
twinning on No. 1 East this summer, or are you looking at just 
completing the western portion and getting that under your belt 
and out of the way? What’s the plans for the No. 1 twinning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We intend to do another grading 
contract from Wolseley working east, and it will be carried over 
into next year as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one final question that I have for this evening has to 
do with communities and some of the concerns they have when 
twinning does take place. 
 
And I believe your office just received, or the department 
received a letter from the community of Grenfell in regards to 
the suggestion that’s already been made to them that their main 
street which comes and enters, the highway enters, or main 
street comes right off the highway, that that may be eliminated 
and a service road put in and then traffic then has to get off east 
and west. 
 
And I guess the question I’m asking, Mr. Minister, is what 
policy does your department follow in following up on these 
concerns, and sitting down with communities, and kind of 
hashing out how we address these types of concerns? 
 
It would seem to me as I look at that road and visualize a 
second twin highway going by, and I’m anticipating there it will 
be on the south side, that there really shouldn’t be a problem — 
you’ll have your turnoff lanes anyway and just leaving that 
intersection as is at the main junction. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, could you inform me what process your 
department follows in talking to communities to try and address 
all the concerns prior to construction by those communities so it 
saves a hassle down the road? 



2504 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — One of the things that I’ve been very 
impressed with since I’ve been minister is the amount of work 
that the department actually does working with communities to 
discuss options. And during this past week department officials 
have been out to Grenfell discussing. 
 
There are four different options that they’re looking a right 
now, that we’ll pay attention to the commercial needs of the 
community, but we also have to be very careful in terms of the 
safety aspects in the construction of those access roads. 
 
So all of that is in the mix. And I have to say again that I am 
very impressed with the diligence of the department in going 
out and working with the communities, listening to what those 
needs are, and trying to address those. And they’re in that 
process right now with Grenfell. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate hearing that because I 
think the more work that is done prior to a lot of the concerns 
that will end up at your feet and my feet can certainly be 
eliminated. And I want to encourage the department just to 
continue the dialogue. 
 
And hopefully by taking this advance time we can address those 
concerns and come up with what is a workable solution as we 
move forward in the completion of the twinning. 
 
Because I know, even just on the weekend, the traffic flow on 
that No. 1 Highway, and just even trying to get on at 
Whitewood was really interesting at times. Because of the 
amount of traffic flowing through there it was amazing to see. 
 
So I want to thank you and your department for the work you 
have been doing. And I think, as my colleague has indicated, 
we’ve indicated in the past, I think we certainly need to go 
beyond just a one-year planning and always we need to start 
looking a little further long term so that you’ve got a kind of a 
goal in mind. And I think . . . I compliment you for having 
strived and actually getting to that point where you’re looking 
three and four years down the road. So it just makes it a lot 
simpler rather than hopscotching here and there on a one-year 
basis. So thank you, Mr. Minister, and your officials. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, in previous sessions of 
the legislature I have brought to the attention of the Minister of 
Highways at the time, the need to complete Highway 368. 
Highway 368 stretches from Highway 5 and goes through Lake 
Lenore and ends up at St. Brieux. 
 
St. Brieux of course is the home of Bourgault Industries. Part of 
that highway has been done. There was a great deal of lobbying 
to get that highway resurfaced about five years ago I guess it 
was, five, six years ago and there was some response on the part 
of your government. So there was a portion of it that was 
resurfaced. 
 
I just reinforce, Mr. Minister, that there is a high number of 
employees that travel between the Humboldt area and from that 
area, that use that highway to go through to Bourgault and also 
some of them actually make their way to Annaheim where 
Doepker Industries is. But they use Highway 368. 
 

Now to my knowledge from the information sheet that you have 
distributed to all MLAs regarding which highways would be 
fixed, resurfaced, repaired, there is no indication to me that 
there is any work going to be done to finish that resurfacing of 
368 between Lake Lenore and St. Brieux. 
 
So I’m wondering whether, you know, what kind of 
considerations your department has made in basically, I guess, 
deciding not to complete the surfacing of that. And I would love 
to stand here right now and hear that I’m wrong and that you 
will be doing something with that because it really and truly is a 
highway that’s used a great deal. And because of the high 
staffing of Bourgault Industries the highway is needed. It’s 
certainly travelled a lot. 
 
And I also want to just reiterate that five or six years ago when I 
did talk with the deputy Highways’ minister about the way 
highways were prioritized as far as their need for repair and so 
on, it was important to look at the cost-benefit analysis at that 
factor, and at the time I don’t think that was being taken into 
consideration. And after that conversation, I think it was one of 
the criteria that was used to determine which highway should be 
fixed. 
 
As you well know, Bourgault Industries as well as Doepker do 
contribute a great deal of financial benefit to our economy, and 
it seems to me that this stretch of highway should be fixed to 
ensure that there is a safe passage and a good passage for traffic 
— not only of employees but trucking and so on that takes 
place going through there. 
 
I’d ask the minister to please respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Always something good. One of the 
wonderful things that’s going on is all the discussions with our 
area transportation planning committees and our RMs in terms 
of the kind of needs that there are in the communities. And of 
course the whole issue of what kind of economic activity is 
going on in an area, the kind of development that might be 
happening in an area, is also very important when we’re looking 
at what kind of investment to make in the infrastructure. 
 
In this particular case, the stretch of highway is a thin 
membrane surface highway, and one of the things that we have 
found some great successes in working with the RMs is to find 
alternate heavy haul routes to keep the heavy traffic off of the 
TMS roads. And discussions are going on with the RMs about 
alternate roads for the heavy haul and then when the 
maintenance is done on the TMS, we can bring it up to a 
standard that is acceptable for the light traffic, the transportation 
to the points of industry in the area. 
 
In terms of upgrading that particular piece to structural 
pavement, granular pavement, that’s not in the plan for the next 
few years. And the analysis will continue to go on and so will 
the discussions with our area transportation planning 
committees to make sure that we’re getting the right priorities 
for each area; and we’ll continue to work with the RMs to make 
sure that those TMS which are important for light-duty traffic 
are preserved and alternate routes are used for heavy haul where 
they can be. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the area 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

 

transportation planning committee that is responsible for that 
area, have these people advised you that they believe that it’s 
not important to upgrade that stretch of road between Lake 
Lenore and St. Brieux? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That particular area transportation 
planning committee is one of the newer ones and we have not 
yet received their report in terms of the priorities on the roads in 
the area. 
 
But as I say the discussions have gone on. We’ve received input 
from a variety of sources about the needs not only in that area 
but other areas about what the priority roads should be. And of 
course we’re responsible for that big picture of making sure that 
we get the funds into those roads which are primary to the 
development of this province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, is it 
possible to get the name of the members of that area 
transportation planning committee tonight? Do you have them 
or one of your officials have them with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No, but we can get that to you in mail 
tomorrow. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it then that if the 
area transportation committee has just recently been formed and 
that they have not been advising the department on where 
stretches of roads need to be upgraded, and you know, why and 
how and so on, then I take it the determination has come from 
the department. 
 
And I’m not sure but I’d like to know whether or not you have 
had advice from the RMs regarding the roads in that area or 
what is your source of information basically? 
 
(22:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Though the report is not in from that 
particular ATPC (area transportation planning committee), we 
have had ongoing discussions with them. They’ve given 
significant input as to the value of roads in the area. 
 
I think, for the member’s knowledge, the work that has gone on 
in terms of the Annaheim access, the partnership that we have 
there is an indication of how important we see industry and 
support for industry in the province. 
 
And what we don’t have yet from the ATPC is the overall plan 
for their area, but we have had significant discussions with the 
RMs in that area. They have pointed out very clearly how 
important they see this road to the area and certainly that puts it 
into our priority listing even though we have not yet received 
the full report from the ATPC. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That response sounded 
good but it was a bit vague as far as . . . you know, you 
mentioned that you’ve had input from them. I’m not sure who 
the them is exactly, because I think you’re referring to the 
members of the area transportation committee but you said 
they’re just newly formed so I’m not sure how you had input 
from them prior to their formation. Could you explain that, 
please. 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, they are one of our 
newer area transportation planning committees, but they’ve 
been around as an area transportation planning committee for 
the length of period that I’ve been a minister they’ve been there, 
which has been significant now. I guess we’re looking at seven, 
eight months. But it takes a significant period of time for them 
to put together all of the information for their area in order to 
draft their report. 
 
In the meantime, the deputy minister and assistant deputy 
minister have met with the RMs, have met with the community 
of St. Brieux, have met with significant players in the area and 
discussed with them what the needs are — with the RMs, with 
industry, with the community. And we have had significant 
information, though not the final report, from the area 
transportation planning committee over this past seven, eight 
months, and in their earliest formation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d just 
like to move our dialogue over to the condition of Highway No. 
20 south of Humboldt. There is an area of that highway that is 
being repaired. And I can tell you that it was with a great deal 
of joy that I saw that happening, and it’s actually the area I 
believe the closest to No. 11, from No. 11 and then it goes 
northward a bit. 
 
But there is also — still rather — an area just south of 
Humboldt for a number of miles that is in terrible, terrible 
shape. Now I’m wondering whether or not there is any plans by 
your department to be completely repairing that whole area, 
which would be south of Humboldt, to meet up with the part, 
the significant part that you’ve already repaired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s just an older piece of highway that 
will come up in the regular maintenance schedule for 
resurfacing. I don’t have a time frame on that, but it’s 
recognition that it is an old piece of highway that will need 
resurfacing soon. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I recognize that too. 
And I know there are priorities and I do sympathize with you 
when, you know, your department has to make these decisions 
with a certain budget. 
 
But it appears to me, and in fact I know, that that highway is 
used again a great deal and it’s really getting . . . I’ll tell you, 
you know, it’s a rock-and-roll ride when you’re on that one all 
the way. And it presents, I believe, a significant danger to 
travellers because it’s really getting very, very potted and the 
shoulders of the highway are broken off and it’s really in a 
mess. So I would just encourage you to give consideration to 
that highway. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to just draw your attention to, I guess, the 
decision to have the St. Louis bridge moved from its existing 
location, I guess, a mile over or something like that. I 
understand that the decision has been finalized and that bridge 
is not going to go through St. Louis any more. When it’s rebuilt, 
it’s going to be in another location just east of St. Louis. 
 
Now I’ve had a number of people in that community and some 
of the surrounding communities talk to me about the detriment 
this is going to be if that bridge is moved; to their businesses, to 



2506 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

tourism in the area because, Mr. Minister, St. Louis is a 
significant historical site. There are sites around there that I 
think we have a great deal owing to the area and that 
community has worked so very hard to continue its success. 
 
And it just seems that the people there are having a hard time 
accepting the fact that the reasons that your department has 
given for moving the location of the bridge, they’re finding 
those hard to swallow, I guess. They were told that some of the 
ground underneath the existing bridge, for instance, is not 
stable. Well, you know, that’s . . . they claim that’s not true. 
There’s just the same strength there to uphold a bridge as there 
would be a mile and a half or two miles over. 
 
And would certainly like your . . . they’d like me to ask your 
department to once again reconsider this decision. It’s going to 
mean the downfall of that community if they don’t have the 
highway going through. And it’s really very sad to see that 
happen when we’re trying to restore rural Saskatchewan and 
give it every opportunity to thrive. 
 
So I’m just going to ask your department to really reconsider 
whether it’s absolutely necessary to have this bridge moved 
over. And I’m just going to leave you with that, Mr. Minister. 
It’s a plea on my behalf. I’m advocating for the citizens of St. 
Louis. 
 
But I also would like you to tell me this evening, if you can, just 
when it is that the bridge is going to be built? I understood that 
part of this money, I think, would be coming from the federal 
government as well as provincial government. I’d like to know 
about that also. But first of all, I’d like to know when the bridge 
will be built? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s always difficult to be very clear 
and explicit around a situation that is going to be hard on a 
community, but I have to say that there has been extensive work 
done around this issue of the bridge. There have been 
consultations with communities all throughout the area. The 
department has done extensive engineering work and, really, 
the decision is made that it must be moved to the new location 
and the work will begin on that next fall. And there are no 
federal dollars involved in it. They are provincial dollars. 
 
That’s just the determination after all of the research, and I can 
tell you that the work that’s been done on that has been 
extensive. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have a few 
questions dealing with Highways and a couple of special 
situations in my constituency. The first highway that I’d like to 
deal with is Highway 15. 
 
The east central transportation planning authority, they had a 
study done and of course recommendations as to future 
improvements to highways and that sort of thing. And Highway 
15 was identified as a highway that, in their opinion, they felt 
that it should be upgraded to a primary highway. And there are 
a number of concerns in the area and commercial enterprises 
that are hoping that this will happen within the foreseeable 
future. 
 
There is a group of entrepreneurs in the Kelliher area that are 

actively pursuing and will be building a screening pelleting 
plant in Kelliher. And they feel it’s essential to have primary 
highway services. I’m just wondering where Highway 15 fits in 
the overall grand scheme of provincial upgrades to the highway 
system? 
 
(22:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it’s important to note that we 
have determined this is one of the very important corridors in 
the province. There’s been a significant amount of work done 
on that corridor already, upgrading it to a structural pavement. 
 
And I can say that the section around Fenwood was done, and 
in the past three years that completes the section right up to 
Raymore. A section from Raymore over to Semans was 
completed and the section from Nokomis east towards . . . or 
pardon me, west towards No. 2, there’s a section that is done 
and the next section is underway currently. 
 
So recognizing the importance of Highway 15, we are . . . it is 
on schedule. We are working ahead on it and we’ll see this 
completed in the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to turn my 
attention now to work that your department is having done on 
Highway 22. I believe it’s about 10 kilometres between the 
communities of Dysart and Cupar. The work is in progress as 
we speak, Mr. Minister, and I certainly have no questions with 
that particular section of work. 
 
However it was brought to my attention that there is a short 
section of Highway 22 on the east end from the village of 
Lipton to the junction of 35 that is not part of any future 
improvements, and everything else from Cupar up to Lipton 
will, after the completion of this project, will have been rebuilt 
within the last two or three years. 
 
And the concern that was raised is that two kilometres from 
Lipton to the junction could present some problems with weight 
restrictions and so on. And I was just wondering if those two 
kilometres, if they’re going to be looked at or how will that fit 
when it comes springtime and there’s need to put road 
restrictions on the highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — These are projects that are using the 
Terracem material and I’m happy to say that the smaller section 
to the east is also going to be included. They will be done this 
year. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure the residents 
of that area will be very pleased to hear that. 
 
There’s one other concern dealing with Highway 22 and that is 
from Junction No. 6 at Southey west to approximately 5 
kilometres to the site of the Pioneer Grain’s new grain handling 
facility. Pioneer Grain has invested some approximately $14 
million and they are on a secondary highway. And they have 
asked me to raise the issue with you and it would . . . and not 
only the grain company, but the farm producers in the area feel 
that it is essential to have that chunk of highway improved so 
that they can deliver their grain in a timely fashion and on 
highways that are capable of handling these trucking 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

 

requirements, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I was wondering what your plans are for that section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for bringing that forward. I 
had the opportunity to go out to Southey the other day — we 
were out there with the Premier — we did an opening of a 
brand new crosswalk that’s going to make it a lot safer for the 
children and the people in the community out there. 
 
And while we were out in Southey we took the opportunity, the 
assistant deputy minister drove me along this road, out to the 
elevator. And though there are no current plans for upgrading 
that road, there are discussions that have gone on and will 
continue to go on in terms of whether or not that’s going to be 
upgraded. And I expect it’ll be on the scope relatively soon. 
 
But I think it’s very important — and we made this point a 
number of times in talking with groups and individuals who are 
planning economic development projects, whether it be an 
elevator, whether it be a feedlot, no matter what it is — that 
when they’re looking at location, they need to be looking at the 
kind of corridors that are available; that they shouldn’t be off 
building in the back forty because that’s the cheapest place to 
buy land. They need to be looking at the infrastructure that is 
available, and that includes primary weight highways. Because 
there is no guarantee that we can always build to wherever 
somebody decides they want to put their particular project. 
 
But in this case I’m happy to say that there are discussions 
going on. We believe that will be in the scope soon. But I think 
it is important to get that message out, that people when they 
are looking at the projects that they are doing, need to be aware 
of the infrastructure that’s in place and try and build 
accordingly. And I think that would overall provide a better 
development strategy for our province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure the grain 
company looked at all the factors involved including highways, 
you know, because of the grain moves over road . . . over our 
highways and municipal roads to get to the elevator and then 
from that point it’s put on rail cars and moved by rail. And I 
think it was more an issue of being able to locate the length of 
car spot that’s required and those sorts of things. And I 
understand that their choices were limited in that with regards 
to those factors. 
 
I’m glad you mentioned that you were out in Southey very 
recently and I understand that you were there to open a new 
crosswalk across Highway 66 . . . No. 6, sorry, in the town of 
Southey. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, how does the height that those signs 
that were placed across the crosswalks compare to the heights 
that, say, power lines that cross provincial highways? It seems 
to me there’s a fair bit of difference there. And how does the 
height of those signs compare to power lines that go across 
highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — They are significantly lower than the 
power lines and that’s very important because we’re dealing 
with safety here, and the safety that we’re concerned about is 
stopping the flow of traffic when there are people needing to 

use that corridor and so they need to be in the driver’s sight 
line. And so they’re significantly lower than what power lines 
are. 
 
And recognizing the kind of traffic that moves over that 
particular highway, when there are over-height loads, these 
signs are designed so that they can be turned and give access to 
those loads if they need to pass through that particular area. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s precisely the 
problem with those signs, Mr. Minister. I have had a number of 
calls to my office asking that the issue of the height of the signs 
be raised with your department. There has been a number of 
instances where truck traffic has had considerable problems 
manoeuvring that crossing. 
 
As a matter of fact, I’ve been told that some of the equipment 
that’s being manufactured in Edmonton and is trucked down to 
the co-op upgrader has a extremely difficult problem in 
negotiating them signs. In fact they have to stop all traffic and 
move on a 45-degree angle to get through that sign area. 
 
And I really think that your department should look at the 
height of those signs. I realize safety is a factor, but I think it’s a 
real bottleneck. I am told, and I certainly can’t verify that, but 
that particular crossing is one of the lowest areas all along 
Highway No. 6. And it’s a real bottleneck. 
 
Farm machinery dealers tell me that they have great difficulty 
moving their equipment underneath those signs and people feel 
that it’s quite a nuisance. And I would urge you to have your 
department officials look at raising those signs. I would talk to 
your local people, your local Department of Highways people 
in the Southey area. I’m sure they have a pretty good idea of 
how high those signs should be raised, Mr. Minister. And I 
would urge you to do that. 
 
I would like to now turn my attention very briefly to another 
area in my constituency and that is the area of . . . in Craven. 
That’s the 641 grid road that comes down into Craven. It’s been 
a problem for a long, long time. That road is virtually sliding 
off the side of the hill. Your department has been monitoring 
that since, I believe, 1978. The village of Craven and the RM of 
Longlaketon have corresponded and contacted your department 
on a number of times asking for some assistance. 
 
This type of problem is way beyond their financial capability of 
rectifying it. And to this point in time, Mr. Minister, really there 
is no satisfactory answer has been received from your 
department. And I would urge you to look at this again. I was 
wondering if in the last year or so that you’ve had and your 
department has any new ideas as how to overcome this problem 
of the road slumping or virtually sliding off the side of the hill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — First of all, just to close the discussion 
around Southey, I think it’s important to know that with 
crosswalk signs there are standards that have to be followed 
which includes, as I mentioned earlier, the sight lines. 
 
It’s also important to note that the community of Southey 
petitioned the Premier, petitioned our office, to get crosswalk 
signs put in there for safety. 
 



2508 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

One of the hazards of having a community with a highway 
running through it is that you’re going to have those kind of 
slowdowns when you’ve got oversized traffic coming through. 
But the issue there was safety for the people in the community, 
and so that’s why it was designed so that it could handle 
overloads. 
 
It wasn’t designed so they could just go whipping through there, 
but it was designed so that they could . . . the signs could be 
shifted to allow those oversized loads to go through. But the 
main thing that we were doing here is responding to the 
community’s request for crosswalks for safety for the children 
and the walkers within that community. So that is the response. 
 
Those signs are at the safety standard levels so that they meet 
all the standards. And it is possible to get oversized loads 
through, not necessarily as convenient as just being able to whiz 
right through. But that’s the reason for it, that they have to be 
built to certain standards to be safe and effective. If they 
weren’t, somebody’s going to be liable for that. 
 
Secondly, you were asking with regard to the community of 
Craven and the roadway through there. And it’s important to 
note that that is a very, very active slide area right through 
there; important to note that there are houses in the community 
built right along that slide area as well. And there is no clear 
technical fix in that kind of a situation. 
 
We could spend millions of dollars to move the housing out of 
there, to attempt to stabilize that and it still might not be as 
effective in that kind of an active slide area. So the best that we 
can see is to do as little to disturb that area as possible, to 
continue to do fill when we need to on that road and to patch 
accordingly. But it’s a very, very unstable situation there. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll deal with the 
Craven situation first, and then I guess we’ll go back to the 
Southey crosswalks. I realize that that’s a very unstable 
situation in Craven with that slump on 641. It has been 
suggested by municipal government, both the village and the 
RM, that perhaps that road should be rerouted and brought 
down into the valley on the west side of Craven, which would 
be quite a considerable expense to the RM. 
 
Now I think if the partnership situation would arise where 
perhaps your department, the village, and the RM could partner 
in assuming the additional cost of rerouting that route, I think it 
would solve everyone’s problems because, as I understand it, 
that unstable portion, there really isn’t anything that can be 
done, and I think probably the long-term fix would be to reroute 
the route. 
 
And I understand and I’m told that there is increasing amount of 
traffic on that road on a daily basis. There are more and more 
people on acreages to the north of Craven that are working in 
Regina and elsewhere that use that road, school buses are using 
that road, and it is becoming an increasingly unsafe situation. 
 
And I would urge your department to work with the village and 
the RM to perhaps look at an alternate route for that road 
because, as I said, for the RM to do it on its own, or the village, 
it’s just beyond their financial capability. And I would hope that 
perhaps that could be put in future planning, Mr. Minister. 

Now getting back to the Southey crosswalk, I understand that 
the town council had requested quite some time ago that a 
crosswalk be installed. I also understand that after a recent bus 
tour last summer that that crosswalk was fast-tracked because 
I’m told that some occupants of the bus had a fairly close call 
crossing the highway, and I’m told that’s one of the reasons 
why that crosswalk was fast-tracked, Mr. Minister. 
 
However, nonetheless I’m sure the residents of Southey are 
happy to have the crosswalk. Now I guess the question is, are 
the signs as high as they possibly can be and still be in 
accordance with safety regulations, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It is clearly my understanding that 
these signs were built to the standards for crosswalk signs 
within the province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I realize the hour’s 
getting late and there’s some impatience in the room, but I want 
to make the point, Mr. Chairman, that the Highways estimates 
have not seen their full complement of time to date. We were 
cut short on several occasions earlier in this session and we’re 
going to make up for it tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So thank you very much for the opportunity to 
do that. 
 
At the last occasion of our meeting, I asked the minister for a 
copy of the globals, the questions that we ask each department, 
and I want to thank him for making them available. 
 
I’m looking through the front page under general departmental 
agency report and it talks about the number of employees under 
the auspices or the jurisdiction of the Department of Highways 
and Transportation. And it talks about in-scope permanent, 
in-scope temporary and casual, out-scope, out-scope temporary 
and casual, and so forth. It lists each of those categories by 
number and the salary that is payable in each of those 
categories. But it gets down to other with a number of zero but 
a salary of $10,540,818. 
 
That seems like a lot of money for zero employees. Would the 
minister care to explain that particular figure, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The department staff at this point are 
saying that they would like to get the detail on that to you at a 
later date. There’s not . . . not there in the collective memory at 
this moment but they will get it to you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I think the minister probably is 
trying to avoid some embarrassing information and that’s why 
he wants to make it available to us after we’re out of the House 
and unable to ask questions. 
 
We’ll move on to another area that arises from the globals. 
There’s two pages of names — about 25 names per page — of 
terminations of permanent employees. And while I assume that 
termination is a word that’s used to describe any reason for 
leaving the employment of the department, whether it’s 
resignation or whatever, I guess the question I’d like to ask the 
minister is: if you have a senior member of the department or 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

 

somebody from the minister’s office and they choose to leave 
for one reason or the other, is there any severance allowance 
made for those employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — If an employee just chooses to leave 
the employ, there is no severance at all. If they’re involuntarily 
terminated in some way, then they are . . . we would just follow 
common law in terms of payment and severance. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. To the minister 
through the chairman, looking further in the globals, we have 
25 pages with 25 names on each page of terminations of 
non-permanent employees. 
 
Now I’m not going to do the math that quickly in my head 
because I’m used to using a calculator, but that’s a substantial 
number of individuals. And given the fact that the department 
has about 1,300 employees in total, I think that’s a fairly high 
percentage. 
 
What percentage of turnover or change in employment 
personnel is an acceptable standard for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Those would be accounted for in 
seasonal labour, term employees, and student employees. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So the other half of 
the list, if we have 625 that are terminated for one reason or the 
other, the other half are considered permanent employees of the 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It would be accounted for by terms . . . 
term employees who are not terminated and permanent staff and 
also students who would be on longer term employ, perhaps the 
co-op program. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
chairman to the minister, I asked in written questions earlier this 
year about the amount of money spent on advertising 
campaigns, both for this fiscal year . . . budgeted for this fiscal 
year and spent in the year previous. They were the two 
campaigns, we’re building better roads, and I can’t recall the 
name of the other one just off the top of my head. 
 
But the total, if I recall, came to about $428,000 for the one 
year and about $403,000 for the second year of those two 
campaigns. That represents well over $800,000 for advertising 
purposes. Mr. Minister, would you explain for me please the 
value of spending that kind of money on advertising for a 
department that requires no advertising at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As an open, accountable, and 
responsible government we believe that it’s important to be 
accountable to those people who are helping pay for fixing the 
highways and who are travelling on the highways. 
 
Our campaign, We’re Fixing the Roads, and Building Better 
Highways advertising campaigns over the last couple of years 
have been very important in terms of communicating to the 
people of this province not only what we are doing and the kind 
of funding that we’re putting into building the infrastructure of 
this province, but it was very, very important also to let the 

commuting public know what roads were being fixed, and 
when, and that’s all part of the project in keeping them 
informed about the work that’s going on. 
 
Tremendous value — we get a lot of positive feedback around 
the communications that is going on. It also, I mean, just by the 
way, it’s very important as well that this goes out into, not just 
our major newspapers, but it goes out into local papers as well, 
just to let people know what is happening out there, where their 
dollars are being spent, and how effective that is. And again, the 
feedback that we’ve got from that has been very, very positive. 
People have appreciated knowing what is being done, where it’s 
being done, and when it’s being done in terms of our fixing the 
roads and building better highways. 
 
(23:00) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
chairman to the minister, with the success of that advertising 
program then, would you consider at some point delineating 
your three-year plan as to the projects you would hope to 
accomplish in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is significant discussion, 
planning, working with RMs, and ATPCs, working with a 
variety of different bodies to plan for the future. And those 
plans, as you’ve seen with Prairie Grain Roads Program, are on 
a three-year time frame. There are some that are extended out 
significantly beyond that. 
 
But it’s important that in terms of announcing plans and 
programs that we have had finalization with all, in terms of our 
discussions, with all of the partners involved, the funding 
partners. We’ve got to make sure that we’ve got finalization in 
terms of environmental side of the planning as well. But I think 
of particular importance is that we have all of the commitments 
in place by funding partners, which includes the federal 
government, some of the RMs, before any projects are 
announced. 
 
And so a lot of that planning work goes on. We’re looking at 
alternatives. We’re laying out the longer range goals and plans, 
we’re setting corridors, and really categorizing what our 
highways are, what our funds are in terms of rail as well. So 
we’re trying to make sure that we’ve got very clear alternatives 
for our long-range plans and we are doing three years and 
beyond in that planning. 
 
But in terms of any kind of announcables, in terms of making 
those plans concrete, we must have the partnerships with all 
bodies involved firmed up before we can do that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, there are so many areas of interest 
and question that I have available to me tonight that I’m not 
sure where to start. We wanted to talk about issues of safety. 
I’ve asked written questions of the department on that particular 
area, and maybe that’s someplace we should go right now for 
just a few minutes. 
 
I know the department takes the issue of safety very seriously. 
That particular cause has been spoken about eloquently by 
yourself and by other members of the department from time to 



2510 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

time. 
 
And as you well know, there was a number of mishaps over the 
years involving Highways department workers. We’ve had 
rear-end collisions on the highways involving maintenance 
equipment. And we had a tragedy in the north central area of 
the province, the Highways worker that was killed; and more 
recently somebody just in my own constituency. 
 
And so I’d like to address the issue of safety. Would the 
minister care to explain to us what kind of soul-searching goes 
on in the department? What kind of response comes out of the 
department when we have the kinds of tragedies occur that I 
just indicated happened most recently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — First before I answer your last 
question, I would like to return to your first question in the 
globals where you were asking about the zero employees and 
the $10 million figure. And that is all accounted for in 
supplementary payments such as overtime, temporary 
performance of higher duties. These are included in other and 
are fully accounted for there. 
 
Okay, with regard to the kind of tragedies that we recently 
encountered. The first line in terms of response is that 
everything possible is done by department staff, by people close 
to the person to care for family, people who are co-workers, and 
try and make sure that just in terms of the grief and the pain that 
people are going through that there are there . . . folks there who 
can help them through that. 
 
But overall I think what is important is that we want to do 
whatever we can to avoid those kind of tragedies, and there is 
significant time, energy, thought, and money goes into 
occupational health and safety initiatives. And we try and make 
sure that recognizing that safety is key for . . . from our 
perspective for the travelling public and for highway workers. 
 
You’ve probably been aware, as I suspect most have, of the 
Orange Zone safety project that’s out, for the Share the Road 
campaigns regarding semi-trailers and trucks, and trying to help 
the travelling public be aware of what some of those concerns 
are. 
 
Within the department itself, we’ve invested over $1 million on 
improved safety measures related to on-road work. You’ll note 
the new vests that we received this year. They’re more, much 
more highly visible and that’s vitally important when you have 
people working out in the traffic. 
 
The department is continually working with occupational health 
and safety people to develop training programs for workers so 
that they’ll know the issues that they need to deal with out on 
the roads and in their workplace. And along with rigorous 
training, the department is continually examining and looking 
for new ways to try and help make our workplace and our 
highways safer both for our workers and for the travelling 
public. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, thank you through you to the 
minister for the response. As tragic as the incident south of Gull 
Lake was just recently, there has been brought to my office a 
complaint, anonymously, about occupational health and safety 

moving in there with such determination and with such force 
that the project has been handicapped, frankly. And I’m 
wondering what level of attention, what level of response is 
appropriate in those kinds of situations. 
 
I’ve been told that department personnel are required to spend a 
couple of hours each morning reviewing safety measures and 
projects are significantly slowed as a result of those types of 
incidents. Is that, is that necessary? Is that appropriate? Is that 
the best way to deal with these kinds of difficult circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s probably important to note that 
when a death, a tragic incident like this occurs, that the RCMP 
and the occupational health and safety shut down the operation 
to investigate and clearly get a handle on what happened. The 
other thing that I think, it’s very important . . . and support the 
staff in making sure that all members who are working out in 
the . . . all department members who are working out on the 
roads get adequate safety training to make sure that they know 
what the rules are when they’re out there working. 
 
But in terms of . . . I think you might find that it’s a significant 
exaggeration if it’s being reported to you that they’re shutting 
down for two hours every morning to go over safety 
procedures. I think there’s conscientiousness and a heightened 
conscientiousness in direct . . . directly after an incident like 
that, but I think it’s very important that safety procedures be 
emphasized. We don’t want other incidents like this happening. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe you could 
comment on one other element of the anonymous complaint 
that was directed to me. And I want to know if it’s common 
practice, if it’s understood by the department that this is an 
acceptable level of interest in a situation like this. 
 
I’m told that occupational health and safety sent seven people to 
the job site to make sure that everything was running according 
to expected standards. Is that possible at all? And if not, would 
you indicate for me what would be an acceptable presence by 
occupational health and safety? 
 
(23:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The Department of Labour would 
have sent out one person for occupational health and safety and 
they would do investigation along with the RCMP. From our 
department’s occupational health and safety, two people would 
have been sent out for an internal investigation, and along with 
those two people would be the supervisors of the project, but 
they’re on the project most of the time anyway. So those are the 
numbers that we have with regard to that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In keeping with the 
safety theme, I have with me here a copy of an e-mail that was 
sent to a Pamela Bishop of your department. And it comes from 
a gentleman by the name of Brad Harris and he’s commenting 
about an incident that occurred to him as he was travelling on 
Highway 45 between Outlook and Delisle on the day of June 3 
of this year at 11:20 a.m. 
 
He approached a construction zone and was following 
instructions and did what he felt he was expected to do given 
the direction of the flagman on that particular project. And I’m 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

 

just going to quote from this e-mail. He said: 
 

I proceeded to follow his instructions because I should be 
able to trust their judgment. However I thought their 
judgment was very poor in this case and I then began to 
drive on the ditch slope. 

 
I think you probably have seen this e-mail or somebody in your 
department has. And I don’t want to read the whole thing but 
suffice to say that this individual was asked to detour around a 
piece of equipment that was working in the only open lane, and 
when he was directed to the shoulder of the road felt that the 
slope was precariously sharp and was actually fearful of a 
potential rollover. And he said: 
 

I was very disappointed and very appalled with your 
department that workers would force drivers into a perilous 
position such as that. Had an accident occurred I could 
almost guarantee you that your department would be facing 
a serious lawsuit. 

 
I guess the thing that disturbed me about this particular e-mail 
was the driver’s assertion that he was asked to do something 
that he was clearly uncomfortable doing and felt that was 
unsafe to do. Would this flag person have been a member of the 
Department of Highways staff or would it more than likely have 
been an employee of a contractor? 
 
And if it’s a department staff person, what kind of effort would 
be made to inform that individual about this type of situation 
and the potential for accident and mishap that could occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I don’t have the details to that 
particular situation but we can get you a summary of the reply. 
But I think it was probably department flag person that was 
involved. They are given training for their duties, and they 
would have also been given instructions during that time frame 
by the supervisor of that particular project. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would the employee 
be held responsible for any difficulty that might have arisen 
from that particular situation? If there had been a mishap, if 
there had been a loss of control, if there had been a rollover, 
would the employee be held accountable for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — It’s important to let you know that we 
can’t really comment on the detail of that particular incident. 
But I think to just say in general that our employees are in 
situations that would be like that, would be acting on behalf of 
the department, and the department would be responsible for 
the work that they were doing and the way they were doing 
their work. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The time has come I 
guess to change subjects. We only have a few more to go 
through tonight and we want to cover as many as possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, the last time we visited here, I raised the subject 
of the Farm Rail Car Coalition and we danced around that a 
little bit. I asked some kind of broad, general questions, and 
your responses were appropriate to the nature of the questions 
— broad and general. 
 

And I think that at the time you, through your department, 
offered to provide us with a full technical briefing. And because 
of scheduling it wasn’t possible to accomplish the technical 
briefing that had been contemplated. However I did have an 
opportunity to sit down with Mr. Harrison and one of the 
employees of your department, Bernie Churko. And we talked 
fairly candidly about the Farm Rail Car Coalition. 
 
So while I got some fairly good technical information and some 
good background, there are a number of sort of philosophical 
and maybe pragmatic issues that are better asked within the 
political forum. And I’d like to return to that this evening, if we 
may in the time that’s left to us. 
 
I need to go back to the question I originally asked concerning 
the funding that the department had given to the Farm Rail Car 
Coalition. If I understood the response correctly, it was 
indicated to us that the Department of Highways had committed 
$250,000 to the Farm Rail Car Coalition as of 1996. It was 
money that was determined to go to the coalition in the 1996 
budget. 
 
I guess what I didn’t confirm with the minister was whether that 
was paid in a lump sum or whether it was paid in instalments 
over the subsequent five years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The funding was, in ’96, the 
conditional grant funding approved was 244,521. In 1996-97 
there were three periods, three grant periods: October, 90,000- 
plus; January, 15,000-plus; May, 22,000-plus, for a total of 
127,342.91. 
 
In ’97-98 there were three periods, and I’ll just give you the 
total for that year. If you want more detail we can give you that 
— 24,561. In ’98-99 a total of 10,307; ’99-2000, 47,842.31. 
And along with the additional $25,000 grant that was given in 
December of 2000-2001, the total for that 2000-2001 year was 
59,468.25. For a total amount of the conditional grant, 244,521 
and $25,000 grant in funding to assist with administrative costs 
for a total amount of 269,521.47. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I’m sorry, I missed the last figure. Could you 
repeat that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — 269,521.47. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — The money that was paid out to the Farm Rail 
Car Coalition over that five-year period, Mr. Minister, as was 
indicated by the response given to this question earlier, went to 
a variety of areas. Would you be good enough to specify 
precisely what those areas were? Who or what were the 
recipients of the money in terms of lobbying or consulting fees 
or those types of activities that were covered by this 
expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That funding was provided to the 
Farm Rail Car Coalition and you would need to speak with 
them if you want detail as to how that was used. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So am I to believe, Mr. Minister, that that 
amount of money was given to the Farm Rail Car Coalition 
without any, any statements of payment or any, any indication 
of how the money was disbursed? 



2512 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The funds were put out, as I indicated 
in the earlier comment about giving you the schedule of dollars 
that were turned over to them, were given out with reports 
coming back. And those reports would indicate the kind of 
work that had been done, whether it was technical work or 
whether it was preparing their bid process, whether it was 
working with other technical bodies like the Sultran. The work 
that they did primarily was really trying to prepare the way for a 
successful bid. 
 
And I think I indicated that . . . and in fact you know the 
materials we . . . if you need or desire more specifics, we can 
get those materials for you, provide them for you. 
 
In general the process was that they would report back when 
they had need of further funds to move ahead the process of 
having a successful bid. 
 
I think the other thing that is important to note is that in this 
time period — and I think I indicated this last time we were 
talking about this subject — that in that time period one of the 
things that was happened was that they were successful in 
getting the federal government not to sell those to the railroads, 
which the government intended. And that has already had a 
significant return to the producers over these past few years. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, am I to understand, given what 
you’ve just said, that money was given to the FRCC (Farm Rail 
Car Coalition) without explanation as to how it would spent, but 
after it was spent there was some attempt to provide you with 
information as to where the monies went? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Actually you would be correct in 
understanding both of those, that they gave an overall direction 
of where they were going to go, that they gave a plan for what 
their immediate future was, and that they reported back after 
they had spent and named what requests were there for the next 
phase of their work. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, what kind of detail would have 
been required in the request for funding, or in the justification 
for money spent to satisfy the Department of Highways and 
Transportation? 
 
(23:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I understand that you’re asking for 
detail of what justified the payments as those requests came in. 
And as I indicated earlier, I don’t have that level of detail here 
with me, but you can either get that from FRCC or we will 
provide that for you. We can . . . I mean we’ve got the 
documentation available. 
 
But if there’s any implication at all that it was just lightly 
transferred over with, well here you go, you take this money 
and do it. Absolutely not. There is criteria involved. I am 
convinced having worked with the department now for over 
seven months that it would not be lightly done. It would be well 
considered. And we’ll be prepared to provide that material for 
you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that assurance. 
Can you also assure me though that audited statements might be 

available, completely audited by a reputable auditing agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think what is essential and what is 
key in this is to . . . is to get the larger picture and to put that in 
front of you — that this project is about making sure that 
producers get the best possible return that they can get and that 
producers have some say at the table in terms of car allocation, 
etc. That’s what’s behind it and we’ve already seen some return 
to producers because of the work that we’ve . . . that has been 
done. 
 
I think it’s also important to note that audited statements will be 
available. I think it’s also important to note that there were 
many other partners that were involved in this: Western 
Diversification to the tune of some $365,000; Canadian Wheat 
Board, $20,000; Manitoba Rural Adaptation Council, 4,813; 
and member contributions of almost $140,000. But audited 
statements will be available. But I think — I mean, if you, if 
you want to get tied up around the little numbers — that audited 
statements can be made available down the road. 
 
But presently, what . . . what we’re involved in here is an issue 
of trying to make sure that producers get an opportunity to have 
some say in this and that they get the best return possible. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, I don’t think that we have a 
problem with the, you know, with the project. I suppose we’re 
more troubled by the process and that’s where the questions are 
originating, frankly. 
 
The Farm Rail Car Coalition has an idea. They’re working on it. 
After the explanation we were given by Sinclair Harrison and 
Bernie Churko, I understand the technical merits of the proposal 
and so forth. But there is an issue of policy here that has never 
been explained, has never been justified, and I think it’s 
incumbent on the department and you as minister, frankly, to 
justify this whole process for us. 
 
Since 1996, the department, through Saskatchewan Grain Car 
Corporation, has been making expenditures on behalf of a 
coalition, a loose knit coalition of individuals and organizations. 
And we have not had audited statements of any kind as yet and 
I think that that speaks to some, if not impropriety, certainly 
some rather casual approaches to accounting. 
 
And the other thing I think that needs to be discussed in this . . . 
in this venue tonight is the very foundation of policy that the 
government has decided to act upon. Where did this policy 
come from? What is the policy statement for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation in this regard? 
 
We are talking about taxpayers’ money here, frankly. And 
whether we’re careless with a little bit or a lot is not the issue. 
The issue is how careful must we be with taxpayers’ money to 
account for every nickel of it and to justify it according to 
generally accepted principles and standards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member opposite, I think it’s 
important to note that this investment that we have made of 
$269,000-plus has, in the seven years that that has been 
invested, the return can be estimated at about 1 or $2 per tonne 
on an estimated 30 million tonnes per year. That investment has 



July 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

 

returned significantly to the taxpayers of this province, to the 
producers of this province already. 
 
Secondly it’s important to note that 250,000 of that money is 
. . . or 244,000, whatever the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
thank you, that is a loan. If the Farm Rail Car Coalition is 
successful in its bid, that money will be repaid. 
 
I think that you’re right in terms of the need for full 
accountability and we have called on the Farm Rail Car 
Coalition to give us the audited statements of their work. As I 
say, overall in terms of the policy it’s vitally important from our 
perspective that we enable competition in this industry. 
 
And we’ve heard from the potash corporations how important it 
has been for them to have a place at that table to be able to 
encourage competition and get the best prices possible. And this 
allows — if they are successful in this bid — this allows a third 
party to have a place at the table to gain the benefits of 
competition and to have those benefits returned to the 
producers. So from that perspective we see it as a very 
worthwhile investment. 
 
In terms of the return to taxpayers, as I’ve indicated, we can 
estimate that on the 1 or $2 per tonne, 30 million tonnes per 
year over the seven-year period. And the detailed audited 
statement when we receive that from Farm Rail Car Coalition, 
we can make that available. 
 
In terms of the incremental funding, discussions were ongoing 
with Farm Rail Car Coalition in terms of how the monies were 
being spent in terms of consultations and in terms of the work 
that was being done in order to prepare for the bid. Those 
figures will be made available. There will be an audited 
statement on where those monies were spent and that too will 
be made available when that audited statement is in our hands. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. I 
have your assurance that we will have audited statements 
available. I take from your assurance that there are none at this 
time. And I’m wondering why that would have been allowed to 
happen within your department. When you’re making this kind 
of money available, even though it’s small potatoes compared 
to the overall benefit, as you have suggested, it is public money 
and it does require that very precise and direct oversight. 
 
And I think, from what you’ve indicated tonight, that oversight 
has not been available on this project. And I think that, on 
behalf of the taxpayers of this province, I must protest that lack 
of oversight and require of your ministry and of your 
department that you ask the Farm Rail Car Coalition for audited 
statements immediately — not at their convenience, but 
immediately. 
 
I also understand that the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
has provided technical assistance to the Farm Rail Car Coalition 
since its inception. I’m wondering if there are other types of 
in-kind services that the department is providing to the coalition 
at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I can assure the member, as I did 
earlier on, that the department is not lackadaisical in its 
operations and that we have seen draft audited statements and 

we have had ongoing working relationship with the FRCC over 
this period, from ’96 until the current time. 
 
I think it’s very, very important to recognize the benefit, as 
compared to the investment, as well. And I think any 
implication of irresponsibility will be well refuted with the 
audited statement, and certainly will be well refuted with the 
results of a successful bid. 
 
Secondly, you asked about in-kind support. And there has been 
in-kind support in developing the proposal and in terms of the 
current decision to provide an additional . . . up to an additional 
$450,000. We are accounting in that in-kind and technical 
support for the Farm Rail Car Coalition as well. And we think 
that that’s been a real benefit both for the Farm Rail Car 
Coalition and for ongoing understanding of the department 
through this period. 
 
(23:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, through the chairman, would you 
be able to tell me if there will be any wages paid out of the 
$450,000 the department intends to advance to the FRCC? And 
if so, to whom will they be paid? 
 
And secondarily, can you tell me where we would find the 
offices of the Farm Rail Car Coalition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — At this point the only salaries that we 
are aware of that will be paid out of any of the grant monies 
from any of the partners would be the salary for Sinclair 
Harrison who is the president — I believe is the title — of 
FRCC and one part-time support staff who works with him. 
 
Other funding that would be going out would be for technical 
consultants, and also for legal advice and for preparation of the 
bid. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you, my appreciation to 
the minister. Just carrying this issue one step further. You know 
one of the things that we’ve talked about is the benefit that this 
proposal will allow farmers. The benefits will accrue generally 
to farmers. And while I might be able to accept that assertion on 
face value, I think that governments are going to be much more 
cautious about making these kinds of commitments without a 
pretty thorough policy and analysis review. 
 
And I guess the question I would pose to the minister now is 
this: has the proposal by the Farm Rail Car Coalition been 
submitted to a full policy analysis within the department by 
policy specialists and analysts within the department or within 
the farm . . . the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, and/or 
has it been looked at and has it been reviewed by any other 
department? 
 
I would consider the Department of Finance one of the more 
logical departments to look at this very kind of question 
because it could ultimately involve a substantial commitment 
from the province or it might have a very significant impact on 
the economy of the province. So I would assume that these 
kinds of very clear policy analysis would have been 
accomplished. 
 



2514 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2002 

 

Can the minister confirm or deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I can confirm that clear policy analysis 
has happened through the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. 
The request was brought forward through them to Finance, the 
Treasury Board, and a cabinet decision item was taken on that. 
And with the analysis a decision was made to go ahead and 
provide this funding for the Farm Rail Car Coalition on an 
incremental basis. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, through the 
Chairman to the minister. In view of the analysis that you have 
indicated was undertaken and achieved, was there any further 
consideration given by the department or by the government 
generally to involve itself further with this proposal if financing 
became a problem at any time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We did very careful analysis of the 
situation, considered all the possibilities on this front, and 
advised the Farm Rail Car Coalition that their proposal would 
have to be . . . their proposal and their purchase would have to 
be self-sustaining by the Farm Rail Car Coalition. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In your view, is that 
the position held by other government departments and/or 
agencies? Would a similar view be held by the Crown 
Investments Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — In terms of other departments, to the 
best of my knowledge, which is fairly good, there is no 
difference in understanding or policy. 
 
With regard to the Crown Investments Corporation, you would 
have to ask them that. I have no sense . . . we’re not privy, 
really, to the directions that they will take in terms of their 
investments until they bring those forward. And we have seen 
nothing on that front. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, could you tell me how money 
from the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation is forwarded to 
the Farm Rail Car Coalition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The Treasury Board has given 
permission to the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation to give 
the grant of up to $450,000. And for detail on that, you’ll have 
to ask the Grain Car Corporation through the Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think I would assume from your answer, Mr. 
Minister, that it won’t be a cheque directed or made payable to 
the FRCC. There might be some other way of getting the 
money to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think that’s a fairly safe assumption. 
There won’t be one big cheque for $450,000 cut. As we 
indicated earlier there will be in kind technical work and 
support work by the Grain Car Corporation, and there will be 
incremental cheques as they meet the conditions that are set out. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I 
have reason to believe . . . I have information that the cabinet at 
one time authorized or that there exists authorization for 
negotiations to proceed to purchase all or part of CP (Canadian 

Pacific) Rail. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if the Farm Rail Car Coalition 
proposal fits in with that authorization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Basically that’s the first I’ve heard of 
it. There has been no discussion at the cabinet table during my 
time there and there is nothing in the direction or planning of 
FRCC that has been brought forward that has anything related 
to that involved at all. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, the FRCC proposal talks about 
OmniTRAX as being the corporate partner in their plans for the 
future. And I know that OmniTRAX has been involved in 
substantial short-line activity in this province. 
 
I’m wondering if you can give us any indication of what other 
possible roles OmniTRAX is expecting to or hoping to play as 
part of the transportation system in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — As you were probably made aware at 
the briefing there, a number of partners; the FRCC as your 
words indicated earlier, is a relatively open coalition and the 
OmniTRAX participation in that, as a technical part of their . . . 
of the FRCC planning and operation, is a very important role. 
 
OmniTRAX, as a short-line rail operator in the province, is 
playing a substantial and important role in the province. But in 
terms of what their corporate plans might be, we’re not privy to 
those either. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, in view of the potential — or the 
need I guess, not just the potential, the reality — for significant 
repairs to many of the cars that the FRCC is hoping to purchase, 
it would appear to make sense that those repairs be done here in 
Saskatchewan. And with OmniTRAX’s expertise as a rail 
operator, they would make the most logical partner in that 
effort. 
 
Would you agree that they would potentially be the benefactor 
of this particular arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I don’t think that we can really 
speculate on who all might be involved in potential of repairing 
those cars. I mean, there’s a world out there with all kinds of 
people who might bid. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I want to thank you and your 
officials for tolerating this marathon tonight. It could have gone 
longer by agreement but I told the Deputy House Leader on the 
government side that we’d quit at midnight. 
 
And I want to express my appreciation once again for your 
attendance here and for dealing with the issues as directly as 
you have. Thank you very much. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 00:01. 
 


