















































Hansard: March 15, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 9 
 March 15, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
on this first day of the session to present petitions from people 
who are concerned about the way the current tobacco legislation 
is worded. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
I present this on behalf of citizens from the communities of 
Nipawin and Codette, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise in the 
House to present a petition regarding the condition of some of 
our highways in this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in this area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Francis, 
Fillmore, Weyburn, and most importantly, Williston area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of the 
people from Swift Current and southwest Saskatchewan 
concerned about tobacco control legislation in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the petition could be 
summarized as follows: 
 

That the petitioners would like it to be made illegal for 
anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of any 
tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Swift 
Current and Pennant, Saskatchewan. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 7 ask the government the following question: 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: for the 
fiscal year of 1999-2000, how many contracts were let for 
the construction, maintenance, and repairs related to 
Saskatchewan highways and the total value of these 
contracts; of the contracts let, how many came under legal 
dispute between the government and the contractor and 
what was the total value of these disputed contractors; and 
how much did the Department of Highways and 
Transportation pay in legal fees in resolutions of these 
disputes? 

 
And I have the same questions for three years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 7 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: regarding the North 
Battleford Water Inquiry, what is the cost of the North 
Battleford Water Inquiry to date; what is the estimate of 
further costs? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all the 
members of this House, I’d like to introduce several guests I 
invited here for this day. It’s a special day for me getting into 
this new job. 
 
Up in the west gallery is my mom, Agnes Forbes from 
Mortlach, Saskatchewan. And I would like to say that she first 
brought me to this House when I was seven years old, some 39 
years ago, on a bus from Mortlach with my brother — sitting 
beside her — toured this building, and then we took a . . . went 
to the provincial exhibition. So it was a pretty special day. And 
here I am now. 
 
As well, up there is my brother Reg from Moose Jaw and my 
sister-in-law Collette from Regina here, and my brother Jerry 
and Sandra who operate an organic farm at Mortlach, 
Saskatchewan. And as well, my wife Dawn Martin and my son 
Reilly Forbes, of course from Saskatoon. 
 
And further up, at the very top, my brother Mick — he’s from 
Regina Beach — and Rick Forbes from Martensville, and his 
brother-in-law, Walter. 
 
As well, I invited some guests in the gallery . . . the Speaker’s 
gallery — Laura Kusisto, and I’ll talk a little bit about her later, 
because we have a strong tradition of debating. That was one of 
my favourite things. And she brought a friend as well. 
 
So I’d like you all to welcome my guests today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canada’s War Against Terrorism 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise to talk about an issue that’s very important to all of 
us. 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, no conflicts have been fought on Canadian soil 
since 1812. While we were involved in the two world wars and 
the Korean conflict, much of our efforts have been focused on 
peacekeeping throughout the world for the last 50 years or 
more. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, we have become very complacent 
about our freedom, taking it for granted and assuming that it 
would always be there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that all changed on September 11. That day 
proved conclusively that we in North America are as vulnerable 
to terrorist activities as the rest of the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past few years since 1989, governments 
have cashed in on the peace dividend. Yet while it seemed there 
is no need for military force as Canada kept a small but highly 
trained and efficient military contingent, Mr. Speaker, this 
contingent has now been called upon to help stop terrorism and 
preserve our safety and security here at home. 
 
It has been asked to implement its tremendous skills in the very 
hostile conditions in Afghanistan. Our military is proving 
beyond a shadow of a doubt that it can stand shoulder to 
shoulder with the defenders of freedom and make us all proud 
here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
paying tribute to our servicemen and women who are putting 
their lives on the line to protect the world from the evils of 
terrorism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thank You To People of Saskatoon Idylwyld 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to thank the people of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld for their support on November 8. I’m 
honoured to have received such a strong mandate — about 58 
per cent of the popular vote. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, people took the measure of the opposition 
and cast a vote for the confidence for the Premier and the 
government that listens and has a positive, realistic, doable 
plan. The people of Saskatoon Idylwyld have rejected the 
opposition’s ideology of cutbacks, and the people of Saskatoon 
Idylwyld want a government and society that is decent and 
caring, concerned about children and families and make these 
values part of its everyday affairs. 
 
And no program better exemplifies these values than the Early 
Childhood Development Strategy that we’re launching. This 
strategy focuses on special services and early intervention for 
children with serious health, education, or developmental 
challenges. And that’s progress. Real progress that improves the 
quality of life for children in Saskatoon Idylwyld and in 
Saskatchewan. These challenges may change but the resolve 
and spirit of Saskatchewan remains the same. 
 
The people of Saskatoon Idylwyld made their choice on 
November 8 and I’m happy that they chose us. Our plan is 
doable, positive, and realistic. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
just a short while ago I had the honour of making an appearance 
on Z99’s 15th Annual Radiothon. This annual event put on by 
radio station Z99 raises money for the neonatal intensive care 
unit at Regina General Hospital. For those of you who aren’t 
familiar with the event Z99’s morning hosts, CC and Lorie, stay 
up for 36 consecutive hours and ask for donations of support 
while doing so. The Regina community has proven over and 
over again how much it believes in this worthwhile project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since it started, Z99’s Radiothon has raised about 
a million dollars for essential equipment for the NICU (neonatal 
intensive care unit) at the Regina General Hospital. The 
outpouring of generosity and support for this event is incredible 
and it’s a testament to the compassionate and caring nature of 
Saskatchewan’s residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus, I was proud to make a donation of $500, and it may still 
be growing, to Z99’s Radiothon. I wish CC, Lorie, and Buzz all 
the best, and congratulate Z99 on yet another very successful 
Radiothon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Graduates 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what do 
you and about a dozen members of this House have in 
common? Two things at least. You’re all graduates of the 
University of Saskatchewan and you work here. That makes 
you and your colleagues, Mr. Speaker, like a very large number 
of your fellow graduates. The U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) annual report proves it — and it’s more good 
news for Saskatchewan. 
 
According to the survey 90 per cent of graduates had good jobs 
five years after graduation and several others were pursuing 
further education. Here’s the really good news, Mr. Speaker. Of 
the 1,600 or so graduates interviewed, more than 75 per cent 
continued to live and work in the province. 
 
We have similar numbers for SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) students, graduates, Mr. 
Speaker — 93 per cent of those are working here. The children 
are staying here, Mr. Speaker, and they are the driving force 
behind our 21st century economy — more good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 
February 17 to February 23 the city of Humboldt hosted the 
best ever Saskatchewan Winter Games. Approximately 700 
people from Humboldt and area came forward to volunteer their 
time and energy to make this event a great success. A total of 
1,667 athletes, coaches, and managers were accommodated and 
cared for by these enthusiastic volunteers, spearheaded by 
Co-Chairs Val McNally and Michael Suchan. 
 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

 

Thirteen sports were offered to the nine game zones in the 
province. Zone 9 representing northern Saskatchewan 
participated as a separate zone for the first time ever in the 
Saskatchewan Winter Games. Zone 2, which is Regina, won the 
games flag for the highest point total. Zone 7, North Battleford 
Kindersley, was the recipient of the Joe Griffiths trophy, which 
is presented to the zone that improves the most in performance. 
 
In the words of Co-Chair Michael Suchan, these games have 
showcased fine young athletes from all corners of this province 
and they provided exciting entertainment which will not be 
forgotten in a long, long time. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, the 2002 Saskatchewan Winter Games 
was a wonderful week of friendship, fellowship, and a lot of 
fun. It was awesome, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Humboldt, for a 
job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, CC, 
Lorie, and Buzz at Z99 are at it again. This is their 15th annual 
Radiothon. We are very, very proud of the job that the Z does 
and that their more than able hosts are doing. 
 
Reginans are responding, as are honorary Reginans this day, 
Mr. Speaker. The 15th Annual Radiothon will result in money 
to purchase life-saving incubators and radiant warmers. The 
neonatal intensive care unit in Regina will benefit and will be 
even better able to provide a new level of support when babies 
need it most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to give out . . . to share how we can make 
donations. We can either show up at the Cornwall Centre in 
person or we can phone 522-5437 — that’s 522-KIDS — or we 
can even make donations on-line at www.Z99. All of that’s 
available to us until 6 p.m. today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This 15th annual fundraiser will make the total raised in excess 
of $1 million, Mr. Speaker. I think we all owe CC, Lorie, and 
Buzz, and Z99 a tremendous debt of gratitude and our sincerest 
thanks for topping $1 million in 15 short years. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

Congratulations to Saskatchewan’s Brier Representatives 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, curling fans throughout 
Saskatchewan will be on the edge of their seats this afternoon as 
the foursome of Scott Bitz, Mark Lang, Brian McCusker, and 
Kelly Moskowy begin their final drive to the Brier 
championship. 
 
After a slow start this week, the Bitz team has rattled off five 
straight victories to advance to the playoffs. Nowhere in the 
world is the popularity of curling higher than right here in 
Saskatchewan. Our history is filled with the best curlers in the 

world. Names such as Richardson and Campbell and many, 
many others. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join with the residents of 
this great province to thank Scott and his team. We wish them 
the best of luck as they begin play on the final weekend of the 
2002 Brier. They’ve already done this province proud. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Development in Melville 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to present one of the first members’ statements in the 
third session of the 24th legislature. It gives me even greater 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, it is about my constituency of Melville, 
in particular the development in the city of Melville. 
 
Every year in rural Saskatchewan, regardless of economics, 
residents work hard and they prosper. Some of the most 
innovative, enthusiastic residents live in the city of Melville. 
They believe in buying and investing locally. They believe in 
expanding their businesses and creating new interests. 
 
The city of Melville has seen significant growth in the 
commercial sector over the past several months in the 
downtown area and on the outskirts of Melville. 
 
Dale and Joanne Holowaty have opened a new A & W 
franchise on Highway No. 10 — home to good food and an 
employer of 20 full and part-time people. 
 
Downtown, Garth Kowalchuk, owner of Kowalchuk Meats, has 
expanded his retail location. 
 
Anchor Water Conditioning, owned by Frank Melanson, has 
opened a new downtown store. Donna Gadica has increased her 
business presence by opening a second store, the Cornerstone 
Market, Mr. Speaker. It’s not just the business owners that are 
helping the community. The city council, led by Mayor Fisher, 
is considering hiring a full-time economic development officer 
to help with the expansion and attraction of new business 
opportunities. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think our prestigious editor of the 
Melville Advance, Lin Orosz, has it right when in a previous 
column, he said: 
 

Economic development isn’t a science, it’s an attitude. 
 
Come to think of it, Mr. Speaker, I think we have heard that 
here in the legislature from the Premier — something those 
people don’t understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Plans for the Growth of Saskatchewan’s Economy 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As everyone is 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

painfully aware, earlier this week, census figures were released 
and a short time later, I received an e-mail from a young couple 
here in Regina. It said, and I quote: 
 

Please get something done about the dwindling population 
of the province and of Regina. As a professional couple in 
our twenties, my fiancé and I are actually having to justify 
staying in this province. No longer is it a matter of coming 
up with reasons to leave, but rather reasons to stay. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the problem. The NDP (New Democratic 
Party) keeps giving young people reasons to leave instead of 
reasons to stay. Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP have no plan to 
keep young people here? Why does the NDP have no plan to 
grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, two points. 
 
Obviously the content of this session will be to debate plans. 
The debate will be between a plan outlined yesterday in the 
Throne Speech, a plan that talks about investing in our 
economy, a plan that talks about building our infrastructure, a 
plan that talks about building quality education and quality, 
healthy families in Saskatchewan; between a plan that talks 
about unsustainable tax cuts, major sell-off of our assets, and 
decimation of the public service. That will be the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s no debate — there’s no debate that we have 
challenges, and there’s no debate among us that we need to do 
something. We need to do something for our young people and 
the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker. We know we’re going to hear a 
lot of doom and gloom from that opposition during the course 
of this session. And I tell you today, Mr. Speaker, no amount of 
doom and gloom from that group of men and women is going to 
deter this government or the people of Saskatchewan from 
building the province of opportunity here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
those aren’t my words. Those are the words of a young couple 
who would love to stay in Saskatchewan. They want to stay 
here but they say, and I quote: 
 

Sadly we have reached the pinnacle of our job 
opportunities in this province. And these are our first jobs 
out of university. The opportunities for advancement in this 
province simply do not exist right now. We love living in 
Regina and in this province, but the sad fact is, if 
opportunities still do not exist in two or three years, we will 
be gone too. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this heartbreaking decision is being made 
thousands of times across this province — people who love 
Saskatchewan, considering leaving. 
 
My question again to the Premier: why don’t you have a plan to 
keep these people here? Why don’t you have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Before the Premier responds, I would just 

remind all members including the Leader of the Opposition to 
address all remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the 
course of the next several days in this House, we will be, in 
fact, be debating a substantive plan to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan people, to grow our province, to build our 
economy, and to make this the province of opportunity in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A plan that talks about substantive, substantive investments in 
our economy, partnering with the private sector, partnering with 
the co-operative sector; a government that works with people; a 
government that works with the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A plan that talks about investment in education. And we’ve 
heard this morning how our students graduating out of 
university — by the report of the university itself — now 
indicates that 75 per cent of our students are finding 
employment in this province. And out of our technical schools, 
93 per cent of those students are finding employment in this 
province. 
 
But it’s not good enough. And so we have a plan to build the 
economy, to build education, to build healthy and resilient 
families, and to build the infrastructure that makes it happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s 
response indicates he wasn’t listening to the words of this 
young couple. Will he then listen to the people who create jobs 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
Business leaders are saying of his Throne Speech that it shows 
no plan of the NDP to grow this province, no plan to grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce said: 
 

I don’t see anything that’s going to stimulate the type of 
employment and growth the province needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business 
said that: 
 

. . . the Throne Speech was a disappointment for small 
business owners . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, business has also lost confidence in this 
government and they too are leaving this province in record 
numbers. When is the NDP going to listen to somebody? When 
is the NDP going to put forward a plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as Her Honour was 
pointing out in the Throne Speech yesterday, we have spent 
much of the time since this House adjourned in meeting with 
and listening to people of Saskatchewan. This government and 
this caucus travelled the province, as you well know, Mr. 
Speaker, visited 90 separate communities, covered 15,000 miles 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

 

and spoke to 6,000 people on what we called the summer bus 
tour. Since then we’ve been meeting with people right, left, and 
centre. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition went out on his own tour to 
talk about his plan. I call it not a bus tour — it was a busted 
tour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — How many people, Mr. Speaker, came 
out to hear the plan of the Leader of the Opposition? Well, 
minimal. We are listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve developed a solid plan based on listening and talking 
with the people of Saskatchewan and we intend to implement 
that plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this couple wrote to the Premier several weeks ago and he 
hasn’t even bothered to respond. I think that indicates how 
much he’s listening. 
 
There’s a very clear way to measure the performance of a 
government: are more people moving in or are they moving 
out? In Saskatchewan today a lot more people are moving out. 
That’s the record of this NDP government — no plan, no 
vision, squandered opportunities, and thousands of people 
leaving the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is not gloom and doom. 
We have a plan to grow Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have a 
plan; the NDP does not. When is the NDP government and 
when is the Premier going to admit that they in fact are driving 
people from Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated earlier, 
there is no debate about the challenge that faces all of us in this 
House, all of us as leaders in this province, that we need to 
attend to the challenges and problems that face our people and 
the dwindling population that we’ve seen in the last several 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member . . . the Leader of the Opposition 
knows the challenge. He should know; he’s from rural 
Saskatchewan. He knows the challenge that agriculture’s faced 
in our province. He knows the twenty-six thousands of jobs that 
have left agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he should . . . he should on occasion talk to some 
of his own constituents. Mr. Speaker, I understand that in search 
of a plan or to sell his plan, that the Leader of the Opposition, 
last night, spent time in Calgary, Alberta — Calgary, Alberta. 
Now I wonder, Mr. Speaker, when he was in Calgary, Alberta if 
he learned about their 11,000 jobs that have been lost in 
Alberta, while we’ve seen job growth in Saskatchewan. I 
wonder if he’s learned about the tax increases that are coming 
in Alberta, while we’re trying to hold the line. I wonder if he 
. . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one year 
ago the new Premier took over from Roy Romanow. And we 
quickly learned that there’s one thing absolutely certain, he is 
no Roy Romanow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Instead, Mr. Speaker, instead of coming up with a 
plan to grow Saskatchewan, the Premier decided . . . what did 
he decide? He decided to grow the government. And look at the 
results we have today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after Roy Romanow balanced the budget for six 
consecutive years, this Premier, this Premier sitting over here, 
gave Saskatchewan a $500 million deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did this Premier lose control so quickly? 
How did he go from a huge surplus to a massive deficit in one 
short year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is a interesting 
question from the particular member from Humboldt, who 
stands in her place today levelling criticism at a government 
who, in last year’s budget when substantial resources were 
available to us, where did we put those resources, Mr. Speaker, 
we put then into child protection workers. Into child protection 
workers, an issue that I know that member has been bringing to 
this House for some years. We put revenues into, when 
available, into important public services for the children and 
families of Saskatchewan. She stands in the House today and 
criticizes. 
 
Last session — we all remember, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan remember last session — when day after day 
after day, that opposition said spend more, spend more, spend 
more; spend the Fiscal Stabilization. They say spend the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
Now when we use that fund to support the children and families 
of Saskatchewan, that member stands up and criticizes it. It’s 
unbelievable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing about spending; 
spending more is not necessarily the way, but spending smarter 
is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it’s now very clearly evident that 
growing the government is not the way to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year the NDP gave us more government. They gave us 
more government interference. They gave us bigger Crowns. 
They gave us more Crowns competing with private business. 
And what was the result, Mr. Speaker? Fewer jobs, and fewer 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

people, and a $500 million deficit. And now we look at this 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and what are they promising 
again? They’re promising more of the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government learn that Crown 
corporations competing with private business is not the way to 
grow the economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member suggests that 
government should spend smarter. Then I ask her, when she 
next gets to her feet, to explain to this government what would 
be smarter than spending on the children and families of 
Saskatchewan? What would be smarter than rebuilding the 
highways network and road infrastructure of Saskatchewan — 
800 kilometres last year? What would be smarter than investing 
in internets to communities across rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to hear the answer. Nothing has 
changed. They just holler from their seats. What could be 
smarter? She said we’re doing more of the same in this Throne 
Speech. You bet we’re doing more of the same. We are building 
the road infrastructure of this province to build its economy. We 
are investing in our families. We are investing in education. We 
are investing in new technology. You bet we’re doing more of 
the same because it’s the right thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Response to Declining Provincial Population 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not surprising that Saskatchewan is losing people 
today. We have an Economic Development minister, Mr. 
Speaker, who believes, if you can manage, that losing 
population is a good thing. He says that losing people, losing 
taxpayers, from the province of Saskatchewan is a good thing 
because there’s more left for the rest of us, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what the Minister of Economic Development said in the face of 
the falling population numbers that came out from the recent 
census. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we understand that this particular minister 
. . . There’s rumours that this minister has been casting around 
for other private sector employment. We’d suggest to him to 
stroke the London School of Economics from his list, Mr. 
Speaker, for theories like that. 
 
The question however, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. His 
Minister of Economic Development has said that losing people 
is a good thing because there will be more left for the rest of us. 
The question is this to the Premier: does he agree with the 
Minister of Economic Development? Is that his policy as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I do not expect that 
member or members opposite to get things straight. Obviously 
he’s misquoting the Minister of Economic Development. Why 
would I expect them to get it straight when they can’t, even 
among themselves, get their own party policies straight? 
 

We got their critic for Economic Development out here in the 
hallway saying, well no, we don’t think, I’m not sure, we don’t 
know if we can keep up the tax regime that’s being put in place 
by government. We don’t know if we can do that. 
 
Then the leader of the party has to come out and say no, no, that 
guy he doesn’t know what he’s talking about, here’s the policy. 
 
Well there’s the . . . you see there’s the . . . How can we accept 
the quote from the member from Swift Current when they can’t 
even explain their own party policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well actually the quote 
from the Premier’s Minister of Economic Development is 
exactly this, this is the exact quote: 
 

What it looks like to me (in response to falling population 
numbers) . . . 
 
What it looks like to me is more wealth for a similar 
number of people (the minister said). 

 
That is exactly what he said, Mr. Speaker. And maybe we’re 
being a little bit hard on the NDP, the minister, and the Premier, 
because maybe there is actually a case where this new ingenious 
theory from the minister actually works. Maybe there is one 
group of people whose out-migration from Saskatchewan may 
benefit the economy. It we could just get rid of that population 
right over there . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — If we could get rid of the NDP there might be 
more for the rest of us — more investment, more jobs, more 
opportunity, and more hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier is this: will he stand up 
in the legislature today and reassure the people of this province 
that he thinks the statement by his Minister of Economic 
Development, that losing people is a good thing, is dead wrong? 
Will he do that today, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member, I think a few 
moments ago, talked about the London School of Economics. 
It’s obvious he hasn’t spent much time there. The fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, in the last decade — in the last decade 
— this province has shown growth in gross domestic product at 
a rate higher than any other jurisdiction in Canada, if not North 
America. 
 
We have grown the GDP (gross domestic product). The result 
of growing your GDP is more wealth per capita. That’s the 
simple, economic truth. And the member should be 
congratulating the people of Saskatchewan and the leadership 
of this government for growing the GDP. Never mind that 
we’ve been growing the GDP, we’ve been paying off debt, 
we’ve been lowering taxes, we’ve been making Saskatchewan 
competitive in the Canadian economy. And where does it show, 
Mr. Speaker? It shows in the optimism and confidence of 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

 

Saskatchewan people. 
 
I have headline after headline: “Local businesses optimistic 
about 2002”; “Regina ranks high as a place to do business”; 
“Saskatchewan leads the way”; “Saskatoon ranked high.” And 
on and on it goes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, recently it 
was announced that the NDP lost . . . confirmed the NDP lost 
$28 million in potatoes, and the minister characterized that as, 
largely successful. They . . . the NDP racked up a $500 million 
budget deficit; the Finance minister calls it good fiscal 
management. 
 
And now the NDP drive out still more people from the province 
of Saskatchewan, and the Economic Development minister 
says, that’s a good thing. That’s apparently part of the plan. Mr. 
Speaker, God forbid, we have another depression, these people 
will be dancing in the streets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can’t stand 
many more NDP successes. Does the Premier really believe that 
losing taxpayers is a good thing for the economy? And if he 
does, he should let us in on his targets. What exactly is the NDP 
government’s target for how many taxpayers they need to get 
rid of before there’s enough for the rest of us? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on the issue of 
diversification in agriculture, on the issue of meeting new 
markets, the member will know — or if he doesn’t he should 
know, and all members opposite should know — that the potato 
industry in this province has grown from an industry of about 
200 acres to an industry of 10,000 acres. 
 
It has grown from an industry in value about 4 million, if you 
were growing wheat on that land, to a value of 25 million. 
That’s what’s happening out there with Saskatchewan people 
leading the way. And on and on it goes. 
 
We’ve just received, as a province, very good news from 
KPMG in the ranking of the competitiveness of our cities. 
Saskatchewan cities, more competitive — more competitive 
than Winnipeg, more competitive than Vancouver, and more 
competitive, if I may say, than Calgary, where the Leader of the 
Opposition and his colleagues think they have to go to get 
public policy ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Safety Net Program 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while the 
Premier’s on the topic of agriculture, I have a few questions for 
him as well. This Throne Speech is a sorry excuse of a 
document when it comes to agriculture as well. 
 
Saskatchewan has just gone through one of the driest years on 

record, and with existing moisture levels, producers are not all 
that optimistic about this year, either. Yet there is not a word in 
this Throne Speech about the difficulties the farm people of this 
province . . . the farm families of this province face this year, as 
a result of last year’s drought and the prospects of another one. 
 
In every Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, in every Throne Speech, 
in every budget since they ripped up the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) contracts back in 1992 this government has 
promised a long-term safety net. And yet we see nothing in the 
Throne Speech whatsoever. 
 
A program which the farm people of this province need in dry 
years like we’ve experienced and like we may experience again. 
But this Throne Speech only promotes the idea of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member go directly to the question 
please? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Minister, will the minister or will the 
Premier explain to the farm families of this province why they 
have not established and implemented a long-term safety net for 
the farm families of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think even the 
member opposite would concede that in building a long-term 
safety net program for producers in Saskatchewan, that 
long-term program needs the involvement of our national 
government just as producers across the road in the United 
States or in Europe have the support of their national 
government. 
 
Even that member, I think, would agree that a long-term safety 
net program needs the support of the national government. Our 
Minister of Agriculture has advanced such a program, has 
earned the support of producers across Saskatchewan and the 
farm organizations for just such a program. 
 
Interestingly enough we have had Liberal members of 
parliament, members of the federal Liberal government are 
calling on their own government for support. There seems to be 
. . . there’s only one voice left in support of the federal Liberal 
government, and that’s the Agriculture critic of the 
Saskatchewan Party. He comes out in the press this past week 
in support of the Liberal government in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just what we don’t need, is the support of 
the Saskatchewan Party for our national government. We need 
to stand together from this province, from this House, in 
involving and calling upon the national government to support 
our farm families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the farm families of 
this province wonder from you, how long do you need . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to rephrase 
his question and speak to the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the farm families of this province 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

wonder from this government, how long do they need? They’ve 
had 10 years since they ripped up the GRIP contracts of farm 
families, 10 years they have promised in every Throne Speech, 
in every budget, that they would implement a long-term safety 
net. 
 
And now we see the federal government saying, in negotiations 
with the Minister of Agriculture, that we can’t possibly see one 
this year; we may not even see one in year 2003. These words 
came directly from the Finance minister at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 
last week. 
 
So I ask the Minister of Agriculture or the Premier, what are the 
farm families of this province supposed to do this year? 
They’ve drained their NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) accounts. They got nothing from CFIP (Canadian 
Farm Income Program) but a big bill from their accountant. 
And now they’ve had their provincial government slash the 
crop insurance program. They have cut the spot loss hail 
program. They have cut the variable price program. 
 
Mr. Premier, why is the NDP government cutting the last viable 
safety net farm families in this province have — the crop 
insurance program — when they need it most desperately at this 
time when we’re affected by drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, he hasn’t paid any attention. 
Mr. Speaker, thank you for the recognition. I want to begin my 
comments by saying, Mr. Speaker, that the safety net programs 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker, have been there now for the last six 
years. 
 
We’ve had CFIP. We’ve had AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance). We had crop insurance, and we have 
NISA. That’s been our safety net program for the last six years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don’t like the safety net program. But when the 
member opposite stands up and makes the comment that he 
supports the federal government in his approach to sustain the 
funding where it is today, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people at 
the plant biology centre in Saskatoon, if you were a plant, 
would say he’s got head blight, Mr. Speaker. Because there’s 
nobody in Saskatchewan today who believes that we should 
have reductions today in the money from the federal 
government. 
 
We’re working together, Mr. Speaker, to build a strong safety 
net in Saskatchewan and in Canada. The member opposite says 
we should do that on our own without federal government. That 
member is the only one, Mr. Speaker, who is standing alone in 
Saskatchewan today saying that provinces should be doing that 
on their own. 
 
And I say shame on you, Mr. Member. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind the Minister of 
Agriculture to direct all of his remarks through the Chair. 
 
(10:45) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

SaskTel Expansion of High-speed Internet Service 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to announce that SaskTel will expand its high-speed 
Internet service to 191 more Saskatchewan communities over 
the next two years. By the end of 2003, 237 communities or 71 
per cent of the population will have access to SaskTel 
high-speed service. SaskTel is well on the way to achieving its 
ultimate goal of reaching 95 per cent of the population with 
high-speed Internet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This significant expansion is directly due to the technical 
synergies associated with the provincial government’s 
CommunityNet initiative. CommunityNet, which was 
announced last year, will provide a high-speed Internet 
connection to more than 1,500 educational institutions, health 
care facilities, and government offices in 366 communities. 
SaskTel is a technology supplier for the program, along with 
SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network). 
 
In 1996, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel was the first communications 
company in North America to offer high-speed Internet service 
using digital subscriber line technology, commonly referred to 
as DSL (digital subscriber line) technology. In December of 
2000, just nine communities in the province had access to 
SaskTel high-speed Internet service. By the end of 2001, 46 
communities had the service and that truly was just the 
beginning. 
 
Today’s announcement is significant for a number of reasons. 
First, SaskTel is one of the few communication companies 
willing to expand high-speed service to communities with 
populations as low as 500 people, Mr. Speaker. There are many 
locations with significantly larger populations that do not yet 
have high-speed Internet access. 
 
SaskTel’s mandate, as Saskatchewan’s own communications 
company, is the highly . . . in the highly competitive converging 
market, is to bring Saskatchewan people the best technology at 
a competitive price to as many communities as possible. As 
well, expanding service to so many smaller communities will be 
a great technological and administrative achievement. 
 
The infrastructure required to connect Saskatchewan people to 
the world is extensive. It requires a large capital investment and 
a tremendous amount of technical expertise. Economic 
development, educational opportunities, and improved access to 
health care are only some of the benefits high-speed Internet 
can bring to a community. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is proud to bring high-speed 
Internet service to more Saskatchewan people. This expansion 
will connect our communities as never before, Mr. Speaker. As 
always, SaskTel is leading the way. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise and respond to 
the minister’s statement on behalf of the official opposition. 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? When any organization, 
including a government, runs out of ideas, when they have no 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

 

new ideas, when they have nothing new to offer, they tend to 
simply re-announce what they’ve already done. And largely, 
largely today, largely today that’s what we’re talking about. The 
minister was talking about CommunityNet and its benefits and 
so they wanted to re-announce something that, frankly, is old 
news in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I think they’re . . . I think that there is nobody on this side 
of the House that wouldn’t agree that connectivity is important 
for rural Saskatchewan as well as it is for urban Saskatchewan. 
Nobody on this side of the House disputes that it is an important 
. . . connectivity is important for the entire province if we are to 
take full advantage of the knowledge economy. 
 
But once again, we in the province . . . once again we in the 
province of Saskatchewan have taken a unique approach to this 
particular issue. And that unique approach, basically, is all 
government. As it is with this government in almost all of its 
initiatives that relate to the private sector and industry, it’s all 
about government and SaskTel. 
 
And I’ve met with several IT (information technology) 
companies, for example, in this province who are concerned 
with this particular initiative — concerned that SaskTel had 
elbowed them out of the opportunity that might lay ahead in 
terms of connectivity in the province. 
 
It’s the same old story we hear, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 
corporations bullying these small private-sector businesses from 
participating or perhaps from locating here and getting into this 
industry. 
 
So we’re going to continue to watch the CommunityNet 
industry unfold. We’re going to continue to watch as SaskTel 
invests $80 million in Australia and then has kind of a retreaded 
announcement about what they’re doing in the province. People 
will know where our priorities are. 
 
And we certainly, we certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
future when the government looks at these sorts of things, they 
will look first to the private sector and lastly to the government 
sector. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is well known 
. . . By leave, to respond . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member from North Battleford has 
requested leave to respond to the ministerial statement. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleagues. I’m pleased on behalf of the Liberal Party to say 
that we are, we are in favour of the announcement which has 
been made today and we are pleased to see the initiatives that 
SaskTel is taking. 
 
I am aware that members of the Saskatchewan Party last year, 
in this House, ridiculed the idea of high-speed Internet in rural 
Saskatchewan and declared that it would do nothing to build 

rural Saskatchewan. 
 
With all due respect, I disagree. I think if we want to build rural 
Saskatchewan, we need to provide the tools for them to 
participate in the new economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is well-known that the Liberal Party and myself 
personally have enormous problems with many of the 
investments of SaskTel — both in Australia and also to go into 
direct competition in this province in the cable business and in 
the home security business. But this is one investment I am 
pleased to say with which we are in full agreement. I’m aware 
that DSL technology has run into difficulties in the American 
market, and I think that’s an issue the minister needs to look at. 
But the idea of connectivity for rural Saskatchewan is one that I 
am pleased to congratulate SaskTel on. Thank you. 
 
(10:45) 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 
advise members that I will . . . Order. 
 
Before orders of the day, I would like to table four sets of 
documents. First, the members’ accountability and disclosure 
reports for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2001. Second, the 
audited financial statements and schedule of assets of the party 
caucuses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2001. Thirdly, a 
letter of October 22, 2001 from Her Honour regarding the 
membership of the Board of Internal Economy. And fourthly, 
the business and financial plan for the Office of the Provincial 
Auditor for the year ended March 31, 2003. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, I would ask the Assembly to give leave to move several 
routine motions with respect to referral to committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Annual Report to the Standing Committee on 
Communications 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the report of the Legislative Assembly Library, as 
tabled in the present session, be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Communications. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 
Standing Committee on Communications 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move as 
well, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved under 
The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee as 
tabled in the present session be referred to the Standing 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

Committee on Communications. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Public Accounts to the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
be tabled intersessionally and the present session be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Bylaws of Professional Associations to the 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I move, seconded by the member 
for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the bylaws of the professional associations and 
amendments thereto be tabled in the present session be 
referred to the Special Committee on Regulations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
great privilege for me to be able to represent the constituents of 
Saskatoon Greystone. I’m grateful for the support of the 
residents of my constituency and I hope I can continue to serve 
them well. 
 
Today I want to express my appreciation to our Premier for the 
privilege of moving our government’s Speech from the Throne. 
I also want to recognize the ability and the caring attitude of the 
newly elected member for Saskatoon Idylwyld who will second 
the motion in support of the Throne Speech, and who I know 
will represent his constituents in this Assembly with great 
distinction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, I want to express 
special appreciation to my wife, Louise; to my mother, Trudy; 
to my sons, Mark, James, and Michael; and to my stepdaughter, 
Monte, for the wonderful support that they provide me in my 
role as a member of the legislature. I really function much more 
effectively in my role as a result of their wonderful support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech now before us presents the 
people of Saskatchewan with a plan of action for the years 
ahead — a progressive plan of action. It is forged by a 
government that is committed to doing its very best to listen to 
public concerns, and to work with all residents of Saskatchewan 
to build a province of economic opportunity and a province 
where the values of caring, compassion, and co-operation guide 
our decisions. 

Saskatchewan has an enormous amount to be proud of and 
much still to do in order that we may create an even better and 
more equitable society, and be part of creating a better world. 
 
Let us reflect on what we have accomplished. Saskatchewan 
people are leaders in health care and education. Under the 
leadership of successive New Democratic Party governments, 
we have built one of the very best health care systems in the 
world. And we have led the way, Mr. Speaker, in not only 
building this kind of a health care system in Saskatchewan, but 
having all of Canada adopt it. 
 
According to Statistics Canada youth transition survey, 
conducted in the year 2000, we have the very best high school 
graduation rates in all of Canada. 
 
Saskatchewan people lead Canada in their willingness to 
volunteer, contributing their time to thousands of 
community-based organizations across our province. 
 
We also lead the way in Canada by donating to charities at a 
higher per capita level than in any other province. Our citizens, 
Mr. Speaker, are people with a generous heart. 
 
Saskatchewan, under an NDP government, is recognized 
nationally for our good financial management. Our credit rating 
has been upgraded nine times since 1995, a sign of confidence 
in our government’s ability to manage the financial affairs of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan is the fourth richest province in Canada now, Mr. 
Speaker, after Alberta, Ontario, and BC (British Columbia). 
After years of effort, we have now . . . have a diversified 
economy that focuses as much on high tech and value added, as 
it does on primary production. 
 
(11:00) 
 
We have an experienced cadre of seniors, an educated 
workforce, and a large number of youth pursuing higher 
education — the highest percentage of youth pursuing higher 
education in all of Western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — We have a citizenry who have a zeal for 
justice, a great capacity for mercy, and a deep commitment to 
equality. 
 
We are also blessed with remarkable gifts of nature. We have 
almost half the arable farmland in Canada. We are fortunate to 
have a large forest resource and a plentiful supply of minerals. 
In fact we have Canada’s . . . we are now Canada’s third largest 
mineral producer. We have a bountiful supply of fresh water 
with over 90,000 freshwater lakes in Saskatchewan. And we are 
blessed to live in a truly beautiful province. 
 
The potential of our economy, the spirit of our people, the 
blessings of our natural environment, and the quality of our 
public services means that there is enormous opportunity to do 
exciting things in Saskatchewan. The key to our future is 
building wisely with these gifts, creating greater opportunity for 
all our citizens, and safeguarding and improving our natural 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

 

environment and our public services. 
 
This Throne Speech lays out four pillars on which our future 
will be strengthened in the coming two to three years. The first 
is investment in the economy and in the environment. The 
second is investment in infrastructure. The third is provision of 
quality education. And the fourth is provision of quality health 
care and support to families. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by talking about the 
investment in the economy and the environment. 
 
In terms of specifics, Mr. Speaker, before I get into the specifics 
of our strategy in this regard, let me say that for me a healthy 
economy is one with strong employment opportunities; a 
healthy mix of private, co-op, and public sector investment; low 
public debt with low interest payments to finance that debt; 
affordable tax levels; good-quality public services; and policies 
that ensure environmental sustainability is always protected. 
 
A healthy economy is only part of what we as a civil society are 
about, but it is a very important part. A healthy economy allows 
us to provide fulfilling lives for ourselves and our families. And 
it enables us to provide the mutual amenities we cannot provide 
as individuals — good health care, good schools, good roads, 
good infrastructure — means to an end, Mr. Speaker. We 
recognize that we cannot do for all what we wish for ourselves 
unless the economy is functioning in a strong, sustainable, 
responsible fashion. 
 
2001 was not an easy year for the Saskatchewan economy and 
many of our people. The financial consequences of the 
widespread drought, low commodity prices, the softwood 
lumber dispute, and a US (United States) recession — which of 
course negatively impacted on Saskatchewan exports to the US 
— made 2001 difficult. 
 
But there are promising signs of recovery. And our long-term 
trend line over the past decade has been very strong. In the last 
two months, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy has grown 
by 10,000 jobs. Our unemployment rate at 6.1 per cent is the 
second-lowest in Canada. These are the early signs of what will 
hopefully be an economic turnaround in 2002. 
 
In the 1991 to 2000 decade under the New Democratic Party, 
Saskatchewan’s economy outperformed that of every other 
province in Canada in terms of gross domestic product on a per 
capita basis. That growth in GDP, Mr. Speaker, per capita was 
significantly greater than every other province in Canada 
including Alberta. This is a credit to the hard work of our 
citizens and to provincial government policies that are working 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Your government has also worked to make provincial taxes 
more affordable for families by reducing income tax levels by 
almost one-third since 1993. And eliminating income tax for 
over 50,000 Saskatchewan residents. This includes the 
elimination, Mr. Speaker, of the flat tax that the Progressive 
Conservative government brought in in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, 
for so many Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Prebble: — These NDP tax reductions were made possible 
in part by economic growth. And in part because your 
government has reduced Saskatchewan debt by $3.7 billion, 
thus reducing the interest burden Saskatchewan residents are 
asked to carry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard members of the opposition during 
this question period just moments ago in this House say to the 
Premier — and claim to the Premier — that we were running a 
$500 million deficit. That was the words of the member for 
Humboldt. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to set the record straight. 
This is not a deficit budget, Mr. Speaker. We have not run a 
deficit budget in this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have done is we have drawn on a savings 
fund that we set aside two years ago when we could have run a 
large surplus, Mr. Speaker, but didn’t. We put that money away 
in a savings fund. And what did the member for Humboldt and 
other members of the official opposition from the Saskatchewan 
Party say? They said spend the money, spend the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. And we said, Mr. Speaker, we said no, we 
will not do that because that is the way of deficits and debt 
which the predecessors of the Saskatchewan Party run up to the 
amount of $14 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We said no, we won’t spend the money. We’re going to set it 
aside in case times become more difficult. And they have, Mr. 
Speaker; and that money is now there to spend, there to balance 
this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, not . . . (inaudible) . . . budget, 
Mr. Speaker, has been misrepresented by the member for 
Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. This is a balanced budget, drawing on 
the reserves our government had the wisdom to set aside in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, this government has also 
supported and stimulated small business by reducing the 
provincial income tax rate for small business by 40 per cent 
over the past 10 years. Saskatchewan now has more small 
businesses per capita than any other Western Canadian 
province. 
 
As Saskatchewan people, we have built our economy on a 
creative private-sector/co-op-sector/public-sector mix. Our 
Crown corporations are an important part of our economy. They 
provide reliable service to our people in all parts of 
Saskatchewan at the lowest possible cost. Overall we pay less 
for utilities in Saskatchewan than consumers in any other 
province. 
 
Over $400 million is spent by the Crowns every year to expand 
and improve their services, creating thousands of construction 
jobs in Saskatchewan. Because we own our Crowns, their 
profits stay in Saskatchewan to help develop our economy and 
pay for important services like health and education. 
 
Our Crowns employ nearly 9,000 direct employees who work 
in head office jobs and communities right in . . . head offices 
and communities across our province. These jobs, Mr. Speaker, 
are all jobs that are in Saskatchewan. And many of these jobs 
would never exist here if these companies were owned privately 
by companies based outside of Saskatchewan. 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

As the Throne Speech indicates, our plan is to use our Crown 
corporations to partner with private companies in Saskatchewan 
in attracting investment for new and expanded industries. 
 
Our strategy in the use of public corporations that are owned by 
the people of Saskatchewan is very different from that of 
members of the opposition. Progressive Conservatives 
destroyed our Crown sector during those years in office. 
 
And many people in Saskatchewan will recall, Mr. Speaker, the 
sale of billions of dollars of assets by the predecessors of the 
Saskatchewan Party. The sale of those assets at a fraction of 
their worth, Mr. Speaker, and one of the biggest giveaways 
Saskatchewan people have ever witnessed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have spent the last decade rebuilding our 
Crowns, rebuilding their profitability for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They now contribute at least $200 
million a year to our General Revenue Fund, helping to keep 
taxes down for all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And now what is the Saskatchewan Party telling us? If they are 
elected to this Assembly, they are telling us, Mr. Speaker, that 
they want to cut the Crown Corporations to their core, as they 
say. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the plan of the Saskatchewan 
Party is another wholesale sell-off of public assets owned by the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, it’s this attitude that is clearly designed as a 
short-term strategy to generate the revenues that would be 
required to allow them to cut taxes in the short term and have 
Saskatchewan people pay for it in the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a strategy, Mr. Speaker, that is certain to result in the 
significant loss of public services for the people of 
Saskatchewan. So let me make it clear, Mr. Speaker, under an 
NDP government well-run, profitable, public enterprises that 
were built to serve the people of Saskatchewan and create jobs 
and revenue for our people are not for sale on the auction block, 
Mr. Speaker. They are not for sale on the auction block. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see the 
emphasis on research and development in the Throne Speech. 
The Saskatchewan Research Council, our two universities, 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon, the Canadian Light Source 
synchrotron in Saskatoon, and the new forestry development 
centre in Prince Albert provide a significant research capacity in 
our province. 
 
In the past few months I have had the opportunity to meet with 
many graduate students and faculty in the health sciences at the 
University of Saskatchewan, and I know the commitment in the 
Throne Speech to substantially increase health research will be 
very much welcomed by them. This provincial investment in 
health research is pivotal to improving public health, attracting 
federal health research dollars to Saskatchewan, and helping 
ensure retention of our health care specialists in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our province’s cultural community is an important contributor 
to our economy. Our writers, our artists, our performers and 
technicians give form and voice to the values that define us. 

This spring our government will introduce the Saskatchewan 
Status of the Artist Act and we’ll open the new state of the art 
film and video sound stage in Regina, enabling Saskatchewan 
to fully participate in international film and video production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the important announcements in the Throne 
Speech is our provincial government’s comprehensive energy 
strategy which will include an important focus on energy 
conservation, expansion of cogeneration, and development of 
safe, renewable energy resources, including wind power. 
 
An office of energy conservation will be established within 
government, signalling the importance your provincial 
government gives to supporting efforts aimed at promoting 
energy efficiency and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Prime rate loans are available to assist homeowners with the 
purchase of energy efficient furnaces and hot water heaters. 
And several major retrofit projects are now underway within 
government buildings to reduce utility costs, save 
Saskatchewan taxpayers money, and cut carbon dioxide 
emissions. 
 
In the past two years, successful cogeneration initiatives have 
been launched at the Cory potash mine and the Queen Elizabeth 
power plant, and there will be more to come, Mr. Speaker. 
Measures to expand production of ethanol will also be 
announced in the months ahead. 
 
Finally, your provincial government has worked with Ottawa 
and private sector firms to launch two wind power projects in 
Saskatchewan. Last week I had the pleasure to join the Minister 
of the Crown Investments Corporation in an announcement that 
there will be nine more wind turbines and wind towers built in 
the Gull Lake area of Saskatchewan, added to the 17 turbines 
that we built just southeast of Gull Lake last year. Hitachi 
Industries has been selected to build the project’s wind towers, 
and Vestas Canadian Wind Technology Incorporated will 
supply and install the turbines. The total economic impact for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will be $4.1 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working to expand wind power 
in Saskatchewan. I look forward to working with the Minister 
of the Crown Investments Corporation in doing that. And I also 
want to work to promote creative applications of solar energy, 
especially for homes and business heating purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where do members of the opposition stand on 
matters of energy conservation and safe renewable energy 
development? We saw their priorities last time they were in 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Last time they governed the province of Saskatchewan — in 
fact 20 years ago — I recall, Mr. Speaker, that one of the first 
Acts of the Devine administration was to eliminate the office of 
energy conservation, which we are now re-establishing in this 
Throne Speech . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — They not only eliminated that office, but they 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

 

eliminated almost all programs in support of energy 
conservation and renewable energy in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remember a few years ago the current 
House Leader for the Saskatchewan Party came before the 
environmental assessment panel that the federal government 
had set up that was examining a proposal for high-level nuclear 
waste disposal in Canada and came before that panel and 
advocated the establishment of a nuclear reactor in 
Saskatchewan and a nuclear waste disposal facility in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Moosomin from the 
Saskatchewan Party, who I have a good deal of respect for, 
says, and what’s wrong with that? And I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
members on this side of the House say that Saskatchewan 
people don’t want a high-level waste nuclear repository in their 
province. 
 
We stand against that; they stand for that, Mr. Speaker. The 
lines in the sand are clearly drawn on matters of energy policy, 
Mr. Speaker. And we will proudly go to the people of 
Saskatchewan on our policy rejecting their policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — These members, as the member for Moosomin 
now says, they want to take high-level radioactive waste that 
will be hazardous for the next quarter of a million years, they 
want that trucked through the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Truckload after truckload for decades. I say we reject 
that plan, Mr. Speaker. That plan that they have just advocated. 
 
As the member for Moosomin has just said, what’s wrong with 
that, Mr. Speaker? I say there’s a lot wrong with that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech notes that as 
the federal government considers ratifying the proposed Kyoto 
Protocol, our Saskatchewan government will continue to work 
jointly with Canada to evaluate implications of the protocol for 
Saskatchewan’s environment and economy. 
 
This detailed evaluation work very much needs to be done, Mr. 
Speaker. Moreover, provincial governments and the 
Government of Canada need to work out an allocation plan for 
greenhouse gas reduction that is fair to each province. And the 
federal government needs to fully cost share initiatives aimed at 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
With these conditions in place, Mr. Speaker, it is my own 
personal opinion as a member of this legislature that when our 
government makes a final decision on Kyoto, I hope it will be a 
decision in favour of ratification. I stand opposed to the view 
espoused by the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, the 
Canadian Alliance, and the Canadian Manufacturers’ 
Association that we cannot afford the Kyoto Protocol. Wise 
investments in energy conservation will reduce utility bills for 
homeowners and businesses with an excellent payback period 
in the three- to seven-year range depending on the specifics of 

the work that is done. 
 
There is enormous potential for this kind of investment in 
Saskatchewan. In my judgment, strategic energy conservation 
investments that pay for themselves through energy savings will 
make Saskatchewan businesses more competitive than ever. 
They will also create important employment opportunities with 
new jobs in home and business retrofit, wind power, public 
transit, shelterbelt planting, and many other sectors of our 
economy. 
 
In the end, no country in the world, in my judgment, should 
reject the Kyoto Protocol because the costs of doing nothing to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions will be much larger than the 
costs of taking appropriate action. 
 
If the people of the world do not invest to slow down climate 
change, we will pay a very high price in the form of more 
cyclones and tornadoes, more droughts, reduced crop yields in 
many parts of the world, the shrinking of our glaciers and the 
corresponding threat to the rivers that flow from them, rising 
sea levels, coastal flooding, and the spread northward of disease 
and pests. 
 
In my personal judgment, an equitable and sensitively 
developed Kyoto ratification plan is an urgently needed first 
step for Canada and all industrialized countries in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is taking positive new initiatives 
to ensure that the citizens of Saskatchewan have a sustainable, 
safe, clean supply of drinking water. I strongly endorse this 
commitment in the Throne Speech. Many communities in 
Saskatchewan have already benefited from the investment of 
provincial-federal infrastructure money to upgrade water 
treatment systems. Monitoring of water quality in 
Saskatchewan is being improved and training requirements are 
being put in place for all water treatment plant operators. 
 
These are very positive developments, Mr. Speaker, and I will 
be encouraging the adoption of either national or provincial 
standards for water quality rather than the water quality 
guidelines that are currently in place as one additional measure 
that we might look at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are three other matters of environmental 
policy that I want to touch on briefly. I will be encouraging our 
government to ensure protection of the environmentally fragile 
lands in the Great Sand Hills that are being targeted for oil and 
gas development by the RM (rural municipality) of Piapot and 
some oil companies. And I’m very proud of the work that the 
province has done with many other municipalities in the Great 
Sand Hills to ensure that environmentally fragile areas have 
been protected to date, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will also be encouraging our government to examine a 
province-wide ban on the use of herbicides and pesticides in 
school yards, daycare grounds, and children’s playgrounds, in 
light of the growing body of evidence that children, in 
particular, appear to be extremely sensitive to the harmful 
effects of pesticide use. 
 
And I will continue, Mr. Speaker, as I have had in this House 
over the last 20 years, as a personal position, to advocate that 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

uranium mining in Saskatchewan be phased out because of the 
risks associated with high-level, radioactive, waste disposal; 
nuclear reactor accidents; and the diversion of Saskatchewan 
uranium into the nuclear weapons programs of other countries. 
And I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that this is my personal 
view and at this point does not reflect the policies of our 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the important matter of pay 
equity and minimum wage policy. Pay equity is an important 
principle in our contemporary workplace. Our provincial 
government has implemented pay equity for more than 25,000 
workers employed by provincial departments, and agencies, 
Crown corporations, and several training institutions. This is a 
very fine accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I welcome the commitment in the Throne Speech to continue 
encouraging the application of pay equity for the benefit of 
employees in Saskatchewan’s health sector. It is extremely 
important that pay equity be broadened, and the work in the 
health sector is a very important advance. 
 
Also important is our government’s commitment to improved 
wages for staff and community-based organizations; and our 
commitment to improving wages for the lowest-paid workers in 
our society, those on minimum wage. 
 
I want to commend our Minister of Labour for her 
announcement that the minimum wage will rise to $6.35 on 
May 1, and $6.65 on November 1. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — These changes, Mr. Speaker, which our 
government introduces, will bring the minimum wage much 
closer to the poverty line. These wage increases will all be spent 
in Saskatchewan, and will increase the buying power of tens of 
thousands of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you combine these wage increases 
with the elimination of income tax for the lowest income 
workers in our society, with 50,000 people coming off the tax 
rolls, these two measures will clearly benefit those in our 
society who are less fortunate. And it represents exactly the 
kind of measures that this government stands for in contrast to 
the kind of policies the Saskatchewan Party would put forward. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A stark contrast. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A very stark contrast, as my colleague from 
Regina says, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, the residents 
of Saskatchewan saw with the former Progressive Conservative 
government that getting a minimum wage increase out of that 
government, you had to wait many, many, many years for it, 
Mr. Speaker. The minimum wage lost ground continuously and 
was constantly eroded by inflation while members opposite 
were in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s clear that this government, Mr. Speaker, is committed to 
making sure that there is a fair share for all in Saskatchewan 
and that those at the lowest end of the pay sector will be . . . 
their interests will be protected. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a critical element in building a stronger 
Saskatchewan economy is providing greater economic security 
for our farm community. I therefore endorse our Saskatchewan 
government’s proposal for a national farm safety net program. 
This would provide a meaningful insurance program, including 
both crops and forages and a crop sector revenue deficiency 
program that offsets the impact of international subsidies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the second pillar in the 
Throne Speech in terms of developing a province and an 
economy of opportunity, and that is our plan for investments in 
infrastructure. In Saskatchewan, our population is broadly 
dispersed across our province and every one of us understands 
that our roads, our communication system, and our utility 
services are essential for everyday life and are also essential for 
economic development in our province. 
 
Our government has a well-defined infrastructure plan. The 
Throne Speech signals that our government is committed first 
of all, Mr. Speaker, to fixing Saskatchewan roads. We began 
this process last year, Mr. Speaker, and communities across our 
province were excited about the construction happening in their 
local area, Mr. Speaker, and that commitment continues this 
year. 
 
In this fiscal year, we will proceed with plans for 700 
kilometres of highway reconstruction and paving. Moreover, in 
2002 and 2003, your government will also extend high-speed 
Internet to homes and businesses in 191 more communities in 
Saskatchewan, and we just had an excellent announcement of 
the details of that from the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower and SaskEnergy will 
invest $350 million in the year 2002 in infrastructure renewal in 
Saskatchewan. This is welcome news for all Saskatchewan 
residents, Mr. Speaker, and in particular welcome news for 
residents of rural Saskatchewan who will benefit a great deal 
from these financial investments in rural revitalization. 
 
Our Crown corporations play a pivotal role in this process. 
Without Crown corporations like SaskTel, SaskPower, and 
SaskEnergy that are owned by the people, the investments made 
in delivering services to rural communities would almost 
certainly be dramatically reduced. 
 
The private sector would simply never invest in rural 
communities and in rural utility infrastructure at the scale your 
provincial government is able to by using publicly owned 
utilities and ensuring an equitable sharing of costs and revenues 
among all Saskatchewan people — the very principles, Mr. 
Speaker, that the members opposite want to do away with. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about the third pillar of 
our strategy for building a province of economic opportunity, 
and that is the provision of quality education. 
 
Our Premier’s commitment, Mr. Speaker, to public education 
cannot be in any doubt following our last provincial budget. 
What we saw, Mr. Speaker, in that budget is a commitment to 
increasing funding for kindergarten to grade 12 education by 9 
per cent — a 9 per cent increase. In all, Mr. Speaker, provincial 
funding for K to 12 education has been increased by 24 per cent 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

 

over the past four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite you to compare that to the promise made 
by the members of the Saskatchewan Party in the last provincial 
election that the Education budget in Saskatchewan would be 
frozen under their administration. Mr. Speaker, had that freeze 
been implemented, Saskatchewan children and their teachers 
would have been shortchanged tens of millions of dollars under 
a Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
In conjunction, Mr. Speaker, with our coalition members from 
the Liberal Party, our government has doubled the number of 
community schools in Saskatchewan to 83 and has committed 
to the implementation of the concept of SchoolPLUS. 
 
In Saskatoon we have seen this concept very successfully 
implemented at Nutana Collegiate, where important health and 
social services are delivered to students right in the school. I am 
anxious to see this excellent approach to service delivery being 
implemented in many other schools across our province. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, when the Special Committee to Prevent 
the Abuse and Exploitation of Children held public hearings in 
Saskatoon and Regina, concern was expressed about the 
number of children under 16 years of age who are not attending 
school. Despite Saskatchewan’s very high percentage of 
successful high school graduates — the best graduation rate in 
all of Canada — we do face a problem with our urban youth 
dropping out of school at far too young an age. Over 1,000 
children under 16 are not attending school regularly in 
Saskatoon, and the general pattern is similar in Regina. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, is anxious to address this issue, 
and I am anxious to see an expansion of resources aimed at 
assisting children who are no longer attending school being 
supported in a return to school. Where necessary, smaller 
classrooms and transportation should be provided to facilitate 
these children getting an education. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about our 
government’s plans for post-secondary education. In a year 
when revenues are tight, students in post-secondary education 
institutions will be glad to see that our government’s 
commitment to post-secondary education will be maintained. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan is particularly important to the 
residents of my constituency. With the implementation of the 
DesRosiers report, the University of Saskatchewan has received 
an operating grant increase of approximately 10 per cent in the 
last two years, well above the funding levels proposed by the 
Saskatchewan Party in the 1999 election. 
 
The construction of the new Kinesiology Building and the 
capital renovations to the Thorvaldson Building have also been 
fully funded by our government. Moreover, the graduate 
student tax credit has provided a modest measure of tax relief to 
students who graduate from a post-secondary education 
institution and stay in Saskatchewan. This year more than 7,000 
Saskatchewan students should receive the tax credit. I believe it 
is clear that an important reinvestment in public post-secondary 
education has begun under our administration, and I am glad to 

be part of a government that is committed to such a 
reinvestment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the fourth pillar in our . . . in 
our strategy for economic growth and development in 
Saskatchewan and as part of our strategy for building a 
province of opportunity, and that is our strategy with respect to 
supporting healthy and self-reliant families. 
 
This is an extremely high priority for our government, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are pursuing this priority through many 
strategies. The first, Mr. Speaker, is an investment in early 
childhood development, and I’ll have more to say about that in 
a minute. But I want to lay out the overall plan, Mr. Speaker, 
which is an investment in early childhood development; an 
investment in expanding social housing in Saskatchewan; an 
investment in enhancing the building independence program to 
support low-income working families with children; and above 
all, Mr. Speaker, a very significant investment in our 
commitment to a publicly funded, publicly administered 
medicare program in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Kids First program, Mr. Speaker, draws from the success of 
early childhood intervention work in Hawaii that succeeded in 
dramatically reducing the abuse of children in homes where 
children were judged to be at high risk. 
 
Our Saskatchewan program is getting underway now in more 
than a dozen neighbourhoods and communities in 
Saskatchewan. It includes intensive prenatal outreach to 
pregnant women who are using alcohol or drugs. And our goal, 
of course, Mr. Speaker, is to reduce the incidence of fetal 
alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect. 
 
This program, Mr. Speaker, is also providing intensive home 
visiting to provide support to families who are eligible for the 
Kids First program. These families also receive enhanced child 
care and enhanced early learning opportunities for their 
children. 
 
The second part of our strategy here, Mr. Speaker, is the 
building independence program. And this is a program, Mr. 
Speaker, that I am very excited about. This is a program that is 
really part of our cornerstone for having significantly reduced 
child poverty in our province, Mr. Speaker. We are the only 
government in Canada that year after year over the past four 
years has reduced the level of child poverty among our citizens, 
and I think this is an extremely notable accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I might add, Mr. Speaker, that this is an 
accomplishment that was in effect launched by our Premier 
when he was minister of Social Services and is now being 
continued by him in his leadership as head of our government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the net result of this has been that family 
health benefits in Saskatchewan have been extended to more 
than 20,000 families, and income supplements for working 
families who have children have been provided to thousands of 
families across Saskatchewan — thousands of working families 
who are able to better support their children and live in dignity 
as a result of the income supplements that are provided through 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

this initiative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to touch on the third element of our strategy with respect 
to supporting healthy and self-reliant families, and that is our 
commitment to expanding social housing. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan and the governments of Quebec and — 
during the NDP tenure in British Columbia — the Government 
of BC were the only governments in Canada for years that 
supported social housing. The federal government pulled out of 
social housing in 1995 and then 7 out of 10 other governments 
in Canada proceeded to abandon their provincial commitment 
to social housing. Saskatchewan never abandoned that 
commitment. We always provided funding to social housing in 
our budgets throughout this term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased to say now, Mr. Speaker, that in conjunction 
with a renewed interest in social housing from the federal 
government, we will be able to build 1,000 new social housing 
units in Saskatchewan over the next five years — an initiative 
that will be a source of hope and optimism to many 
lower-income families in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to now turn to the question of child 
exploitation in the sex trade which, as you know, is a matter of 
great concern to our government. And the Throne Speech 
makes clear, Mr. Speaker, that we are committed to responding 
to the work of the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade — a committee 
that was co-chaired by myself and the hon. member for 
Humboldt. 
 
I will have more to say about this response in the near future, 
Mr. Speaker. But I am pleased that our government will be 
moving forward to deter sexual predators and to assist children 
who have been victimized. This Assembly has already passed 
legislation permitting the seizure of a vehicle when that vehicle 
is used to commit a prostitution-related offence. The vehicle 
seizure legislation will be coming into force as soon as the 
preparatory work necessary to enforce the new law has been 
completed. 
 
This will add to the financial support our provincial government 
already provides to community-based groups working to stop 
child sexual abuse on our streets. In my home city of Saskatoon 
this includes covering two-thirds of the funding to operate the 
safe house in Saskatoon, providing financial support to parent 
patrol and sign campaign initiatives designed to deter sexual 
predators, providing financial support to the outreach work of 
Egadz, and funding three residential spaces at Calder Centre to 
assist youth on the streets with overcoming addiction problems. 
 
Often, you know, Mr. Speaker, when you listen to members of 
the Saskatchewan Party you’d think that our government was 
not investing anything in this area. But in fact we’re investing 
very significantly to support young people in need in our 
communities, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue that 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, in our response to the special 
committee report when that response is announced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most important social program our provincial 
government delivers is health care services. And this is the final 
area, Mr. Speaker, that I wish to address this afternoon and it’s 
a pivotal part of our strategy to help support and build healthy 

and self-reliant families in our province. 
 
Your provincial government, Mr. Speaker, is deeply committed 
to a publicly funded, publicly administered health care system 
that operates in the public interest. 
 
Earlier this month, Mr. Speaker, our Premier presented our 
government’s views before the Romanow Commission 
hearings, the federal hearings on the future of health care in 
Canada. And our Premier said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

There are essentially two fundamentally different views of 
tomorrow’s health care system. One vision is frankly 
defeatist. Its proponents say medicare cannot be sustained 
and therefore the well off are entitled to a level of service 
that we cannot provide for all. 

 
The other view, my view (the Premier says and this is 
continuing the quote) and the view of my government is 
that the values underlying medicare are sound. Its current 
performance is pretty good and we need to act decisively to 
improve it. 

 
The Premier concluded by saying, quote: 
 

Let us strengthen medicare with the aim of building a better 
Canada. 
 

To which I say, absolutely. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s health care system 
provided the following to our 1 million residents. It provided, 
Mr. Speaker, 4,761,800 visits to family physicians and 920,700 
visits to specialists. 
 
It funded 800,000 days of in-patient hospital care. It provided 
for our 1 million residents: 266,000 radiology services; 125,000 
ultrasounds; 53,600 CT (computerized tomography) scans; and 
more than 10,800 MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging). 
 
402,700 immunizations were provided for both children and 
adults; 44,000 radiation and chemotherapy treatments were 
provided for cancer patients in two dozen communities across 
Saskatchewan; and part of the costs of home care services were 
provided to 29,100 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly this is a health care system which, while it 
needs ongoing improvement, is doing enormously good things 
for the people of Saskatchewan and is delivering those services, 
Mr. Speaker, in a very cost-effective way and in a way that is 
much less expensive than the privatized US health care system 
is able to deliver. Not only is a privatized system, Mr. Speaker, 
as exhibited by the United States, much more expensive but it 
leaves many, many people uncovered. In the case of the United 
States, 42 million of its citizens are uninsured in health . . . no 
health care services. 
 
In the US privatized system, some high school athletes cannot 
compete because they cannot afford the private insurance 
needed to cover after-school activities. No Saskatchewan young 
person has to worry about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that in the US system, managed care 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

 

plans in several states have actually delisted physicians because 
they insisted on treating their patients regardless of cost. Our 
physicians, Mr. Speaker, in Canada and Saskatchewan, need not 
worry about such measures being taken. 
 
Most emphatically, Mr. Speaker, we know that the US direction 
and the direction of privatization is not a direction we want to 
embark on. At a time in Canada when our neighbour, Alberta, is 
beginning to privatize the delivery of medicare, when our 
federal government has reduced its total contribution including 
tax points to the funding of medicare from 50 per cent down to 
20 per cent, and when other provinces are delisting services or 
increasing health care premiums, Saskatchewan, our 
government and our Manitoba partners, stand alone in the battle 
to protect and fight for medicare in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, we stand alone. And I think this 
is very important, because if Saskatchewan was ever turned 
over to a Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the last lines of defence of medicare, of a publicly funded, 
publicly administered medicare system in this province would 
be lost, Mr. Speaker. One of the last lines of defence, not only 
at the provincial level but for all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. This 
government is the most important defender of medicare that 
Canada has, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’m proud of the role that our Premier played 
when he went to Vancouver, Mr. Speaker, for the last Premiers’ 
Conference. And with Manitoba, those two provinces stood 
alone in terms of defending our publicly funded medicare 
system against privatization and against financial erosion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech clearly signals our intent 
to begin implementation of the action plan for Saskatchewan 
health care, including measures to better manage waiting times 
for elective surgery, create primary health care teams, increase 
recruitment of training activities, begin training of 240 
emergency medical technicians, and establish a 24-hour phone 
line to offer immediate advice from registered nurses. 
 
Saskatchewan’s financial pressures will mean we cannot do 
everything as quickly as we would like to, but we will move 
forward in a very substantial way. These then are some of the 
important measures we will pursue as a government to support 
the families of our province. 
 
It is a plan that is in sharp contrast with the plans of the Leader 
of the Opposition. Let us be clear, Mr. Speaker, about his 
proposal that would translate into tax cuts of approximately 
$650 million per year. The Saskatchewan Party plans to 
eliminate the small-business tax, to cut the corporate capital tax 
by 50 per cent, and to further push down personal income taxes 
far beyond what our government has already done. And I 
remind listeners that we have already reduced personal income 
taxes in Saskatchewan through our own initiatives in this 
government by one-third since 1993. 

The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, says they want to go 
way beyond that, Mr. Speaker. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that 
is simply not sustainable and can be achieved in only three 
ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first of those ways, Mr. Speaker . . . If you want to cut 
taxes by $650 million in Saskatchewan, the first of those ways, 
Mr. Speaker, is that you would have to go into debt — big, big 
deficits, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first option. Their 
predecessors, the Devine administration, took that course of 
action, Mr. Speaker, and took us $14 billion into debt. 
 
The second, Mr. Speaker, the second way of achieving that 
massive tax cut that the Leader of the Opposition talks about is 
by massively cutting health and education services and social 
services in Saskatchewan. The opposition, Mr. Speaker, say that 
. . . have already acknowledged, Mr. Speaker, that they would 
cut social services by $50 million a year; that they’d cut child 
protection services in this province, Mr. Speaker; that they’d cut 
the building independence program. Those are the kind of 
measures, Mr. Speaker, that are in our Social Services budget. 
They say they’d cut that by $50 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They talked in the last election about freezing health and 
education services but let me tell you, to pull off a $650 million 
tax cut they’d have to do a lot more than freeze health and 
education. They’d have to slash away at health and education in 
a way, Mr. Speaker, that the Gordon Campbell government in 
British Columbia is doing. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly 
who this government has been identifying with in the months 
past. 
 
They said, Mr. Speaker, when Gordon Campbell undertook his 
core review of services, they said that’s exactly what we’d do, 
Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan residents can be sure that the 
kind of cuts that British Columbia is seeing now to the public 
service and to health and education and social services is 
exactly what the Saskatchewan Party would do if they ever 
come to government, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I promise 
you and the people of Saskatchewan that members on this side 
of the House will never hand the keys of this legislature to the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, there’s one other option they 
have in achieving this $650 million tax cut and that, Mr. 
Speaker, is a massive sell-off of public assets. We talked about 
that earlier, Mr. Speaker. Their plan to sell the Crowns and be 
on this side of the House, say, Mr. Speaker . . . Assets that are 
owned by the people of Saskatchewan and that generate $200 
million a year for the people of Saskatchewan and that provide 
services, utility services, at the lowest cost of any province in 
Canada to its customers, those assets are not for sale, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — We are not into the Saskatchewan Party policy 
of short-term gain for a long-term pain, Mr. Speaker. We will 
not do that on behalf of Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by citing from the Book of 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

Romans, chapter 14, verse 9, where St. Paul tells us: 
 

Let us then pursue what makes for peace and mutual 
upbuilding. 

 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that what makes for peace is a 
full stomach . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please. Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I just ask members on 
both sides of the House . . . thank you. I’d just ask members on 
both sides of the House to permit all members to make their 
remarks and one by one everybody will get his or her turn. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
was saying, I would like to close by citing from the Book of 
Romans, chapter 14, verse 9 where St. Paul tells us, and I’m 
quoting: 
 

Let us then pursue what makes for peace and for mutual 
upbuilding. 

 
I would suggest that what makes for peace and mutual 
upbuilding is a full stomach and a warm home for every child, a 
fulfilling job and stable community for every adult, an equitable 
and caring society, and a sense of optimism and innovation for 
every community. 
 
We can do that, Mr. Speaker. We can do that by working 
together by mutually upbuilding, as we are told by Saint Paul. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the message of this Throne Speech is 
a message of working together to continue to build a province 
of opportunity and compassion. Because I am comfortable in its 
message and confident in its authors, I am happy to move its 
acceptance. 
 
I move therefore, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. member 
for Saskatoon Idylwyld: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects of the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I so move. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to rise 
today to second the motion placed before this House by the 
member for Saskatoon Greystone. I thank the Premier for this 
honour as I am privileged to be the newest member of our 

government, led by a very capable cabinet and Premier. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m truly humbled to be standing 
here representing the good citizens, my neighbours, of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. I have taken a deep interest in the 
workings of this House and how the members strive continually 
to improve the economic and social lot of the people here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And members of this legislature have at times seemed both 
contemplative and even sensational, but I was always . . . and 
will be now fascinated by our actions. I’m looking forward to 
your wise and good guidance, Mr. Speaker, in facilitating our 
deliberations and discussions here in this third session. 
 
We have new challenges ahead and I’m convinced that our 
government’s plan as outlined in the Throne Speech will prove 
to be an excellent solution as we build Saskatchewan as a 
province of opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first I want to acknowledge those who have gone 
before us. Today when we talk of our vision, our hopes and our 
fears, we should be clear we did not get here all by ourselves. 
As the member for Saskatoon Greystone pointed out, our 
government’s core values are critical to building our province’s 
future success. 
 
Inclusiveness, accessibility, compassion, co-operation, and 
innovation, are such a critical part of our history because the 
men and women who have served this government so well in 
the past not only believed in these core values, but made them 
an integral part of their achievements. 
 
In particular, I do want to recognize and thank my predecessor, 
Janice MacKinnon, for her outstanding contribution to our 
province in her many roles around the cabinet table and in 
caucus and throughout the province. 
 
The times in 1991 were challenging, as they are today, but she 
was an eloquent spokesperson for compassion and 
responsibility. She rose to meet the issues with both 
determination and integrity. She served our province well. And 
I know, and I know all the members here would like to thank 
her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — And as well, the other members who helped me 
get here, my own family, I want to thank them and their 
constant support. 
 
Now as I said I am delighted to be here representing the 
constituents of Saskatoon Idylwyld. In the short four months 
I’ve been the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), I’ve 
come to appreciate the rich diversity of Saskatoon Idylwyld 
more than ever. 
 
As you may know my constituency ranges from the Saskatoon 
John G. Diefenbaker Airport, much of the north Saskatoon 
business district, to include all of downtown Saskatoon. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, the state of the provincial economy is truly 
important to the people working in Saskatoon. And I was most 
happy to read of the optimism the Saskatoon businesses 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

 

declared in The StarPhoenix last Wednesday, March 6th. And I 
want to quote from the article: 
 

Dale Botting, CEO of the Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority (SREDA), says he had expected a 
larger number of businesses to be concerned with 
outmigration. 
 
Instead, respondents reported booming business in the city. 
 
“The confidence, the optimism, post-Sept. 11 was a nice, 
pleasant surprise for us,” Botting said. “We were all 
concerned as to how much we would be shaken by the 
events that happened there and through the global 
economy.” 

 
Just over 93 per cent of the respondents said their company 
is either in a stable or growing stage, with just over half of 
those saying (that) their company is experiencing growth. 

 
Truly our government’s plan of prosperity through partnership 
is taking shape. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, shortly after my election I was 
delighted to take part in the launching of Saskatoon’s new 
theme, Saskatoon Shines. And truly it does. And I’m so proud 
to be representing here the business community of Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, here in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am a humble 
schoolteacher, not a voodoo economist like the Leader of the 
Opposition. When I buy two fishes, I know that they feed two 
people, not 5,000. But I do manage a family budget and I do 
know a couple of things about how our province handles our 
own budget. 
 
I know, for instance, that if a family is careful with their 
finances in good times and puts some in reserves, we are able 
. . . better able to smooth over the tough times. I know you can’t 
buy a new set of snow tires with a maxed-out Visa. I also know 
that tough times don’t last forever any more than the good times 
keep rolling on. Historically this has been true in Saskatchewan, 
where the term boom or bust was practically invented. 
 
Admittedly, as the Throne Speech says, we have been through a 
tough time, a time of uncertainty since . . . compounded by 
September 11, but underway well before then. North America 
has been through tough times, not just us. But we were smart, 
Mr. Speaker. We put some aside while we were balancing eight 
consecutive budgets. When the waters got a little choppy these 
past few months, we were able to weather the storm. 
 
Voodoo, Mr. Speaker? No. Just good common sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — And common sense best expressed by the 
Provincial Auditor who said in a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) radio interview, quote: 
 

The government’s financial condition has been improving 

considerably over the last many years, so we are one of the 
provinces better able to withstand a downturn in our 
economy, better than most other provinces. And we are in a 
much better position to deal with it as we were even just a 
few short years ago because our economy has grown so 
much and the government has reduced its accumulated 
deficit over the past few years. 

 
I needn’t remind us, Mr. Speaker, who gave us that 
accumulated deficit. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Now I know one other thing about the . . . I know one other 
thing about the economy, Mr. Speaker, not to get too far out of 
my element. I know that we are no longer one in a . . . 
(inaudible) . . . economy; haven’t been for some time now. 
When one sector of the economy suffers, others help out to take 
up the slack. 
 
It is no secret that these are tough times in agriculture, 
especially for our grain farmers. And for the reasons also are no 
secret, unfair foreign subsidies, little to no help in the federal 
area, and bad weather. 
 
The combination of September 11 and poor prices have 
admittedly led to some job losses. But as I said, nothing lasts 
forever, good or bad. And I’m very happy to note that 
Saskatchewan job numbers are improving — 10,000 more jobs 
in the last two months. And that’s very encouraging, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And before the opposition throws our neighbouring province in 
our face, let me point out that in the last month of February 
when we gained 5,800 jobs, Alberta lost 11,000. Not to gloat — 
not to gloat over the misfortunes of our neighbour, but just to 
remind us that the grass can be cut two ways. 
 
Now what picked up the slack? Oil and gas of course, but jobs 
were up in construction, manufacturing, services, 
transportation, retail and wholesale, and also in the livestock 
industry. We are no one-horse town, are we, Mr. Speaker. And 
speaking of diversification, has anyone mentioned the 
synchrotron lately? 
 
Now more than this, Mr. Speaker, my Saskatoon Idylwyld is 
made up of vibrant neighbourhoods, our communities. And this 
is what I believe is the heart of representative democracy — our 
constant seeking of a common voice that speaks of the hopes 
and fears of our neighbours. And again I draw upon those core 
values: inclusiveness, accessibility, compassion, co-operation, 
and innovation that our government holds so important as the 
values that drive our communities throughout this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at my swearing-in December 19, our 
Premier movingly reminded me of my roots as he welcomed me 
to this legislature by saying, I’m convinced that the people of 
Saskatoon Idylwyld want exactly what people want throughout 
this province. They want to build healthy, vibrant, and 
prosperous communities and your election victory came about 
partly because of your deep involvement in your community. 
 
Well the Premier is quite right about my history. It’s really 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

through my community, Caswell, and its community 
association. And we are the people who do the coaching, the 
programming, but most of all, we are the people who live and 
breathe the political consequences of government daily with our 
neighbours. 
 
Caswell, like Westmount, Mayfair, Riversdale, Hudson Bay 
Park, Woodlawn, Kelsey, and so on, face challenges daily as we 
struggle to have good housing, good schools, in a safe 
community. And I believe our Premier and our government 
have a clear plan to accomplish this. 
 
The Throne Speech yesterday clearly articulates our goals, and 
I’m so pleased to be here representing my neighbours, those 
who work, who go to school, who live together in our 
neighbourhoods, and that all of Saskatchewan can be a province 
of opportunity, and all our communities can be communities of 
opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I am particularly pleased by the 
announcement in the Throne Speech of our government’s plan 
to pass the status of artists legislation. This is a true indication 
of our government’s vision of connecting to all segments of our 
Saskatchewan communities. In fact, with this legislation we 
will be the first jurisdiction in North America that will formally 
begin to recognize the value of the artists to the community. 
 
This is consistent with the Saskatchewan’s rich tradition of 
valuing arts in our community. Our Saskatchewan Arts Board is 
a wonderful example of our province’s pioneering spirit that 
was established in 1948, the first of its kind in Canada. And so 
this legislation maintains a commitment to culture here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My own constituency has a vibrant, lively arts and cultural 
community that includes visual arts for our artists, musicians, 
actors and so forth. Culture does count in our communities right 
across this province as it engages our people in creative activity, 
it builds healthier lifestyles, and inspires social well-being. And 
for youth, and especially those at risk, it builds an inspiration 
and hope now. 
 
In Saskatoon Idylwyld, we have a fantastic project today called 
the Circus Arts Project, that works with youth at risk in the 
inner city. Its goal is to build self-confidence, and self-worth, 
and this legislation to pass for the status of the artists is a clear 
message that artists do count and do make a difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is of special 
significance that this Throne Speech speaks directly to a new 
vision of education. We, the government, like the people of 
Saskatchewan, are convinced that it is a critical time to be 
innovative in our services to the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as a teacher I am, of course, passionate about public 
education. Events in America in the fall only underline how 
fragile our world is, and how critical it is that we have 
appropriate tools to understand, develop empathy and 
compassion. But more than this, how we can develop or foster 

capacity to care for one another. I believe public education is a 
strong agent for all of these, and we must ensure public 
education stays true to its best intents, and not just training but 
helping us all to fully participate, and to fully contribute to our 
society. 
 
We have to, as the saying goes, recognize that it takes a whole 
village to raise a child and so it is in our communities 
throughout this province. 
 
Now, SchoolPLUS, our vision of education in our province, is 
that every school will become a community school and that 
every school will ensure that children with needs will have 
them met so learning can take place, and this initiative is in the 
true innovative spirit of Saskatchewan education which has 
always been noted for searching for best practices. 
 
I would like to at this time acknowledge Dr. Stirling McDowell, 
who passed away just a short month ago, but who personified 
education and innovation at its best in our province. Stirling 
worked tirelessly for the cause of public education, and I’m 
confident that SchoolPLUS will be in the spirit of best practices 
that will improve learning in the classrooms of Saskatchewan. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, as a representative for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, that we have appreciated the work of our government, 
as we have five community schools and one of the first 
community high schools announced in this province last year in 
our constituency. And I, yesterday, was delighted, along with 
the members for Regina Centre and Regina Elphinstone, to see 
the students from Sacred Heart School here with their principal. 
This school truly personifies the intent of community schools in 
action. And I am sure that while we work through the processes, 
there will be challenges. It is clear, though, that neighbourhoods 
across this province are now engaged with their schools, and the 
supports for both the family and the schools are strong. The 
time is right for SchoolPLUS. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, today I invited a very special 
guest, Laura Kusisto, from . . . she’s a grade 12 student from 
Campbell Collegiate, but I think she had to get back for 
afternoon classes. But I had the distinct pleasure of acting as a 
provincial debate coach at the junior national debate tournament 
in 1998 at Castlegar, British Columbia. Laura was one of six 
students that our provincial organization, Saskatchewan 
elocution debate society, sent. The topic was a very hot issue on 
the west coast — the salmon trees — and we were a fierce 
team, winning first overall in the debate category. Max Shapiro 
from Saskatoon was declared the best debater across Canada 
that year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now, I was even more, though, delighted in the 
national speech competition because four of the nine 
semi-finalists were from our province, Saskatchewan and, Mr. 
Speaker, Laura had come in a very strong second. I was so 
proud of her, not only because she did so well but she had a real 
message for all of us, and I believe SchoolPLUS speaks to the 
issues she raised some four years ago. 
 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

 

Now, Laura’s speech was based on the saying, “If you give a 
man a fish, you feed him for a day. If you teach him how to 
fish, you feed him for a lifetime.” Now, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
all agree there’s much merit in this, but Laura recognized that 
there’s a potential shortcoming in this plan. She very eloquently 
suggested that while we teach people how to fish, we must 
honour and respect their cultural diversity. And so it is in 
education. We must be inclusive, and we must celebrate the rich 
diversity of all our students in our classrooms. And if we fail to 
do this, then in the end our good, but short-sighted intentions 
will be our undoing. Our government is saying schools must be 
ready for all of our students, and I’m confident that Laura and 
Stirling would agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as a teacher I often spoke to 
my students about a positive attitude, hope, and optimism. I 
challenged them to develop a world view that is compassionate 
for others and I challenged them to develop a strong sense of 
stewardship for our world. And I often used this quote by 
Reinhold Niebuhr to spur on this discussion: 
 

That nothing — nothing that is worth doing can be 
achieved in our lifetime, therefore we must be saved by 
hope. Nothing which is true or beautiful or good can make 
complete sense in any immediate context of history, 
therefore, we must be saved by faith. And nothing we do, 
however virtuous, can be accomplished alone, and 
therefore, we must be saved by love. 

 
I was so happy to see a former student, Jonathan Chow of 
Saskatoon receive recognition this past December from the 
Saskatoon public school division, a school division noted for its 
support for public education. Jonathan had received the award 
of excellence, a reward that was based on academic 
achievement, outstanding personal qualities, strong leadership, 
and participation in school activities and community. In fact, 
Jonathan was called Saskatoon’s super student. But I was so . . . 
I was doubly happy, because Jonathan was so positive, 
recognizing the importance of education and how he had such a 
strong commitment to his community. He is a testament to our 
. . . that our province is truly blessed with wonderful youth. And 
our challenge is to ensure that our youth has a strong, healthy 
world view such as Jonathan’s, and I’m satisfied that our vision 
of schools in the future will do this. 
 
Now interestingly, Mr. Speaker, another of my favourite 
projects with grade 8s was a little Shakespeare. With Jonathan’s 
class we put on a pretty good version of Macbeth. The students 
were fascinated with this study of power and how it can corrupt 
worthy citizens such as the good soldier Macbeth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am struck by some eerie parallels in this House. I 
have come to notice in the last few months that the opposition 
have come to believe that it’s their destiny that the next . . . that 
they will be the next government regardless of the merits of 
their plan or how much support they have from the people. 
 
And I am not sure if the Leader of the Opposition has not been 
talking to a few witches, if not at least figuratively. And who 
might these witches be? Private communication consultants 
here in Saskatchewan or Alberta who are telling them all they 

have to do is just wait — the government will be theirs. 
 
I’m not sure if we should speculate on this but let me add this. 
As I was campaigning on the doorsteps this past fall, I must tell 
you of the great apprehension that the voters of Saskatoon 
Idylwyld held for the Sask Party. They were and are still very 
nervous of what might be in store for this province if the Sask 
Party were to come to power — the Crowns sold, cost of living 
soaring. And what would become of our schools and our health 
care system? And they are even more anxious now as Gordon 
Campbell in BC has come to power and shows what he really 
meant by efficiency. We know the high regard members across 
the way hold for the new British Columbia government. People 
are very concerned, Mr. Speaker, very concerned. 
 
It reminded me of the lines, the uneasy lines, Macbeth speaks 
after he realizes he’s committed himself to acquiring power at 
any cost. He has in fact lost all personal integrity and self 
respect, exclaims to Lady Macbeth: 
 

Methought I heard a voice cry, “Sleep no more! 
Macbeth does murder sleep!” the innocent sleep, 
Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care, 
Balm of hurt minds . . . 
Chief nourisher in life’s feast. 
 
Still it cried, sleep no more to all the house: 
Glamis hath murdered sleep . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the opposition were to form government I can 
see the headlines now, “Sleepless in Saskatchewan.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — “Citizens overcome with high anxiety as 
Saskatchewan Party comes to power” and this is indeed a 
troublesome image, a tragic image. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the good citizens of Glamis, 
Saskatchewan, through their elected representative, the member 
of Rosetown-Biggar, that Shakespeare was of course referring 
to Glamis, Scotland. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I truly do appreciate all things in my 
constituency but I must tell you I am certainly happy of the 
work regarding sexual exploitation of children that will come to 
pass this session. I want to thank the all-party committee for the 
tireless effort and in particular I want to acknowledge the 
leadership of the member for Greystone and the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
The report underlines the urgency of this very sad and 
disturbing issue. Fortunately solutions are now taking shape as 
we as a society recognize the horrible reality of child sexual 
exploitation. This is a daily issue for far too many children in 
my constituency and I applaud the work of the members of both 
sides of this House to tackle this tragic fact of life in our 
country and in our province. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly support the member for 
Greystone who completely agreed with the Premier on his 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

presentation to the Romanow Commission. I was so pleased 
that he reminded us of the fact that for the most part those who 
are familiar with the health plan are satisfied with their care, 
and those who listened to the weepers and wailers and gnashers 
of teeth across the way worry about it. To paraphrase Churchill 
about democracy, our health system is the worst in the world, 
except for all the others. 
 
Now I don’t want to be negative, but I do want to remind 
ourselves about the one “other systems” the one to the south 
that the member from . . . (inaudible) . . . Greystone told us so 
much. He talked about the high school athletes who can’t play 
sports because they don’t have private insurance; the delisted 
physicians who do truly care about their patients; and over the 
42 million uninsured Americans who can’t afford health care. 
And we know a lot more. 
 
So most importantly, Mr. Speaker, we know we don’t need to 
go there. The lessons of 50 years and more tell us that in health 
care, as in so much more, we are not doing too badly in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. We can, and we are, and we will 
do much, much more. The action plan for Saskatchewan health 
care provides that blueprint. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — As my roots are from rural Saskatchewan — in 
fact my brother and sister-in-law who operate an organic farm 
just west of Mortlach, which will be in the family come 100 
years in 2007 — I have watched closely the Action Committee 
for Rural Economy. And I’m very excited to see that our 
government continues to maintain a determined commitment to 
the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We are engaging citizens right across this province, as we all 
recognize the challenges that exist in this country. But we know 
that the Saskatchewan spirit is strong, in creating opportunities 
such as organic farming, ethanol, the intensive livestock 
operations, wind energy, and so many more to complement the 
traditional rural way of life that we are so proud of. 
 
And I’m particularly happy to see in the Throne Speech that our 
Deputy Premier and Minister of Agriculture continues to press 
the federal government for a national farm safety net program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, as I conclude my remarks, I want 
to say that I’m very excited about the future of this government, 
led by a very capable Premier. He has established an ethic 
within our government of listening and engaging the 
communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
The summer bus tour is an excellent example of our 
government that is open to all and not by invitation only. And I 
must say, Mr. Speaker, this is in sharp contrast to our 
opposition across the way, that in this past month has sent so 
many mixed messages to Saskatchewan citizens. We want to 
hear from you. No, we don’t want to hear from you. Now. Not 
now. And the only consistent message seems to be from the 
Saskatchewan Party is their inconsistency. What is their plan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we are without . . . we are without a 

doubt facing challenging times and we shall be judged by the 
quality of our stewardship of our province, Saskatchewan. But I 
must say I was drawn to seek public office by the early 
evidence of an exciting renewal as we build opportunities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the start of our Premier’s very industrious and dynamic 
tenure. This evidence includes a strong commitment to quality 
public education, a vibrant sustainable health care system, the 
economy, but most of all to the people of Saskatchewan. And 
this commitment by our government continues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as citizens, we have choices to make about 
the kind of society we want to live in. I live in Saskatchewan 
and I have made my choice. I want a society that is decent and 
caring and concerned about children and families. I want a 
society that does more than spout slogans when it comes to 
improving life for every person. In Saskatchewan, our 
government has made these choices and we have a plan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I wish to say that as by the quality of their 
work you shall know the workmen, so too by the quality of our 
governance as outlined in this Throne Speech, you will come to 
know this government so aptly led by the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am most happy and delighted to second this 
motion before us today. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
begin today by certainly welcoming you back to the Assembly 
and wishing you very well in the proceedings that take place in 
this Assembly over the next two or three months and 
apparently, according to some of the members of the 
government, may even be into October. So we’re ready and 
we’re certainly hoping that they’re ready for what we’re going 
to be presenting to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also just like to take a moment to welcome the 
new member to our Assembly, the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld. And I wish you well in your work as an MLA for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to give commendation to all the 
Legislative Assembly staff that support us so much in our work 
in the Assembly. And I would like to commend also our 
constituency assistants, and in particular my own, Mary Anne 
Telfer, who is just an absolute jewel and a wonder in being able 
to assist the people of the province through my office in 
Humboldt. 
 
And while I’m on that note, Mr. Speaker, I was really quite 
thrilled to hear that — although I wasn’t too thrilled to hear 
about the population decline in Saskatchewan; it’s a really 
horrific message of the dismal failure of the government to 
stimulate economic activity in this province — but Humboldt 
was one of the three centres . . . three cities in Saskatchewan 
that actually grew in population. And I’d like to give you my 
view as exactly why that’s happening and why it has happened 
throughout the history of the province. 
 
That area is a people of faith. They have faith in themselves. 
They believe in themselves. They know that they can work hard 
and they have a good sense of values. They certainly have good 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

 

business . . . sound business management. 
 
I can point to two very, very obvious examples in Bourgault 
Industries and Doepker Industries at Annaheim. These people 
have been successful in spite of the many deterrents that 
government, the NDP government, has put forward. And they 
will continue to be successful. 
 
One of the problems they’re facing right at this time is they 
can’t seem to find enough skilled labour to work at their 
manufacturing industries there. A lot of our young people have 
left the province. They don’t seem to be able to attain the 
training that they need here. 
 
And both the . . . both Doepker and Bourgault mentioned this 
when we went . . . the Saskatchewan Party had our grow 
Saskatchewan meetings around the province and we went to 
Humboldt. That was one of the issues that was brought forward, 
was we need to make sure that we have the population here and 
we have to have in . . . an opportunity for youth to be able to 
have training in order to meet these job requirements. 
 
So it is incumbent upon government in a sense to make sure 
that the atmosphere is here where our youth will feel that they 
do have an opportunity to train and then to access the jobs that 
are in place right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do welcome the opportunity to bring forward on 
behalf of my constituents some of their thoughts about the last 
10 years and their hopes for the future. 
 
They know, and we know on this side of the House, that the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
We know, and my constituents know, that the NDP has no plan. 
They have demonstrated that in spades in the last 10 years. 
They have no plan for the economy. They have no plan. 
Obviously their deficit is in place and showing the true colours 
of the previous administration’s ability — or lack of ability 
rather — to be able to have fiscal sound management. They 
have no plan for health or agriculture or anything in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government certainly, as I mentioned today in 
question period, is not the Romanow government. They cannot 
manage finances. They’re incompetent and they’re obviously 
unable to provide the sound fiscal management that Premier 
Romanow did in the past. 
 
But I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the NDP 
government that is failing; it’s not the people of the province. 
We have in Humboldt an exemplary model of businesses that 
manage to sustain themselves, and they’ve done that by being 
very prudent and very watchful of how they do their business 
plans. They’ve been very watchful that they don’t 
unnecessarily, or as little as possible, get involved with 
government and government money. We have seen any . . . 
every venture in this province that has really suffered is 
generally related to government interference and government 
money being put into it. We don’t need that in this province. 
The people of the province are quite capable of stimulating 
businesses, managing their businesses, and growing. 
 

What we do have to recognize, Mr. Speaker, is that we need 
investment from private sources. And we need to invite that into 
this province in order to create business opportunities, to create 
jobs, and to have a reason for our young people to stay here and 
to prosper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past 10 years we have seen many, many 
NDP promises, most of them that were broken. One of them, 
for instance, was we are going to help to create 30,000 new 
jobs. Well the actual NDP record, Mr. Speaker, is that 12,000 
jobs have been lost over the past two years alone. We have 
heard an NDP promise that we’re going to keep the budget 
balanced. Well right now the NDP record is 478 million deficit 
in the year 2001-2002. 
 
We have heard the NDP promise that there’s going to be less 
crime. Well we all know what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. We 
have . . . Regina is the car-theft capital of North America. There 
has been no change. There has been a lot of talk from the 
government side of the House on how they are going to address 
this, but the talk is not translating into action that is meaningful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard the NDP promise that surgical 
waiting times will be cut by at least 30 per cent. Well the real 
record, Mr. Speaker, is surgical waiting lists have increased — 
increased — over 50 per cent. Saskatchewan has the longest 
waiting lists in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard the promise that 200 more police 
officers would be hired. Well I think we need do nothing but 
talk to the police officers in this province to find out just how 
very disgruntled and disappointed they are with the NDP 
government for not keeping that promise. They have a huge 
load on their shoulders and it’s pretty well impossible to do a 
sufficient and efficient and effective job without having the 
police officers in place that are needed in order to effect a 
peaceful society. 
 
We have 45 more officers that were hired but police officials 
are telling us that these hirings have been more than offset by 
the retirements that have taken place. 
 
We have heard an NDP promise, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
going to be 500 new health care providers in the province, and 
the real record, Mr. Speaker, is 1,192 fewer nurses than in 1999, 
and that’s according to SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses). 
 
There is no plan by this government, Mr. Speaker. There is no 
vision and there certainly is no capability by the NDP 
government to change anything — otherwise it would have 
come forward by now; we would have seen it by now. The 
people of the province recognize this and they’re very, very, 
disappointed. 
 
One has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, how does it feel — I ask the 
members of the government side — how does it feel to have 
destroyed the fiscal accountability achieved by Roy Romanow 
and Janice MacKinnon in one fiscal year. The member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld gave accolades to Janice MacKinnon, and I 
think she is very deserving of those. But she’s not here any 
more. A number of the people from that side of the House that 
certainly did have some sort of conscientious ability and effort 
to move the province forward are gone. They’re not here any 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

more and this government opposite is not what it used to be. 
 
It has taken only one year for this government to destroy Mr. 
Romanow’s legacy. They’ve gone from a major surplus to a 
deficit in one year. What does that say about this government? 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier referred to himself last week, when he 
was talking to one of the media, as the wee Premier of a wee 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that comment speaks volumes about the vision of 
the Premier. It speaks of the Premier happy to maintain the 
status quo of growing smaller as a province, of getting nowhere 
as a province. It does not speak of creativity, of innovation, of 
abundance, and prosperity. Mr. Speaker, we need to have a 
more competitive atmosphere in our province and the way to do 
that is to get government out of business, to downsize some of 
the Crowns. 
 
We have in excess of 50 Crown corporations in this province, 
many of them doing what business, private business, should be 
doing. That is chasing business out of the province. People that 
want to come here, build business and invest in the province, 
are facing competition from the Crowns and they’re gone. 
 
We have had many, many business opportunities, business 
people from the United States, from other places in Canada, that 
wanted . . . considered coming to the prairie provinces to build 
value-added industry. They took one look at socialist policies in 
this province and they were gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier on today, during question period, the 
Premier charged me with asking for spending for children that 
were involved in sexual exploitation, for putting forward money 
to assist children into healthier lifestyles. 
 
Well I thought that remark was a bit disgusting, misleading, and 
very improper for the Premier of this province. It should have 
been the government, if in fact they have the social conscience 
they’re talking about, bringing forward some initiatives in the 
past 10 years to deal with this issue. 
 
The very fact of the matter is yes, there will be some money 
needed for that. But we have to understand that it is not 
pertinent for government to be taking taxpayers’ money, 
investing in places like the Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corp., 
losing $28 million; experiencing a $2 million loss investing in 
an on-line auction company — for what purpose we don’t 
know. 
 
There has been many, many losses of money in this province 
through this government that had that money been used I think 
more expediently and in a better and smarter manner, we would 
have money to help to raise children to a point where they do 
not have to be exploited, where they certainly do not have to 
feel that the only way that they can make a living is to go and 
sell their bodies. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we find out a number of other things about 
this government and their sticking their nose in business, trying 
to become business people when they in fact are not. 

We have to ask some questions. We asked, why did this 
government invest I think it was about $15 million in a meat 
products factory in Yorkton — Premium Brands Harvest Meats 
— when the business owner clearly indicated that they would 
have gone ahead to expand regardless of government money? 
Why would this government do that? Is government so intent, 
so intent on owning everything in this province? And for what 
reason? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we find out now that the sound stage that is 
currently under construction, and funded by more taxpayers’ 
money, doesn’t have a business plan. Well according to a CBC 
report, there are no projections for revenues and expenditures. 
That is not sound fiscal management, Mr. Speaker. A 
small-business person, Mr. Speaker, can’t even get a business 
loan without a business plan that includes projected revenues 
and expenditures. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are very tired of this government’s 
waste and mismanagement and their incompetence. Although 
there are a lot of good words, Mr. Speaker, that come from that 
Throne Speech, the people of Saskatchewan want some action. 
They do not want more broken promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to make it very clear that it is not the 
people of Saskatchewan that are failing. The people of 
Saskatchewan are working harder than ever before to make 
ends meet. It’s this government that is failing, Mr. Speaker. 
This government is failing the people of Saskatchewan and this 
government is driving people away and business away. And the 
hon. Economic Development minister responds to the recent 
census statistics saying that there will be more wealth for those 
who remain. 
 
One really has to shake their head, a person’s head, with that 
kind of logic. Where’s the wealth going to come from when this 
government continues to chase private investors out of the 
province? There is no wealth in the province if you do not have 
private investment, if you do not have people coming here who 
want to invest and have their families here and grow here. 
 
We have such unfair competition in the Crowns that it’s very, 
very disgusting. Right now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a situation in 
southwest Saskatchewan where SaskPower is establishing and 
competing with a wind generation project. We have a private 
firm that has come in that are generating wind energy. They’re 
paying taxes, Mr. Speaker. SaskPower in the next municipality 
is setting up the same kind of a wind generation plant. Are they 
paying taxes? No, they’re not. They won’t be paying taxes to 
the municipality and they won’t be giving grants in lieu. So you 
tell me how the Crown in business is going to help to put more 
money into general revenue in order to pay for the very 
fundamental and basic services we need in health and 
education. 
 
How is a shrinking tax base in this province, by the loss of 
population and jobs, going to support the public services that 
we need? How is it going to support the infrastructure? There is 
no way. We have a major problem with the mass exodus of 
business and workers from this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has had 10 years to work on 
population loss and to react to trends in the economy. This 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

 

government has had 10 years to work on a plan for attracting 
new business into Saskatchewan. But we are no better off today 
than we were 10 years ago. In fact, population-wise we’ve gone 
backwards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing new proposed in this Speech from 
the Throne, not a thing. They’re the same old words sang to the 
same old tune. This government has clearly proven that it has 
no plan to deal with the challenges that this province faces right 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make mention a bit to the government’s 
words in the Throne Speech pertaining to agriculture. There 
were few words of encouragement there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very grievous situation in rural 
Saskatchewan right now. Everyone knows about it. There is a 
major drought at hand; there was last year. And in fact in the 
northwest part of the province there was a drought for many 
years before that. Right now we have no water in any dugouts. 
We have no water in any sloughs. There is no water. There are 
farmers going to tap into a pipeline from miles away in order to 
get water for their home use, not to mention anything about 
cattle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have now a Minister of Agriculture who is 
going to be slashing the crop insurance program, hitting the 
farmers even harder than they are. At a time when they need to 
have an enhanced crop insurance program, we have a Minister 
of Agriculture that is blaming the federal government for the 7 
per cent increase this NDP government is going to put onto crop 
insurance premiums. 
 
Now the Minister of Agriculture knows better; he knows very 
well that his government borrowed $20 million from the federal 
government. He knows that. And he knows that he was 
supposed to repay that money. The federal government 
probably has a fair case when they’re asking this government to 
at least show some initiative to repay that money. 
 
But what’s going to happen because this government has failed 
in that regard again — and God knows where the $20 million 
went — the farmers are going to have to pick up the bill one 
more time. This is not concern for agriculture; this is not 
concern for farm families in this province, and the Minister of 
Agriculture should be ashamed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked or the government at hand has talked 
about justice and security. We’ve talked . . . They’ve talked and 
they’ve talked. We have a number of studies that have taken 
place; a number of committees that are in place right now to 
study the justice issue. It’s really very easy as a government 
when the only answer that you can find, the only intention you 
have, is to put another committee in place to study the issue. 
 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, is some leadership. This 
government should know, if they don’t know, only too well, 
what the problems are in our society. They should know very 
well that it takes leadership now and to get some action going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government in the Throne Speech spoke of a 
province of opportunity. That is a very nice phrase. The people 
of this province know that we have the means for prosperity and 

opportunity in this province. They know that. They know we 
have the resources, they know we have the hard-working 
people, they know we have the good sense to make this 
province thrive. 
 
But this province will not end up to be a province of 
opportunity. The people here will not be able to pursue 
opportunities if we don’t have a change in government and a 
change in policy that will in fact invite people into this 
province, will encourage the people of this province to invest 
because in fact there is going to be a new and better way. 
 
It is not enough to say that we’re a province of opportunity. We 
need to initiate policies that are going to encourage investment 
in the province, encourage job growth, economic growth all the 
way around. 
 
Those people, Mr. Speaker, that are on poverty row right now, 
that are struggling within minimum wage, those people will 
have better opportunities for better and more jobs when the 
Saskatchewan Party forms government in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t say enough about the 
government’s lax attitude on understanding and recognizing 
how important it is to diminish taxes for people that want to 
invest in the province, for people that want to grow businesses. 
 
Taxes combined with excessive, I would say, and increasing 
utility rates, as well as red tape and regulation that puts a really, 
really regressive and repressive tone in this province is 
something that has got to change. We cannot continue to have 
this happen. There are people moving out of the province 
continually, because they don’t have money in their pockets to 
invest in the province, to spend in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many things that could be 
changed; very simple things that can be changed. And yes, an 
attitude has to change. We need to have an attitude in this 
province where government is not here to lord it over, to 
control, and to exert their power over the people of the 
province. The attitude that must be in place is that we respect 
our people. We respect their abilities and their talents, and we 
will give them the opportunity to grow and to be very 
prosperous in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although I am very happy with the contents of the 
Throne Speech that spoke of the government taking some 
initiative to implement the recommendations of the committee 
that was dealing with the child exploitation in this province, I 
am yet to see what initiatives will happen. 
 
I understand through the grapevine that we are going to be 
seeing a proclamation of the legislation that was passed last 
session. I’m going to be very happy to see that happen. The 
Saskatchewan Party put forward that initiative quite some time 
ago along with other initiatives to address this situation. And in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the truth be told and the truth be known, the 
Saskatchewan Party has supported this initiative as they have 
many other initiatives that the government side has taken. We 
have had to tell them and finally they have listened to some of 
our ideas, to the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am very happy about those initiatives. I 
will be waiting with bated breath to see the implementation of 
some of those recommendations — for the sake of the children 
in the province, for the sake of the well-being of the province, 
for the sake of society. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the Throne Speech, because 
there is no plan overall for the economic prosperity and growth 
of this province, and that includes our children. Healing of our 
children is a necessary component. The support of our children 
is a necessary component. Opportunities for our children is 
necessary. 
 
(12:45) 
 
But those opportunities don’t come about just by speaking of 
them. They come about by having an environment created in 
the province where there is going to be opportunity for children 
to have a good education, to be able to move forward into jobs, 
to create entrepreneurial activity themselves, so that they can 
own their own lives and that they can prosper within their own 
families. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the Speech from the Throne 
for that reason, and I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly a privilege to stand in this Assembly today to respond 
to the Speech from the Throne that was presented to us 
yesterday in this Assembly by Her Honour. 
 
And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, the comments that 
have begun to circulate around this province in regards to the 
Speech from the Throne. Certainly we saw a number of guests 
in this Assembly yesterday, much fewer than we’ve seen in the 
past, and what we’ve begun to hear, Mr. Speaker, is something 
that we knew all along — that this government is devoid of any 
ideas of how we’re going to build on the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the headlines this morning, Mr. Speaker, that we see in 
The StarPhoenix was: “Throne speech ignores reality,” the 
realities of the day. I think what that’s saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that this government has decided 
that it’s going to bury its head in the sand rather than face the 
realities, rather than take a . . . and come forward with a sincere 
plan that would look at building and growing the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that this most recent Throne 
Speech has no vision and no plan to grow the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s painfully obvious this NDP government has 
run out of gas. It’s painfully obvious, Mr. Speaker, that they 
have no plan and no idea what needs to be done today, and no 
vision for where Saskatchewan needs to go in the future. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think this government calls its Throne 
Speech . . . in its Throne Speech calls it a province of 
opportunity. But, Mr. Speaker, the realities are it’s a province of 
squandered opportunities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech alludes to the fact that we have 
so many opportunities in this province; that we have 
hard-working and well-educated people; that we have an 
abundance of natural resources; and that this province should be 
booming. Yet thanks to the NDP-squandered opportunities, we 
continue to see people losing . . . leaving the province; we see 
jobs and investment leaving the province. And unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s heartbreaking to watch this take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about job opportunities, and each 
and every one of us in this Assembly, the people across this 
province, are well aware of the most recent stint . . . census 
numbers — numbers that show that we’re well below the 
million population that we were expecting that we would be 
close to in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact as we’ve heard in times past, and we will continue to 
hear into the near future, this province continues to be . . . 
remain at a stagnant level of population growth in the nation. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part about all of that is, while 
in reality we have actually seen more people leave the province, 
the only positive thing we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan is that we have fewer people dying than the 
number of people being born. And that has kind of, in some 
ways, helped to stabilize, stabilize our population growth. But 
at the end of the day it really . . . what we have in the province 
in Saskatchewan, we have fewer people actually in the ages, the 
key working years, of 25 to the area of 60 when you look at the 
average across Canada. 
 
What does that say to us, Mr. Speaker? It says we need to work 
harder at growing our province. Because that under-20 group of 
our population really aren’t substantial economic contributors to 
this province because they’re not . . . haven’t reached that 
working age yet, therefore they’re not generating the tax 
revenue that is needed for this province to continue to provide 
the services of health and education, and the need to meet the 
needs of the individuals through social services who, through 
no lack of their own, need an avenue of support that they are 
unable to provide for themselves — in many cases due to health 
difficulties and disabilities that they face. 
 
And on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, when you get to that 
60-plus population, our population in this province is growing 
substantially. There again, Mr. Speaker, while there are people 
in that age group who have sincere and significant investments 
and savings, Mr. Speaker, they are not necessarily a large 
contributor on the taxation side to build the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So what do we see from this Throne Speech? We see a Throne 
Speech that we were all hoping would show that this 
government, as the Premier had indicated, they had taken the 
time this past summer to travel to a number of communities, 
leaving out a significant number of constituencies that they 
didn’t travel to; and actually going around listening, supposedly 
listening, to people. 
 
And what we thought as a result of that bus tour, as a result of 
this consultation process, that this government in this Throne 
Speech would come out with a well-defined plan as to how they 
were going to build and to grow the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s important. It’s very important 



March 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

 

that political parties sit down and develop plans rather than 
continue to operate on knee-jerk reactions to the economy we 
face today. 
 
And why is that important? Mr. Speaker, it’s important because 
we need to provide opportunities, as we heard this morning, for 
young families to not only try to figure out and develop ideas, 
or tell them, give themselves reasons why they should stay in 
Saskatchewan, because they believe in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you have greater opportunities outside 
of the province and you’re continuing to stay here because this 
province they believe so much in they want to contribute to it, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that governments and political 
parties develop plans that would build on the province, build on 
the opportunities, build on that resource sector that we have so 
that these young couples have solid reasons to stay in this 
province because the opportunities are there for them. 
 
So that they can have those quality jobs that allow them to 
continue to invest and to raise their families in a province that 
we all believe is a great province to live in. And unfortunately 
we use the words many times, to come from. Mr. Speaker, we 
want this province to be a province that people decide they want 
to stay and invest in because of the opportunities it has. 
 
So why do we say we need to build a plan? We need to build a 
plan because as we look at the statistics; the statistics continue 
to tell us that jobs are leaving this province. In fact over the last 
two years 12,000 jobs have been lost in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We also realize, Mr. Speaker, that people are going to invest 
and build in this province, we need a government that will bring 
a balanced approach to financing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And unfortunately as we saw last year, the 
Minister of Finance stood in this Assembly and told us that 
while they had to withdraw on some funds from the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) pool of 
resources in order to balance this budget, he did have a fiscal 
rainy day contingency plan that he could draw on if need be, to 
balance the books. 
 
And so what we saw, almost a $400 million surplus, or 
supposedly surplus in the province of Saskatchewan today, less 
than a . . . 12 months later we basically are finding ourselves in 
a deficit position of almost $500 million. So you wonder why 
we need a plan to build the province of Saskatchewan — a plan 
that is sustainable and that will actually encourage investment. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Humboldt, talked about 
the fact that . . . of health care and what it’s doing in the 
province of Saskatchewan; the long surgical waiting lists. 
 
And I’m sure that MLAs, not only on the opposition side of this 
Assembly but MLAs across this Assembly, have been contacted 
by people who find themselves on extended waiting-list periods 
in the province . . . in this province and are desperate for the 
services that we brag about being able to perform. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues and I have found 
out, many of these people have found it easier to be referred 
outside of province for immediate attention versus using the 
resources and the personnel that we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
And why do we need to look at building this province as well, 
Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, there’s no question, unfortunately, 
that this . . . certainly the city of Regina, and I must add that it’s 
not just the city of Regina any more, even the communities in 
. . . some communities in my constituency have experienced the 
problem of car theft. And we need to look at how we address 
crime and that’s why we need to build a province . . . build a 
plan. 
 
We talk about the government promised a number of years ago 
to hire 200 more police officers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And while their record shows that there . . . we 
have hired 45 more officers, police officials tell us that the 45 
more officers hired have been offset by the number of 
retirements. And we also hear that that number, the number of 
retirements and people leaving the police force, is going to 
increase dramatically as their force actually ages as well. 
 
Then in the area of health care . . . So many areas in 
Saskatchewan that need to be addressed if we’re going to create 
a province and a place for people to come and look to not only 
investing in, but living in and raising their families because of 
the opportunities that we have here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about the government’s bus tour. And we 
saw that in the Speech from the Throne yesterday, the Premier 
and his government bragging about their bus tour. 
 
Unfortunately as we look through the Speech from the Throne 
very . . . a lot more closely, as we took the time to put the 
microscope over it — or magnifying glass, Mr. Speaker — Mr. 
Speaker, we see that this Speech from the Throne has done a 
poor job of really bringing forward, I’m sure, many of the ideas 
that the Premier and his government, his cabinet, have heard 
from people in regards to how do we build the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Do we have a real plan? Are we looking into the future? Are we 
looking down the road just a few days, and then maybe in 
another month’s time we’ll come up with another knee-jerk 
reaction to the problems that we’re facing, rather than building 
a long-term contingency plan to grow the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people across this province were certainly 
awaiting with bated breath for a game plan. But unfortunately 
this Speech from the Throne I do not believe came very close to 
building and putting forward a long-term game plan that would 
grow the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we talk about a game plan we talk about census, we 
talk about the population. Unfortunately, the only reaction we 
have from this government when we talk about population and 
we talk about the census numbers that were released most 
recently . . . in a response to a question of the lower population, 
coming from the Minister of Economic Development, what was 
his response? His response was, more wealth for the rest of us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder exactly if that’s what the people 
and the taxpayers of this province really believe. Do we really 
believe that we want to have . . . see our population diminish 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2002 

 

while supposedly the wealth of this province then can be 
divided amongst fewer? Or do we want to see our province 
grow so that we can create and generate more and greater 
wealth in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
While we may talk about greater wealth for the few of us 
remaining here, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we also have to be 
mindful of the fact that as fewer and fewer taxpayers live in the 
province of Saskatchewan, there’s going to be a greater expense 
for each and every one of us as the needs of health care and 
education and social services and the other areas of 
responsibility are then off-loaded and carried by a smaller 
taxpaying population in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, this government should have 
been coming forward with a plan that would have offered 
encouragement rather than discouragement to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that this province is a land of 
opportunity, that we have unlimited opportunity and wealth. 
And while this Throne Speech, I believe, recognizes some of 
that opportunity, indicates that there is opportunity . . . and it 
talks about the fact that there’s opportunity abounding in many 
sectors of our economy, in the areas of diversification and 
value-added processing and agriculture, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members of the Assembly, it now 
being past 1 o’clock, this House stands adjourned until Monday 
at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 


