















































Hansard: March 20, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 125 
 March 20, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
that would like to see SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) waive the $700 deductible for vehicle owners whose 
cars are damaged but not stolen as a result of using an anti-theft 
device. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to work with SGI to develop more fair 
guidelines for deductibles on vehicles that are damaged as a 
result of an attempted car theft. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Allan, Hanley, Elstow, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the condition of Highway 339. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Avonlea, Regina, and Calgary, Alberta. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
petition, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 

The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of 
Yorkton and the village of Willowbrook. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the condition of our highways in 
this province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Kendal, 
Yellow Grass, and Odessa area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — The following petitions have been reviewed 
and are hereby received. 
 

A petition concerning the reverse of the government’s 
decision to eliminate child maintenance as income; 
 
A petition concerning high-speed Internet service for the 
community of Lanigan; 
 
A petition concerning car thefts; and 
 
A petition concerning the resolution in the Lake of the 
Prairies situation. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 10 ask the government the following question. To the 
Minister Responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation): 
 

What percentage of the building located at 800 Central 
Avenue in Prince Albert is leased by Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation? How many square feet 
does this represent? What portion of this government lease 
is presently vacant? And what is the square foot cost for 
this lease? 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day 10 ask the government the 
following question. To the Minister of Health: 
 

How many public health inspector positions are currently 
vacant, and in what communities? And in respect to these 
vacancies, what inspection services are not being 
completed in the communities where these positions are 
unfilled? 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 10 ask the government the 
following question. To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: 
 

Which towns and municipalities have not paid their RCMP 
service agreement bills for the 2001 year? And how much 
does each of these municipalities owe? 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 10 ask the government the following question. 
To the minister responsible for SGI regarding cellular phone 
related motor vehicle related accidents: 
 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

In how many motor vehicle accidents was the use of a 
cellular phone a factor in the year 2001? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have parallel questions for the years 2000 and 
1999. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d just like to draw your attention and that of the members of 
the House to a group that is seated in your gallery. It’s a group 
of 18 students who are from the University of Regina. 
 
They’re enrolled in the Faculty of Education; they are in fact 
fourth-year secondary teachers. They will be graduating this 
spring. And one of the chapters in the course textbooks deals 
with the concept of democracy and it was felt that the 
Legislature was the best classroom to experience it. And I hope 
this will be true today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are accompanied here today by their professor, Dr. Garth 
Pickard. I would ask all the members of the Legislative 
Assembly to make these people feel very welcome here today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you my nephew, Bruce Reimer, and his colleague 
from North Battleford. They’re here at the SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) 
convention and they thought they’d come in and watch the 
proceedings for the day. Welcome here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
 
J’ai le plaisir de vous présenter ainsi qu’à tous les députés de 
l’Assemblée législative une délégation qui est ici aujourd’hui 
pour souligner La Journée internationale de la Francophonie, 
dans le cadre des fêtes qui se déroulent durant Les Rendez-vous 
de la francophonie et la Semaine nationale de la francophonie. 
Elle est assise dans votre tribune, Monsieur le Président. 
 
Voici les membres de cette délégation représentant un large 
éventail d’organismes communautaires fransaskois, Monsieur le 
Président: 
 
Monsieur le Président, je vous présente: Denis Desgagné; 
Francine Proulx-Kenzle; Francine Lacasse-Powers; Martin 
Samuels, qui est un visiteur d’Ottawa, Monsieur le Président, 
mais il est de la Saskatchewan originalement; Sasha Przytyk; 
Ronald Labrecque; Donna Thibeault; Réda Lounis; Michel 
Hamon; Michel Vézina; Françoise Landry; Lisa Hounjet; 
Céline Desrosiers; Robert Jerrett; Nathalie Bernier; Marie 
Patterson; Claude Martel; Robert Therrien; Catheline d’Auteuil; 
Joanne Bonneville; José Deschênes; Janice Murphy; Luc 
Martin; Lionel Bonneville; Paul Héppelle; deux, deux officiels 
de notre Office de coordination des affaires francophones, 
Monsieur le Président, Florent Bilodeau et Terina Abrahamson, 
Monsieur le Président. 

(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is my pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly a delegation here today to mark La 
Journée internationale de la Francophonie, as part of the 
celebrations during Les Rendez-vous de la francophonie and La 
Semaine nationale de la francophonie. They are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members of this delegation representing a variety of 
Fransaskois community organizations are: Denis Desgagné; 
Francine Proulx-Kenzle; Francine Lacasse-Powers; Martin 
Samuels, who is a visitor from Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, but he is 
from Saskatchewan originally; Sasha Przytyk; Ronald 
Labrecque; Donna Thibeault; Réda Lounis; Michel Hamon; 
Michel Vézina; Françoise Landry; Lisa Hounjet; Céline 
Desrosiers; Robert Jerrett; Nathalie Bernier; Marie Patterson; 
Claude Martel; Robert Therrien; Catheline d’Auteuil; Joanne 
Bonneville; José Deschênes; Janice Murphy; Luc Martin; 
Lionel Bonneville; Paul Héppelle; two officials from our Office 
of French-language Co-ordination, Mr. Speaker, Florent 
Bilodeau et Terina Abrahamson, Mr. Speaker.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 
introduce, seated in the gallery opposite, my good friend, 
Vice-Chief Greg Ahenakew, vice-chief of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, who was elected to that post in 
October of 2000. 
 
He is, as many will know, Mr. Speaker, a member of 
Ahtahkakoop First Nations . . . First Nation. He is responsible 
for land and resources, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), and many other aspects of 
activities and affairs which are important to First Nations, Mr. 
Speaker. With him is his assistant, Leeanne Anderson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, Vice-Chief Ahenakew is the 
famous son of a famous father, Dr. David Ahenakew. Please 
join me in welcoming Greg Ahenakew. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition I would like to join with the Minister of 
Justice in welcoming the representatives and the people from 
the Francophonie to the legislature in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve been observing francophonie week in the legislature 
since Monday and I would like to ask my colleagues to again 
welcome the delegates to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
join with my colleague from Battleford-Cut Knife in welcoming 
Bruce Reimer from North Battleford to our Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take the opportunity to, on behalf of Saskatchewan Party 
official opposition, to welcome First Vice-Chief Greg 
Ahenakew to the Assembly today. And I’d also like to welcome 
his assistant. 
 
And I’m presuming that there are some young people that are 
attending the Assembly with you today, and I would like to 
welcome them to the Assembly too. I do hope you enjoy the 
day. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome a former 
colleague and the former member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. With my stature, he’s a man I’ve always 
looked up to. 
 
But I have to say that Dale continues to do an admirable job in 
keeping us in touch with the issues out in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and we are glad you are here to join us 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with my colleagues in welcoming Vice-Chief Greg 
Ahenakew and Leeanne Anderson. I consider them both very 
close personal friends. And I would also like to tell the 
Assembly that Vice-Chief Ahenakew taught me a fair amount 
of Cree in my time as minister of Aboriginal Affairs. And so, 
Greg, to you I would like to say . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly I’d like to welcome 21 grade 
7 and 8 students from the Odessa School. They’ve made the trip 
in. They’re sitting in the east gallery. Their teachers are 
Bernadette Gavin; chaperones are Yvette Anderson, Donna 
Wild, Colleen Hamilton, and Joanne Herman. 
 
I will be meeting with them after the question period and the 
routine proceedings to hopefully try and explain what they have 
just witnessed. So I’d like to welcome them all here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of this House I would like to introduce a 
couple of young men who come and study this Legislative 
Assembly from time to time, and I think also gather for our 
youth parliament. And they’re sitting up in the gallery opposite. 
 
I’d like to welcome them not only on behalf of myself but the 
member from Regina Elphinstone and all of our colleagues. 
Kelsey Rose and Tanner Morrison, welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to rise as well with my colleagues in recognizing Vice-Chief 
Ahenakew and to point out that while many of them consider 
him his friend — certainly I consider him my friend as well — 
but he’s also very tough. And I would point out that this 
Assembly quoted his great, great grandfather. 
 
And I would like to join my colleague from Saskatoon in 
welcoming him in our Cree language. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I’m just saying in Cree I’m glad that he’s here to see the 
challenge that we have in this building as we’re sitting here, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with my 
colleague from Regina Qu’Appelle and ask all members to join 
me in welcoming the two young parliamentarians that have 
joined us today. I had the privilege just a few weeks ago to 
serve as their lieutenant-governor for the mini session that they 
held in Swift Current, and it was an enjoyable experience. 
 
I know their session covered an array of topics and the province 
is in good hands if the future of it was represented in Swift 
Current over that weekend. I’d ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

North Saskatoon Business Association 
Business Builder Awards 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, last night 
the Minister of Economic Development, the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin, and myself were at the Saskatoon Inn to 
attend the fifth annual Business Builders Award banquet 
sponsored by the North Saskatoon Business Association and 
very ably emceed by Paul Martin — our Paul Martin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NSBA (North Saskatoon Business 
Association) has about 675 members. Many of those businesses 
are in my constituency of Idylwyld. 
 
The awards are designed to recognize specific achievements of 
member businesses. As well the banquet provides us — 
business, media, and government — with an opportunity to 
recognize the important role the NSBA plays in promoting 
business in our fine city, the best small city in Canada in which 
to live, as the member from Greystone documented in this 
Assembly yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quickly congratulate each nominee and 
especially the winners by announcing their names. 
 
For New Direction, the award went to CJWW/Hot 93/Magic 
98.3 radio. For Job Creation, Days Inn. For Team Building, 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

Cover-All Building Systems. For Management Quality, North 
Ridge Development. The award for Small Business went to 
Cardwell Human Resources. Business Builder is HandyMan 
Rental Centre. And the Member of the Year was awarded to 
Wendy Portfors, the NSBA executive director and branch 
manager of the Circle Drive Scotiabank. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nomination of Saskatchewan Party Candidates 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this first day 
of spring one’s thought turns to renewal of life, greener 
pastures, and warmer weather as old man winter loses his grip. 
It also reminds us that the expiration date of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party)-Liberal coalition is fast approaching. The 
Saskatchewan Party must start nominating candidates to replace 
NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) who have 
long since passed their best-before date. 
 
Today I am very pleased to announce that on June 5 in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast there will be the first of 
many more contested nominations. Although the deadline for 
nominations is May 29, we already have two prominent 
community leaders declared as candidates: Mr. Don Morgan 
and Mr. Kevin Waugh. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Both of these people will be excellent 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs for the constituency of Saskatoon 
Southeast — and the race is just beginning. We will be 
announcing more nomination dates in the near future and we 
expect hotly contested races in every one of our urban ridings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are coming together 
and they are prepared to roll up their sleeves and work hard to 
make sure that the Saskatchewan Party forms the next 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

La Journée internationale de la Francophonie 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
 
Aujourd’hui, 20 mars, est un jour important pour les 
Francophones partout dans le monde. Cette journée marque 
l’anniversaire de la signature historique, il y a trente ans, du 
traité qui devait créer le premier organisme francophone qui 
unit les pays de langue française. La Francophonie, tel est son 
nom, comprend plus de 50 pays et gouvernements qui ont le 
français en partage. 
 
Les Fransaskois, les francophones de la Saskatchewan font 
partie de cette francophonie internationale. En signe de 
reconnaissance, mon collègue l’honorable Chris Axworthy a 
officiellement proclamé le 20 mars 2002, Journée internationale 
de la Francophonie en Saskatchewan. 
 
Au Canada, nous avons choisi la quinzaine qui entoure ce jour 

pour célébrer le patrimoine, la diversité et les réalisations de nos 
propres communautés francophones, durant le Rendez-vous de 
la francophonie et la Semaine nationale de la francophonie qui 
reviennent chaque année. 
 
La contribution de la communauté fransaskoise au 
développement social, culturel, et économique de la 
Saskatchewan est sans l’ombre d’un doute digne de mention. Le 
thème provincial de cette année: «Bilinguisme et 
employabilité», vient souligner le désir des Fransaskois de 
continuer à contribuer. 
 
En terminant, j’encourage tous mes collègues à soutenir 
activement et à fêter les Francophones dans leurs 
circonscriptions et je les invite dès maintenant à se joindre à 
moi pour souhaiter aux Fransaskois et Fransaskoises: Bonne 
journée internationale de la Francophonie. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, March 20, is an important day for francophones around 
the world. 
 
It marks the historic signing over 30 years ago of the treaty to 
create the first intergovernmental organization linking 
French-speaking countries. La Francophonie, as it is now 
known, comprises over 50 countries and governments with 
French as a common language. 
 
The Fransaskois, Saskatchewan's francophones, are part of this 
international French-speaking family. As a sign of recognition, 
my colleague the Hon. Chris Axworthy has officially 
proclaimed March 20, 2002, as La Journée internationale de la 
Francophonie in Saskatchewan. 
 
In Canada, we have chosen the two weeks around this day to 
celebrate the heritage, diversity, and accomplishments of our 
own francophone communities during the annual Rendez-vous 
de la francophonie and the Semaine nationale de la 
francophonie. 
 
The Fransaskois community's contributions to the social, 
cultural, and economic development of Saskatchewan are 
certainly worthy of note. The provincial theme this year, 
"Bilingualism and Employability," underscores the desire of the 
Fransaskois to continue this contribution. 
 
In closing, I encourage all my colleagues to be active in 
supporting and celebrating the francophones in their 
constituencies and ask them to join with me now in wishing all 
Fransaskois and Fransaskoises: Bonne Journée internationale de 
la Francophonie.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order for a minute. 
 
I too would like to welcome all the guests to the legislature 
today; and seeing as how we have some students here looking at 
the political process and democratic process, one of the 
processes is that we invite people to come to the galleries but 
ask them not to participate — even if they get excited about a 
member’s statement — but to listen diligently. 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

 

Two New Radio Stations Launched 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past 36 
years, CJVR radio in Melfort has established itself as an 
essential component of our community. The station’s efforts 
have been earned . . . have recognized them as a Canadian 
Country Music Association’s radio station of the year for six 
consecutive years. 
 
Recently radio CJVR has demonstrated its commitment and 
faith in our community and the rest of the province by 
launching two new radio stations. The country music format of 
CJVR radio will be broadcast from three positions on the FM 
(frequency modulation) band, providing the largest FM 
coverage of any area in Canada and positioning CJVR as a 
country FM station on a predominantly rock FM band. 
 
The second station, 750 on the AM dial, is now CK750, playing 
a mix of rock and roll hits and filling the void for rock on the 
AM band. CK750 will be capable of broadcasting to the 
majority of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our community was proud of our local station before, and we 
now have even more reason to be proud. Would the Assembly 
please join me in congratulating CJVR Radio on their 
accomplishments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Renal Satellite Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I 
welcomed the Minister of Health to my constituency who came 
with some very welcome news for the Yorkton Regional Health 
Centre. 
 
As of mid-April, the renal dialysis program at the health centre 
will be increased from four to six stations. Now this will take 
extra pressure off Regina and Saskatoon health districts, but 
more importantly, Mr. Speaker, this means that the quality of 
life will improve for an extra eight patients in the Yorkton area 
who require dialysis three times a week. 
 
Once the expansion is completed, 24 people will receive 
treatment in this facility. That means, of course, that 24 people 
will be driving much shorter distances, Mr. Speaker; and that is 
good news, Mr. Speaker, and also that’s very good health. 
 
The Yorkton satellite centre is one of five located in the 
province and I am proud that our government is expanding the 
life-saving procedure to communities close to home for dialysis 
patients. 
 
In all there are 87 people who are being served in five different 
stations across the province — in Prince Albert, in Tisdale, 
Lloydminster, Swift Current, and in Yorkton. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud that my regional health centre 
and I am pleased to be part of the government which provided 
on that day 344,000 to the renal satellite centre for the extra 
stations. And most of all I’m happy, Mr. Speaker, that all those 
patients whose life has been made a little bit less complicated 
by the services that we’re providing in that region. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hanley Elks Provincial Curling Champs 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have the honour 
today to rise in the House to talk about the recent achievements 
of the Hanley Elks Club curling team. Last month this team 
succeeded in winning the Elks provincial curling title at the 
event hosted in La Ronge. 
 
The team consisted of three Grindheim brothers — Dean, 
Darren, and Daryl — as well as Lorne Peek. These gentlemen 
have done very well curling together over the years and should 
do well in the Elks national playoffs beginning this week in 
Kindersley. 
 
As a member of the Elks Club in my hometown of Bladworth 
— of which if there’s any Elks members watching, there’s a 
meeting tonight — I am proud to see these successful curling 
events taking place here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hats off to the organizers and volunteers both in La Ronge, and 
this week in Kindersley, who have worked hard to host these 
events. Funds raised by these events will be used to assist 
community charities across Saskatchewan, providing a benefit 
to all those in need. 
 
We have seen our sport of curling continues to enjoy increasing 
recognition, both at this year’s Olympic Games in Salt Lake 
City and across Canada. I see a bright future ahead for curling 
Saskatchewan, and I hope the Assembly will join me in wishing 
the Hanley Elks all the best in their quest for national Elks 
championship. Best of luck, gentlemen. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Blind Curling 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, the Western Blind Curling 
Championships last week celebrated a milestone, 30 years — a 
testament to the volunteers that make this happen every year. 
Curling is the official sport of Saskatchewan, and it brings joy 
to everyone who gets a chance to pick up a broom or throw a 
stone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 40 curlers, comprising two teams each from the 
prairie provinces, took part in the championship. Teams are 
mixed with an open age class and have five members. Each 
team has a sighted second and sweeper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event was hosted here in Regina. And I would 
like to take a moment to thank the Lions Clubs throughout the 
province, SaskTel Pioneers, Redhead Equipment, and all those 
others whose sponsorship made this event possible. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

West Central Pelleting 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one never 
knows who may be watching the legislative channel. The other 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

day in my response to the Speech from the Throne, I mistakenly 
referred to the town of Unity as the home of West Central 
Pelleting. As I was speaking, my CA (constituency assistant) 
received a phone call from an observant constituent calling to 
inform me that West Central Pelleting is located in the 
community of Wilkie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank this observant constituent for 
being . . . bringing this oversight to my attention. Wilkie is 
indeed the home of West Central Pelleting. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we soon hope to see a second pelleting plant in the community 
of Wolseley. 
 

Recognition of Athletic Achievements 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well, I would like to take a 
moment to recognize the achievement of two young ladies from 
our community. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the opportunity of 
watching these young ladies hone their skills in hockey 
throughout the years as they’ve played on the same team my 
son did during their minor hockey days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I speak of Colleen Sistorics, a defensive star in 
Canada’s women’s gold medal winning hockey team. And I 
also speak of Brandy West who just recently was a finalist for 
Saskatchewan Female Athlete of the Year. I wish to extend my 
congratulations to both young ladies. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Investment in Retx 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
confirmed yesterday that this NDP government has now spent 
$20 million on an Atlanta, Georgia dot-com company called 
Retx. We confirmed as well, Mr. Speaker, that that company 
has made no profits for SaskTel. In fact in their first year of 
operation, the loss . . . just the Saskatchewan share of the loss 
was $265,000. We confirmed, Mr. Speaker, that no jobs had 
been created as a result of this investment in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party believes we shouldn’t be 
in this deal in the first place, but we are in it nonetheless, Mr. 
Speaker. And so, in the spirit of being constructive, we have a 
suggestion for the government. 
 
If they’re going to run this dot-com, and it appears they are — 
the minister yesterday said he’s prepared to lose money maybe 
up to five years in this particular deal — if they’re prepared to 
run a dot-com, which by the way, with dot-coms it doesn’t 
really matter where they’re located, Mr. Speaker, so if they’re 
prepared to run it, and if they now own 60-plus per cent of the 
company as they do, will the minister tell the Assembly when 
he will direct that company to relocate to Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know 
what the first thing, if they ever relocated in Saskatchewan, that 
they would say — they’re competing with the private sector, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the first thing they’d say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the suggestion is ridiculous. Mr. Speaker, SaskTel 
and our Crown corporations make investments inside and 
outside of Saskatchewan. I said yesterday, I stood in my place 
here last Friday and announced that in Saskatchewan we would 
be investing in 191 communities in Saskatchewan; we’d be 
putting in high-speed Internet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I asked the opposition: how do we pay for that, Mr. 
Speaker? We pay for it by investments, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
how we pay for it. SaskTel — $157 million we bring back into 
Saskatchewan to pay for high-speed Internet in communities 
that they represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that minister just said that the 
suggestion that they use their majority share interest in this 
company to relocate to the province of Saskatchewan is 
ridiculous. The only thing, the only thing that’s ridiculous, Mr. 
Speaker, is the attitude and the approach of that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very reasonable suggestion. It’s true we 
don’t like this deal, but we’re into the deal. The government 
says they’re not backing off; their CEO (chief executive officer) 
says he’s prepared to put millions more into the company — 
more coming this summer. 
 
So here’s the question. Here’s the question: why wouldn’t that 
minister use the government’s 60 per cent plus majority share 
position in this dot-com — because, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t 
really matter where dot-coms are located; they’re Internet based 
— why won’t he use that influence and at the very least relocate 
this company back to Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, what is ridiculous is their 
vision of Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. He would have that 
company come to Saskatchewan while at the same time their 
party’s vision is to move every one of our Crowns outside of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They want to sell all of our 
Crowns — move all the employees in Saskatchewan out of 
Saskatchewan, move all of the people with expertise, all of our 
head offices — they want to sell them off, move them out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So why would you want to move our Crowns out and sell them 
off — at the same time, having some investment that we have in 
the United States move back into Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
It’s a contradiction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister is once 
again trying to announce opposition policy. And he need . . . he 
ought not to do that, Mr. Speaker, because all he has to do is 
ask, and we’re prepared to tell him about the choices that we’re 
going to make, Mr. Speaker, for this province. 
 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

 

We’re going to choose places like Nipawin over places like 
Newcastle, Australia. We’re going to choose places like Moose 
Jaw over Mexico, Mr. Speaker, to build in and to invest in. 
That’ll be the choices we make and if he’d like us to go on to 
that length, we’re more than prepared to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, shortly after SaskTel first invested in 
Retx, they announced plans to set up a Canadian office — in 
Calgary. Retx CEO Ross Malme said the plan was for a Calgary 
office, with about 10 employees moved there in 2001. It’s on 
their Web site. SaskTel certainly knew about it; they were the 
largest shareholder at the time. We don’t know if the move 
happened or not, but we’d like the minister maybe to elaborate 
a little bit on that. And if Calgary was good enough for this 
SaskTel investment, why isn’t Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
last year all through the session they attacked SaskTel — one of 
our strongest Crowns, one of the Crowns that provides services 
in virtually every community in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
They attacked it on a daily basis; they attack it here again today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one question for them: are you going to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member would rephrase his last part of 
his statements — he’s got 10 seconds to do so. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You can understand 
why Saskatchewan people today are questioning the NDP’s 
priorities. They’ve got $80 million for Australia; they’ve got 
nothing for property tax relief. Mr. Speaker, they’ve got $30 
million for Chile and Mexico; they’ve got nothing for safe 
drinking water in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve got 20 million for a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia, and 
they have absolutely nothing for spot loss hail insurance. And 
the CEO of SaskTel says, and I quote: 
 

If there was no other capital available to Retx, we would 
not allow the company to starve. 

 
Community and farmers in this province can go without water 
but the NDP won’t allow an Atlanta-based company to starve, 
Mr. Speaker. When is this government going to get its priorities 
right? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the question as to 
whether or not they would keep SaskTel under the constant 
attack on SaskTel, and he wouldn’t answer the question. I’ll tell 
you why he wouldn’t answer the question. It’s right here, Mr. 
Speaker. I refer to the Moose Jaw Times-Herald of March 7. 
And I quote, Mr. Speaker, referring to the member from 
Thunder Creek: 
 

Stewart said the party is not committed to maintaining or 
selling Crown corporations. An independent review would 
determine their future (Mr. Speaker). 

 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to put it under review, 
Mr. Speaker. They know the results of the review, Mr. Speaker. 

They know the results of the review. They would sell every 
Crown in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Revenue-sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today the people of Saskatchewan are finding out the real 
priorities of this worn-out NDP government. 
 
Over the past 10 years the NDP have cut municipal 
revenue-sharing grants in half. Mr. Speaker, the NDP has no 
money for municipal priorities like safe water and good roads 
but they’ve got a wagonload of money for high-risk American 
dot-com companies like Retx. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that what the Municipal Affairs minister meant 
when he promised to champion the interest of municipalities in 
cabinet — more money for American dot-coms but no new 
money for municipalities in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
that the member has asked me the question that allows me to 
once again remind the members opposite that all municipalities 
throughout the province know that this government has in fact 
been very supportive of municipalities over the years. 
 
Five years ago there was no such thing as grants in lieu of taxes. 
Over $13 million up to the last year, Mr. Speaker. So I ask the 
member opposite, would he prefer that we do what their cousins 
to the west of us are doing? They’re raising taxes. 
 
And when he talks about ignoring municipalities in this 
province, the amount of money that’s now being on hold for 
infrastructure in that province is nowhere near, Mr. Speaker, 
what the amount of money and support we’ve been giving to 
our municipalities in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
10 years of being dumped on by this NDP government, you can 
understand why municipalities are getting a little tired of empty 
promises. For 10 years the NDP has been downloading on 
municipalities, which by the way might be news to the 
Municipal minister, and for 10 years the NDP is promising next 
year will get better. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, municipalities are saying enough is enough 
and property taxpayers are saying no to yet another NDP tax 
increase. Mr. Speaker, the NDP has taken a hatchet to 
municipal revenue sharing but spent a boatload of money — 
$80 million, Mr. Speaker — $80 million to build a cellular 
phone system in Australia. Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs agree with the NDP’s priorities — millions 
of dollars for an Australian phone system and more broken 
promises for Saskatchewan communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition . . . 
municipalities know that in 2001, 2000-2001, they received 
over $93 million in support from this government. Five years 
ago — once again I’m going to repeat — the grants in lieu of 
taxes afforded a substantial amount of return of money to those 
municipalities; the Centenary Fund, Mr. Speaker. But I guess 
what the members opposite would sooner hear is that 
infrastructure projects such as roads, schools, and hospitals 
worth $631 million have been delayed until the economy 
improves. That’s happening in Alberta, not here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister might be surprised to know that in the last 10 years 
municipalities are receiving less than half the dollars they were 
when these people came to power. Mr. Speaker, if the NDP’s 
plan was to drive municipal and education property taxes 
through the roof, their plan is working perfectly. 
 
According to the minister’s own Department of Municipal 
Affairs, property taxes are going up across Saskatchewan. 
Here’s a summary, Mr. Speaker. Property taxes for all 
municipalities up 7 per cent in 2001; urban property taxes up 
4.3 per cent; rural property taxes up 7 per cent; and property 
taxes on agriculture land up a whopping 10.3 per cent. And 
what is the NDP government doing about it? Absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Municipal Affairs explain to 
this House and to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan why his NDP 
government is blowing millions of dollars on American 
dot-coms, on Australian telephone systems, while they keep 
driving property taxes up at home in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I just 
want to commend the people of Saskatchewan for investing in 
this province and continuing to invest in this province and 
believe in this province and appreciate the support that they are 
receiving from this government. I talked to those people as 
well, Mr. Speaker, and they are appreciative. 
 
I guess, once again, what the members opposite would like to 
hear is lifting a freeze on school property tax that will cost 
property owners $45 million. I’m not sure where those 
questions are coming from. Are they coming from the 
neighbours to the West as a result of their recent release on the 
demands they are going to place on their taxpayers? Not here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Water Quality Improvements 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 
are for the Minister of Municipal Affairs as well. The recent 
Throne Speech by the NDP said this government plans to 
introduce legislative changes and direct action to ensure that the 
people of Saskatchewan have safe, sustainable, clean, drinking 
water. We all remember safe drinking water was a major issue 
last session, particularly when the people of North Battleford 

began getting sick. 
 
And we learned that the NDP government was not listening to 
advice by its own department officials who warned that the 
health of Saskatchewan people was at risk because of unsafe 
drinking water. 
 
Mr. Minister, communities aren’t looking for legislative 
changes, they’re looking for financial help to improve water 
treatment in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: How many communities in 
Saskatchewan currently, today, lack minimum water treatment 
and distribution facilities, and how many municipalities are not 
meeting water quality objectives and standards? How many, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There’s a lot of work being done to 
meet the water challenges of the province as a whole. 
 
And that member very well knows that in the last couple of 
years we have made tremendous progress in meeting some of 
the water challenges, Mr. Speaker. Not only are we putting 
millions of dollars in meeting some of the water infrastructure 
budget needs across this great province of Saskatchewan, but 
we have also, Mr. Speaker, put forward a number of proposals 
to work with the municipal governments to make sure that all 
their operators are certified, to make sure that we do 
inspections, Mr. Speaker, to get more lab tests done so to make 
sure the water samples are up to date. 
 
We’ve done that last year, Mr. Speaker, and that party across 
the way, and that member across the way, Mr. Speaker, they 
voted against that budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think that rambling response is going to cut it with the 
village of Perdue. The village of Perdue has applied to the 
Canada/Saskatchewan infrastructure program for the last three 
years, and every year they have been turned down for their 
request of $150,000. They need this money for improvements to 
their water treatment system. 
 
In fact, Mr. Dale Bonke of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) sent the town council a letter on 
February 6 that says, and I quote: 
 

Failure to correct these problems immediately could result 
in serious safety issues for your citizens and liability issues 
for your council. 
 

Lyle Hosler from Sask Water toured the plant recently and told 
the Perdue council that their lift station would be condemned by 
occupational health and safety if they saw it. 
 
Well last week the town’s well collapsed and the situation for 
the community is now desperate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if two government departments say that Perdue 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

 

seriously needs new water treatment facilities, why can’t they 
get any help from this government to supply safe drinking water 
to their citizens? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I will point out again that 
this government has been very upfront with some of the 
challenges that we have with water quality across the province. 
 
And I will point out, Mr. Speaker, that we have told every 
municipality, if they have a problem, they will hear about it 
from this government, Mr. Speaker. We have told them time 
and time again, get your water tested. If you’re a private well 
operator, if you’re a community, test your water. And if you 
have any problems, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to help you 
address those problems. And that this problem of making sure 
that the water quality across the province is good . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m just having a 
little difficulty hearing the minister. I would ask the minister to 
finish his statement. About 20 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government 
responds, Mr. Speaker. Not only going to make sure that all 
water operators are certified within the 5-year time frame, Mr. 
Speaker; not only going to make sure there’s inspections, Mr. 
Speaker, at the plant; not only going to make sure we put 
millions of dollars into infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. We’re going 
to respond alongside of the people that own and operate these 
water plants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out, all the workers that we hired last year, 
they voted against them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well perhaps, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister could try telling that to the mayor of 
Arran in eastern Saskatchewan. The mayor of Arran is now 
personally hauling water for the town because their water 
system is down. And they didn’t qualify for funding. And they 
have been told by this government that there is no 
compensation for their hauling expenses. And do you know 
where some of the water may be coming from, Mr. Speaker? 
Roblin, Manitoba. 
 
Hundreds of other communities in both large and small are 
facing water and waste treatment expenses, basic infrastructure 
needs here in Saskatchewan, not in Australia. Yet all they get 
from the NDP is a commitment for new legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has $200 million to blow on a 
risky dot-com venture in Atlanta, Georgia, but can’t come up 
with $150,000 for the town of Perdue. No new money for 
drinking water in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: which is more important, the 
people of Saskatchewan or your investment in Georgia? 
 
The Speaker: — Just want to remind the member to complete 

his statement, speaking through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker Again I . . . 
obviously it’s a . . . the investment and the return on investment 
is completely lost by members on the opposite side of the 
House. 
 
CIC’s (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan ) 
dividends to the General Revenue Fund were in the vicinity of 
$200 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s money that goes to our 
municipalities, that goes to creating Internet — high-speed 
Internet —throughout our small communities. 
 
The question that the member raises with respect to the village 
of Arran. We have been . . . Sask Water has been in touch with 
that mayor, and other mayors, and other communities, to 
discuss the problems that they have and offer support to them 
and suggestions on how we resolve those problems, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What I would suggest to the members, if they do have other 
specific villages throughout the province, individual situations, 
I would be pleased to receive a report from those particular 
communities and ensure that our people from Sask Water are 
alerted and will meet with them to discuss how we can resolve 
that issue. We are concerned about water quality throughout the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Assistance for Livestock Producers 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Agriculture. Yesterday the 
minister revealed once again that the federal government had 
rejected one of his government’s strongly worded letters asking 
for agriculture support. Now this time, it was a request for $2.5 
million to fund dugouts and well projects for Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
You know what Mr. Speaker? Saskatchewan livestock 
producers are tired of getting nothing but talk from the NDP 
government. Time and time again the NDP have hidden from 
their own responsibility to Saskatchewan farmers by blaming 
everything on the feds. Today, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
farmers are looking at the NDP for some answers. They keep 
hearing the NDP talk about the serious drought situation, so 
now they’re asking why the NDP won’t come up with the extra 
two and a half million dollars for a farm water program. Two 
and a half million dollars that this government could put into 
that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP has $20 
million to spend on a high-risk dot-com company in Atlanta, 
Georgia and not one extra penny for drought-affected livestock 
producers right here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Maple 
Creek would know very well because we’ve had a number of 
conversations, Mr. Speaker, about the importance and the need 
of getting water for farmers in Saskatchewan. And we had a 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

conversation, not only this year but last year, about the need to 
get water for farmers. 
 
And we got last year, Mr. Speaker, through our conversations 
and a joint bylaw, he and I and the associations in 
Saskatchewan, farm associations, were able to get an additional 
$1.5 million for producers last year. 
 
And we’re lobbying to get from the federal government 
enhancement to the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) again this year for Saskatchewan’s livestock 
producers. 
 
But as, Mr. Speaker, we’re busy lobbying away to get 
additional money — farm organizations and farm leaders in this 
province — we have the Agriculture critic from Kindersley 
standing up in Saskatchewan and saying that Saskatchewan 
farmers don’t need any money, Mr. Speaker, from the federal 
government — don’t need any money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley is on record 
now saying that Saskatchewan farmers don’t need money, while 
we’re busy working away trying to find money for 
Saskatchewan producers. And I say to the member opposite . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — . . . year we lobbied real hard to get any money 
at all, but what we got was a meagre $3 million program. Now 
what we have is producers who have completed their projects 
but won’t be paid for them because the program has already run 
out of money. Two, we have producers whose projects have 
been approved but won’t be able to finish them before the end 
of the deadline because of the severe winter weather. And three, 
we’ve already got growing concerns that the dry winter is going 
to exacerbate the drought situation, and the need for new wells 
and dugouts is going to increase this spring. 
 
Now the government is saying that they don’t have extra money 
of any kind for projects this coming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is it that the minister and the NDP have 
money for dot-coms in Atlanta, but only Georgia peanuts for 
drought-stricken Saskatchewan livestock producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say again to the member, and to 
the House, I have here a letter, Mr. Speaker, that I wrote to Mr. 
VanClief way back in . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, talking 
about the need for additional water for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And I’ve now received the correspondence from Mr. VanClief, 
as of March 6, and he says that this year there won’t be any 
additional money for Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker — 
no additional money for Saskatchewan producers. When all 
Saskatchewan people today — producers and farmers and farm 
organizations — are saying we should have more money. 
 
And not only are people across Saskatchewan saying that we 
should have more money for producers, but also the entire 
federal Liberal caucus that travelled the province just recently 
had conversations with Saskatchewan producers and all of those 

. . . and every one of those members, including the Liberal MPs 
(Member of Parliament), Mr. Speaker, said that we should have 
more assistance for Saskatchewan farmers today. 
 
But who is the only lone voice out there who is opposing 
Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker? It’s the critic from 
Kindersley — the agriculture critic. He’s the only guy who is 
on record in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, today saying that we, 
Saskatchewan farmers, don’t need money, Mr. Speaker. And I 
say to the . . . 
 
Mr. Elhard: —  . . . (inaudible) . . .  government may be 
prepared to abdicate their responsibility but this government has 
a responsibility of its own. Will the minister stand in his place 
and tell us how much money will his government commit today 
to fund water development projects for drought affected farmers 
and ranchers in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year this 
government found an additional $80 million for Saskatchewan 
farmers. Last year we found an additional 1.5, unprecedented 
for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say to 
the member opposite that on this side of the House we’re going 
to continue to work to find more additional money for farmers 
and also provide additional money for farmers. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Member, and to the member from 
Kindersley, who is the agricultural critic, don’t stand in the way 
of our good work because every time you get in the way, you 
know exactly what happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 7, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les 

prestations alimentaires familiales 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 8, The Family Maintenance Amendment 
Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 9, The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Toth. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always a pleasure to exercise our democratic opportunities in 
the legislature here. And I’m just going to do a short recap of 
my introduction yesterday for those who might have forgotten 
some of the trends that I was pursuing. 
 
First of all, I just want to remind everybody of the article, 
“Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just the best.” And the reason I 
want to emphasize it is the researchers were surprised at how 
much higher the figures were for Saskatchewan than anywhere 
else in Canada for charitable giving, for volunteering, for 
community involvement, caring enough to help, and 
particularly caring enough to become involved rather than 
simply sitting back and sniping from the edges. 
 
Now you’ll hear this theme a little bit more, Mr. Speaker, as I 
talk about the opposition sniping from the edges. 
 
Now I have to say I’m getting a little discouraged with these 
front page parrots. When Mr. Harris was on his roll, they 
jumped on that bandwagon. When Mr. Stockwell Day was on 
his run there, they jumped on his bandwagon. When Mr. Klein 
was on his roll, they jumped on his bandwagon. Gordon 
Campbell, they jumped on his bandwagon. I don’t think they 
have a thought of their own. Whenever they see a front page 
headline they like, they just jump on the bandwagon. 
 
But you know, I have to say that the excitement fades, Mr. 
Speaker. Right now we have a headline from the oft-quoted 
Alberta, from last year. Now I don’t notice the opposition 
saying very much about Alberta this year because when you 
jump onto a bandwagon, if you’re not careful, you can just as 
easily fall off again. 
 
And what’s the headlines here: “Taxman jams hand into most 
pockets”. 
 

Albertans will pay more for . . . health care, education . . . a 
budget that dashes Premier Ralph Klein’s pledge that the 
only way taxes in Alberta will go is down. 

 
The tax and fee increases are worth $722 million, including a 
brand new tax on sports. 
 
Now the budget boosts health care-premiums by 30 per cent, a 
move that’ll cost families 240 more dollars a year. And of 
particular note, I think for the opposition, would be lifting a 
freeze on school property tax that will cost property owners 45 
million. 

Albertans will pay 20 per cent more when they register 
their vehicles, file court documents, pay traffic fines. 

 
And I will say, as the opposition pursues their rather specious 
argument about hiring of public servants, last year the Alberta 
government boosted spending by more than 22 per cent and 
hired more than 1,000 staff based on projected energy revenues 
of 7.5 billion. 
 
So I’ll just close this little reminder, because I know what a 
short attention span some of the people opposite have: 
 

(The) infrastructure projects such as roads, schools and 
hospitals worth $631 million have been delayed until the 
economy improves. 

 
Late breaking news from Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I might also mention that, in terms of fiscal reality, Alberta 
knows that there is such a thing as fiscal reality. When you live 
in a province where 75 per cent of your trade is with the US 
(United States), when the US has experienced a dramatic drop 
in corporate income tax revenues and as well a corresponding 
reduction in oil and gas revenues, well, there’s a reality. And I 
have to say that, as depressing as it must be for the Sask Party 
to have all of their heroes crashing around them, where we have 
Alberta dealing with fiscal reality, BC (British Columbia) 
reckless in its response to its fiscal reality, Stockwell Day and 
Gordon Campbell just aren’t feeding any good lines these days, 
and the bloom is off the rose for Mike Harris. 
 
So I would suggest that they pay a little bit of attention to the 
four pillars that we’ve laid out in our plan as mentioned in Her 
Honour’s most excellent address and, of course, those four 
pillars being: investment in the economy, in the environment; 
investment in infrastructure; provision of quality education; and 
healthy and self-reliant families. 
 
Now I mentioned yesterday I wouldn’t spend too much time on 
issues that my colleagues have dealt with very well, so I’m 
going to emphasize just a few. One of the things of course that’s 
very important for Saskatchewan into the future is 
environmental technology and opportunities for growth in the 
environment area. And I just wanted to remind people that 
recently 16 million acres were committed to the representative 
areas network. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Now this is an innovative agreement where cattle will still be 
allowed to graze but land will be protected from being tilled or 
otherwise disturbing the natural growth there. Now this of 
course helps in drought situations and is a very good way to 
conserve the quality of land in our cattle ranching areas. 
 
The second thing I want to mention is the second major wind 
project, 10.8 million. The members opposite are wondering 
where the money goes. I’ll repeat, 10.8 million to the Cypress 
wind power project to provide green power to the University of 
Regina and as well, who’s going to be using it to power some of 
the green projects that are going on there. That’s a project with 
Vestas Canada wind technology to supply turbines near Gull 
Lake. And I’ll also mention that by August the first wind power 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

project with SunBridge will be in full operation. 
 
The next one will be the ethanol announcement that is on the 
way. But there is no question that, as well as being a huge boon 
to the agricultural sector and the energy sector, that this as well 
is going to be very helpful in greenhouse gas reduction. 
 
So I just mention those as new areas of economic development 
linked to the environment. And I think the member from Regina 
South did a very good job yesterday of going through a lot of 
these areas. 
 
Now one of the things I want to talk particularly about is the 
very negative effect that the Sask Party has on the young people 
in our province when they work so hard at depressing them. 
You know it’s interesting. One of our young people who works 
in the bureaucracy, when I was asking him about young people 
leaving rural Saskatchewan, he said, well you know, he said, 
the whole time I was growing up the only thing my parents said 
to me was, you know, be sure you get out of farming; be sure 
you get an education. 
 
Now we can hardly expect our young people to stay here when 
the advice they receive from their parents or from the 
opposition is to get out of what they’re doing. The way that we 
of course are going to succeed is for people to become 
innovative in what they are doing. And I would have to say that 
the biggest detriment right now to young people staying in the 
province is the very poor attitude of the members opposite in 
discouraging people. 
 
When I talk to young people who have gone to Alberta to work, 
wages are lower, housing are higher, costs of apartments are 
higher, and in fact they actually get two weeks less off work as 
part of their labour standards there as well, I might add. 
 
But the fact of the matter is it’s . . . they go there having 
believed the fantasy that’s painted by the members opposite and 
are very disappointed when they see the reality and usually very 
quickly return to work in the province. And I have to say, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re doing a number of things to make sure that 
those opportunities are here. 
 
The centennial student summer program recognizes the need for 
young people to have a good experience in professional-level 
employment. And so 1,600 jobs were created last summer under 
the centennial student employment program so that students 
could get both the direct career experience but also would be 
able to start to look at the various employers they might care to 
work for when they graduate. 
 
We have the very special program in the public service — the 
aboriginal public service internship program — which is 
assisting professional young aboriginal people in getting into 
the leadership levels of the public service where they are 
under-represented. And we’re very proud of this program and 
of the high-quality young people who have applied for it. 
 
And the leaders of tomorrow program — shortly there will be 
young people joining the boards of our Crown corporations to 
add their professional advice and their fresh skills to the work 
of the Crowns. 
 

We have the Youth PACE (Provincial Action Committee on the 
Economy) Committee, which is made up of young people who 
give input into government actions in areas of education and the 
economy. And as well of course, the post-secondary graduate 
tax credit, in which young people who remain in Saskatchewan 
receive a tax credit on their income tax. 
 
We have programs for young people who may not be in 
post-secondary but are certainly wanting to have quality work 
and job start future skills in the apprenticeship program and as 
well, the Department of Economic Development helps young 
people get involved through the regional economic 
development authorities in doing economic development work 
out in their regions. 
 
We have an aboriginal education training action plan that is 
assisting young people in taking their appropriate place in our 
workplaces and our communities. And as well, 
technology-enhanced learning, which is enabling young people 
from around the province to have access to a full range of 
educational services that they could otherwise only get at 
universities. 
 
And I’ll just mention Virtual Campus — Canada’s first. And 
Tracy Belisle, who’s in her first-year nursing class says, it’s 
allowed me to be at home more. While other institutions offer 
some courses on-line, nothing in Canada — nothing in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker — compares to the extent of the virtual campus. 
And that’s a program being delivered by SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) so people are able 
to get started on their nursing careers without leaving their 
home community. 
 
The other myth I’d like to dispel is about young people staying 
in the province. We know that over 90 per cent of SIAST 
graduates get high-quality employment directly related to their 
field of training in the province. And as well the University of 
Saskatchewan just completed a study that I have here: of the 
1,653 graduates surveyed, 1,245 continue to live in the province 
and they found work as quickly and successfully as those who 
moved outside. And over 95 per cent were very satisfied with 
their occupations, which I’d think would probably beat some of 
the job satisfaction levels in other areas. 
 
So, I just want to say that this is a complete myth that young 
people are not finding quality jobs here, and we’re certainly 
working to open up more and more opportunities in those areas, 
with the increase in research projects like the greenhouse gas, 
the CO2 centre, the synchrotron. There’s a whole range of areas 
opening up in research and in the public service as some of the 
baby boomers, who are maybe a little less boomy than they 
used to be, start to retire and open up professional jobs in the 
public service and all our other institutions. 
 
Now the one thing I particularly want to mention, because I 
found this very disturbing, we’ve . . . many of us have fought 
long and hard for young women and women generally, to have 
equality. And here’s a quote from the Leader of the Opposition, 
“Stay home, women told.” Elwin Hermanson was questioned at 
a Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce meeting about why the 
Sask Party couldn’t nominate more women to run as candidates. 
 
The Sask Party leader said it was difficult since their concerns 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

 

were with the home and they don’t like dealing with conflict. 
And you know, I have to say that I think all of the elected 
women here have a lot concerns about the home. But we also 
have concerns about women having the same opportunities to 
make a choice about how they manage their professional and 
home lives. And we stand for women having that same 
opportunity. 
 
Certainly as I’ve gone around the province and been to various 
schools, I’ve seen the huge strides that we’ve made in programs 
for young women in math, science, and technology, and these 
have been very successful. So I’ll just say that unlike the party 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, we do not stand for being barefoot and 
in the kitchen, I think is the old phrase. We stand for young 
women having the opportunity to be both family people and 
professional people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The second area I want to explore here 
is about the film and video industry in the province. I think it’s 
important that people understand that this is not like the old 
days of Hollywood where a few towns had a movie theatre and 
there was one area of the world that cranked out films for 
people to see. 
 
We live in a multi-channel universe now where people spend a 
very large proportion of their time looking at various cable 
stations, being involved in . . . in going to movies. It’s a very 
large marketplace today in the multi-channel universe. And I 
have to say that Saskatchewan film producers have product on 
many, many of the channels today whether it’s Discovery 
Channel, TLC (The Learning Channel), Bravo!, CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network), the Women’s Channel, the home 
and gardening channel, the cooking channel — you name it — 
the National Geographic Channel, The History Channel, 
Global. We are everywhere in the multi-channel universe. And 
these are high-quality film and video productions by 
Saskatchewan talent and Saskatchewan producers and technical 
people. 
 
And, you know, people say well, why does that matter, why do 
we bother? For one, it’s a huge marketplace. But secondly, 
when I watch a movie, I kind of like to see Saskatoon or 
Southey or La Ronge in the background. I don’t always want to 
see Chicago and New York and San Francisco. I like to see 
some of my own home landscapes. 
 
I think that we’ve seen with some of our filmmakers how the 
Saskatchewan perspective is a perspective valued by investors 
around the world who are wanting their story told in a particular 
way, particularly in the documentary film area. But we’ve seen 
other producers be very successful in the feature film area 
where they’ve done programs like the children’s story studio 
program. 
 
These programs have been translated into many languages and 
are shown throughout the world to children of many regions 
and many languages. And I say if we have all this talent, this 
investment that we’ve made in our creative sector and in our 
technical sector, then film is merely a value-added level of 
activity that takes place on top of that skill set and infrastructure 

that we’ve already built. Whether it’s film and video, new 
media, IT (information technology), video streaming, these are 
all complimentary skill sets that fit into knowledge economy. 
 
And I just want to say that it’s a huge economic sector, it’s 
worth $1 billion in Canada today. And I think that we have a 
very competitive edge in Saskatchewan. Now, we lost some of 
our competitive edge when we didn’t have a sound stage, 
because some of the productions require that. And of course 
when your productions have to relocate out of province, so do 
your crews, so does your technology. And ultimately some of 
your folks make connections with other enterprises outside the 
province. 
 
So we’re very optimistic as we go into the sound stage project 
that we are going to repatriate much of our high-level 
production activity and certainly will be seeing a lot of good 
new synergies with the production centre with broadcasting, 
music, sound, and educational activity taking place in the same 
place as film production. And we’re seeing some new 
relationships between the university, in its script-writing centre, 
working together with the English departments and the Fine 
Arts department, together with film people, in applying skill 
sets and new ways. 
 
And the other thing I particularly like about the film industry, 
Mr. Speaker, is that 30 per cent of the people who work in it are 
under 30, and I think that’s a good boost for Regina to have a 
lot of young people involved in the city. 
 
Now people might wonder, how many jobs does this create? 
Well if you’ve ever watched the credits running at the end of a 
film, you’ll have some idea of how many jobs it creates. And I 
ask you to have some patience to watch those sometimes, 
because it’s very educational to see all the work that goes into a 
film. 
 
But at a level of $40 million worth of investment, there’s about 
600 to 800 direct jobs, another 600 indirect jobs, and then about 
1,945 jobs of services that the people in that industry use, for a 
total of 3,400 jobs. So this is a very good area. And like I say, 
the ability to have film year-round means that our crews don’t 
have to leave the province for part of the year. 
 
And it makes things possible like this — I just ran across this 
recently — a big step for Rider Pride. And this was, of course, 
comedian Brett Butt, who’s done a little 10-minute comedic 
short film by Saskatoon’s Tony Hrynchuk and Greg Portis. And 
the deal was with ALLIANCE ATLANTIS, which is one of the 
major film company distributors in Canada. 
 
And this film is going to be shown at the beginning of the 
ALLIANCE ATLANTIS new film, Men with Brooms. So here 
we are, we’ve got Rider Pride being shown in theatres 
everywhere that Men with Brooms is shown across Canada. So 
that’s a very good coup for this film company. 
 
The next thing I want to mention, because I’m so incredibly 
proud of them, is the folks at Partners in Motion. Just in the last 
year they’ve received an Emmy award — very rare; in fact 
almost unheard of for a Canadian company to receive an Emmy 
— for their show 13 Seconds - The Kent State Shootings. 
 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

Now this was both on the learning channel and the history 
television, and certainly Ron Goetz and Chris Triffo were 
involved in that particular show. And it was interesting when I 
talked to them about that show, why it was produced by a 
Canadian company. And what they said to me was that the 
American producers felt that the emotional framework in the 
US was so intense around the Kent State shootings that they 
thought they could only get an objective view of this situation 
by having a Canadian film company do it. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And one of the other things that was unusual about these 
particular folks was that they were able to convince people who 
had never been willing to be interviewed before to tell their 
stories to a Canadian film company and, in fact, a 
Saskatchewan film company. So we are extremely proud of this 
company for receiving that Emmy and for telling the story of 
the Kent State shootings, which of course many of us would be 
familiar with from our days as students. 
 
The second coup that they have done lately is called The Eye of 
the Storm done in partnership with Harmony Entertainment 
Management. Now Paul Millar, Mark Mori, Steven Donziger, 
and Maureen Meehan travelled to Ramallah to meet with 
President Arafat, who of course has won a Nobel Peace Prize 
for his work in trying to resolve the problems in the Middle 
East. 
 
And I’ll just read this quote from Ron Goetz, executive 
producer for In the Eye of the Storm : 
 

It’s a unique and intriguing opportunity for Partners in 
Motion to be involved in the production that features such a 
key player in international events. Our goal is to produce a 
documentary that will help the viewer understand more 
clearly why the Israelis and Palestinians are in conflict and 
one of the most important figures, who for five decades has 
been at the centre of the controversy. 

 
Their lives were at risk in going to do this story and certainly 
again I think it’s bringing that Canadian perspective, bringing 
that Saskatchewan perspective to a story that needs to be told 
about things going on in other parts of the world. So again, 
congratulations to these folks. 
 
And one of the people I want to recognize in terms of why we 
have such a successful film industry here is Jean (Hans) Oser 
who at 94 just recently died. He was the father of the U of R 
(University of Regina) film department and his greatest legacy 
was the hundreds of film students he taught, mentored, and 
encouraged to pursue their lifelong passion. In 1953 Oser won 
an Academy Award for his short film The Light in the Window 
which was a profile of painter Jan Vermeer. 
 
But at the urging of a friend Oser left New York to come to 
Saskatchewan to establish a film department at the university. 
And many people believe that Saskatchewan’s film industry 
wouldn’t exist today, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t for Mr. Oser’s 
contribution. Now I know they’re having a memorial for him 
later this month, but certainly again Mr. Jean Oser had a huge 
amount to do with why so many people in Saskatchewan are 
crazy about films. 

Now the next area I want to mention here is . . . Oh, maybe just 
before I leave the film, we have a company that was just about 
to head off to BC — a company from Saskatoon, an animation 
studio — and because of the sound stage they have now brought 
their 28 staff . . . are bringing their 28 staff to Regina and 
maybe they’ll make a cartoon about the Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know — we’ll have to see whether they are 
able to spend a little time on that. But I have to admit there’s 
not much funny about it so it might not be the best subject for 
humour. 
 
The next thing I want to talk about in the cultural industries is 
the part that culture plays in the economy. And I want to 
mention that 51 per cent — that’s 51 per cent of all Canadians 
— 12-plus years of age are arts patrons; and 37 per cent are 
sports fans. Now I don’t want the sports fans to get all bent out 
of shape about that but I think sometimes people have a 
different perception. They think that more people go to sporting 
events than artistic events. But again I mention that 51 per cent 
of all Canadians 12-plus are patrons of the arts. 
 
Now if you combine arts patrons and sports patrons, 70 per cent 
of the Canadian population are involved in these things. And 
they’re passionate about these activities — they use words like 
exciting to characterize hockey and riveting for theatre. So I 
think we have to understand that these things aren’t just 
hobbies; they aren’t just part-time activities; they aren’t just 
things we do while we’re not at work. These things are a 
fundamental part of both human development, who we are, and 
our economy — and are increasingly becoming part of the 
economy. 
 
And in that regard here’s a person who I have met in my 
constituency — his name is Edward Poitras. Edward Poitras 
was one of the seven winners of the Governor General’s 
Awards in Visual and Media Arts this year. Now he’s had a 
distinguished career in the visual and media arts and as well has 
made outstanding contributions in this area. Edward Poitras has 
been in almost every major contemporary Native art exhibit of 
the last 20 years. 
 
In 1995 — and I remember this because he was looking for 
funding to get there at the time — he was the first Aboriginal 
artist to represent Canada at the Venice biennial. Born in 
Regina, Poitras is a treaty Indian of Métis ancestry and a 
member of the Gordon First Nation. In the late 1970s he studied 
at the Indian Cultural College in Saskatoon and the Native Arts 
and Communication Department of Manitou College in La 
Macaza, Quebec. 
 
The themes of assimilation, genocide, displacement, and 
survival permeate his work. And the jury that looked at Edward 
Poitras’s work said that he is one of the most compelling and 
eloquent artists to have emerged from the rich creativity of 
contemporary Canadian art. He does sculpture, painting, 
drawing, installation work, and crosses many cultural borders 
with the mystery of the trickster coyote which many people 
would be familiar with. So well done, Edward. 
 
And just on that note, I want to switch for a moment to some of 
the other developments that have been taking place in the 
economy. And I want to thank some of our local partners 
because the successes that I’m going to talk about would not 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

 

have been possible without the co-operation of the mayor and 
city council, the Regina Economic Development Authority. 
And I do want to thank all the people who operate facilities and 
businesses that focus on entertainment, service, growth, and 
development in the city — the people with Regina’s best 
interests at heart and Saskatchewan’s best interests. 
 
But I would be remiss if I didn’t mention our Moose Jaw 
partners who are part of the economic development region and 
part of the Regina-Moose Jaw corridor because there are great 
developments all along the way. I don’t know if you know this, 
Mr. Speaker, but a trip to Moose Jaw today could now take an 
entire day because along the way there are art galleries, tea 
shops where you can have a slice of many berry pie — it is very 
good, Mr. Speaker, I recommend it — and a side adventure to 
Claybank Brick Plant which has to be one of the most 
interesting places I’ve ever gone into. I had no idea a brick plant 
could be that interesting. And there is stained-glass artisans 
along the way, organic gardens. 
 
So if you ever have a whole day to get to Moose Jaw, I suggest 
the Regina-Moose Jaw corridor to you as one of the excellent 
ways to spend a day. And I might emphasize that all these 
businesses along the way are either on farms or in small towns. 
So these are people who are very committed to where they are 
and what they’re doing. 
 
Now in terms of the infrastructure that the government and our 
other partners have developed in the last several years in 
Regina, we have our new SIAST campus along with the 
expanded nursing program. We have the Show Lounge 
expansion to Casino Regina. We have our investment in 
Saskatchewan Science Centre ensuring its viability in tourism. 
The investment in the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 
which is a national and internationally recognized institution. 
 
The establishment of the Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre. The establishment of the Greenhouse Gas Technology 
Centre. Very large investments in community schools. A 
leading-edge sound stage to reuse the old teachers’ heritage 
college building. Development of the knowledge corridor in 
Research Park. 
 
There’s 300 employees that have been moved from the outside 
area of Regina into the downtown which is helping with 
revitalization of the area. As you know, we’ve been involved in 
an upgrade of the legislature heritage site here. And the 
Education Building has been expanded at the U of R 
(University of Regina). Luther College and Campion College 
have both had renovations and technology upgrades. 
 
And these are all investments that we think are important to 
help grow the economy and to prepare young people for the 
work ahead. 
 
I want to just go for a minute on the question of high-speed 
Internet and cellular service. You know, the opposition wonders 
where the money goes. Well 100 million of it is going directly 
out to rural Saskatchewan. I kind of like this heading — it’s 
really not . . . (inaudible) . . . of much, Mr. Speaker, but it says: 
“Go digital or eat dust.” 
 
And the next one is called: “The perils of the slow Internet.” 

Which is kind of interesting, because right beside the picture is 
our Christina LeMay Doan speedskating here. I guess fast 
skaters and fast Internet having something in common. 
 
But one of the things that the article talks about is that you can’t 
leave these kind of developments to the private sector alone. 
Because if you do, you will have a digital divide. Because it is 
not profitable for the private sector to set up small Internet 
connections in various locations. 
 
One of the reasons we’ve been able to put together the most 
cost-effective broadband high-speed Internet project in Canada 
. . . And I have to say that companies like Cisco that are world 
renowned believe this is one of the best projects for universal 
coverage of Internet in the entire world. Again, Saskatchewan 
leading in the world. 
 
The fact of the matter is it can’t be left to market forces alone, 
because the penalties of failing to keep up are too large. One 
hundred and twenty-eight kilobytes is needed for full motion 
video, 100 megabits per second is the level at which Internet 
multi-media comes into its own. And a high proportion of the 
latest products, educational offerings, are at these speeds. And 
without high-speed Internet, people don’t have the opportunity 
to access these materials or to access them in any kind of a 
meaningful way. 
 
And certainly if we want our citizens in Saskatchewan to be 
able to have the most up-to-date products with a high-speed 
communications system, economists estimate that it could be 
worth 400 billion US in growth each year in this marketplace. 
But again because of the fact that it is expensive to install, 
because we own SaskTel and SCN satellite servers, we have 
been able to install Internet and will by next year have 90 per 
cent of the province covered with both cellular and Internet. We 
are actually a front of places like Toronto, where in some places 
in their inner city they won’t have the level of connectivity that 
we have throughout rural and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So if they are wondering where we spend 100 million bucks, 
that’s one place. And that’s only one of them. And I just want to 
mention that. 
 
When I was in La Ronge recently, Tina Anderson, the Chair of 
the Northern Lights School Division, praised this investment. It 
said, quoting Tina here: 
 

The benefit to the school division and the kids who attend 
our schools is just immense. CommunityNet is one of the 
most important events since the building of the roads in 
northern Saskatchewan. Northern Lights school district 
Director of Education, Ralph Pilz, said: 

 
Saskatchewan’s and Canada’s economic future depends on 
training our children. If this generation of Canadians is 
technologically literate, we will compete and succeed. 

 
And as you know, our Premier has said that we are very happy 
to be making this significant step in bridging the digital divide. 
 
And you know, people in the city maybe can’t appreciate what 
it means to be in La Ronge and not have access to all the largest 
libraries, the university library, all the various resources on how 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

to do various things, how to start a business, how to do this, 
farm information. Now with high-speed Internet, it won’t 
matter where you live, Mr. Speaker. You can live anywhere. 
You can take music lessons on-line if you want to. You can 
attend a conference via live video streaming — that happening 
to be one of the companies that SaskTel invested in. 
 
And I would just have to say that our government is determined 
that rural and northern Saskatchewan will not lag behind 
because they don’t have the infrastructure that they need in 
communications technology. 
 
And here we have from Lorne Gottselig who’s been teaching 
for 16 years working out of a rural school. And working out of 
a rural school means he didn’t always have the same facilities 
as in the city. But now one thing is equal — the computers. 
 
Getting high-speed in every school is an excellent idea because 
it creates a level playing field. So what a teacher does in Regina 
or Saskatoon could be translated over to a teacher that teaches 
in rural Saskatchewan. And certainly in areas like calculus and 
other areas where teachers have sometimes had difficulty 
getting a specialist into a small school, it now means they can 
assist a teacher via distance education to deliver some highly 
specialized courses. And in some areas of rural Saskatchewan 
where we have multi-use facilities, community colleges are 
sharing the same computer labs and whatnot, where the students 
use them in the daytime and the other students use them in the 
evening — making very good use of that investment in 
technology. 
 
And when the opposition again questions our investment, I 
want them to ask these towns what they think about our 
investment in Internet and digital cellular — Turtleford, Loon 
Lake, Rockglen, Estevan, Carlyle, Grenfell, Churchbridge, 
Foam Lake, St. Walburg, Meadow Lake, Assiniboia, 
Gravelbourg, Coronach, Willow Bunch, Bengough — they will 
have it and I cannot believe that a $100 million leading 
investment that no other government in the world is doing is not 
good enough for the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — However, a party that inappropriately 
uses its Web site is probably not thinking terribly deeply about 
these things. But we won’t mention that. We’ll just throw that 
away. 
 
Okay. The next thing I want to talk about just for a moment is 
the provision of quality education because we think this is so 
important for young people to have the opportunities. As you 
know, last year our community schools went from 40 to 83 and 
I want to particularly recognize Sacred Heart. 
 
Sacred Heart Community School is in the riding of Regina 
Centre. And I talked to the principal. I said, what do you think 
has made your school such a success? And this particular 
principal has been there for the last seven years. And she said to 
me, well the first thing I did was get rid of the authoritarian 
structures in the school and established a school based on 
mutual respect. 

She said, the second thing we did was get rid of the 
unstructured time at recess and lunch hour. They have a shorter 
lunch hour and replace it with structured physical activity in the 
gymnasium. Every class has two half-hours of physical activity 
a day and she said, we get their heart rate up twice a day. I 
think, Mr. Speaker, you should consider getting us out of here 
for a couple of half-hours a day to get our heart rates up. But the 
fact of the matter is that that physical activity has had a huge 
effect on that school. 
 
And the other thing they’ve done, because some of the kids are 
kids who have had a mixed school history, they are quite often 
behind their age grade level, so what they did was they mixed 
the classrooms up so that it’s harder for the kids to identify 
which kids are in grade 3, which are in grade 5, which are in 
grade 8. But they’re all following their own learning programs. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if you went into that school, 
nobody has to tell you that it’s an award winning school 
because you can feel it. You can feel it in the hallways; you can 
feel it in the co-operative, calm atmosphere there; and the happy 
kids who are in that school. Congratulations to that principal for 
having the ability and the courage to make the changes in that 
school setting. 
 
High schools have been added to this community school 
program. And we have found, in areas where there are 
community high schools, that they actually have waiting lists of 
young people wanting to get back into school. So unlike the 
opposition who tend quite often to characterize young people as 
people just wanting to commit crimes and getting in trouble and 
needing boot camps, the fact of the matter is, is that in schools 
like this there’s very positive developments for the 
communities. 
 
And programs like the cadet program — which is voluntary and 
students can only participate in it if they don’t break the law — 
exist at Scott Community Centre. And certainly these are very 
successful programs. 
 
The other thing I want to mention is our libraries. Although the 
province is not as directly involved in funding libraries, we do 
some funding there. But the fact of the matter is, is that libraries 
are very important centres of computer access for people who 
may not have computers at home. I don’t know if people know 
this, but you can have your e-mail received at a library; you can 
go on-line at the library and do that, and it is very affordable for 
people who may not have these things. 
 
And lastly, I want to talk a little bit about SchoolPLUS. 
SchoolPLUS is built on the idea of community schools, but the 
idea being to have a school that meets the needs of your 
community. Now your community could be quite different 
depending on the income levels of people who live there, the 
kind of work the parents do, the kind of support services. But 
SchoolPLUS will be built around those services in each 
community, coming together around the school to create 
healthy . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you going to pay for it? How much 
money are you going to put into that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well if you read your budget — the 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

 

opposition is chirping, how much money are you going to put in 
— if they read their budget they would see that millions were 
put in last year and millions more will be put in this year. But I 
don’t think they know how to read a budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to in fact just thank the public schools, the Catholic 
school boards, the community schools, the early learning 
centres, and the libraries for all the work they do in education. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to speak a little bit about healthy 
and self-reliant families. You know, I want to talk for a minute 
about the minimum wage because some of the critics of the 
minimum wage, who think that people should be able to live on 
less than $12,000 a year, they say that government should do 
more to support the minimum wage. 
 
Well let me explain, Mr. Speaker, what the government already 
is doing to support minimum wage earners. The fact of the 
matter is, is with our tax changes that we made in the last 
budget, over 55,000 low-income people were taken completely 
off the tax rolls. They pay no tax any more. People who are 
working families — who are working poor — have health, 
dental, and eyeglass benefits covered to make sure that the 
absence of those benefits doesn’t create a disincentive to work. 
 
There is the Saskatchewan Income Plan which supplements the 
incomes of working poor families. There is the PST (provincial 
sales tax) rebate which gives back the amount of money 
estimated that people at different income levels paid — I think 
it goes up to about an income of $25,000. 
 
And the biggest benefit we have of all to people of all income 
levels is a public health care system, because it means if you’re 
a minimum wage-earner, you don’t have to watch someone in 
your family die because they didn’t have the money to go and 
get the health care that they needed. 
 
And this circumstance still exists in the US today, where 
millions of their residents are not covered unless they have a 
private plan with an employer. And our employers forget that in 
the US employers pay for those health premiums themselves; 
they’re not covered under a public system. And I think that’s 
one of the biggest benefits we have in our society, to people of 
all income levels, but particularly low-income people who 
would have to have great grief and self blame if they were not 
able to afford the medical help that their families need. 
 
On a positive note, I don’t think I can go through all of them 
today, but I’ll hit some highlights. I’ve added some information 
to my newsletter called the Winner’s Circle. And this is where 
we congratulate people who have won various things. And the 
problem, Mr. Speaker, is not finding names to put in here; the 
problem is finding enough space to put all the names in here. 
 
We have, for example, all the young people from Regina — 96 
who were participants at the 2002 Saskatchewan Winter Games. 
We have Edward Poitras, who I just mentioned, winner of the 
Governor-General’s Award, 2002; Mark Knoll, long-track 
speed skater at the 2002 Winter Olympic Games in Salt Lake 
City; Maurice Thibodeau, 2002 winner of the U of R Ace, 
Regina entrepreneur of the year; PSW Architecture and Interior 
Design, 2002 Municipal Heritage Award; John Cote and Barb 
Stevenson-Cote, these were winners of Canada’s outstanding 

young farmers; University of Regina Cougars women’s 
basketball team, 2001 athlete award and team of the year; 
Hillary Adams and Ingrid Currie, athletes of the year awards; 
Jump.ca, named to the top 100 of fastest growing businesses for 
the third year in a row; Xponential Products, waste reduction, 
2001 Corporate Leadership Award; Stephen Hall, 2001 
international Emmy for an episode of Street Sense; Chris Triffo 
and Ron Goetz, the Emmy for Thirteen Seconds - Kent State; 
Trevor Herriot, 2001 Writer’s Trust of Canada Award for River 
in a Dry Land, and the international recognition for Sacred 
Heart Community School, the only school in Canada of forty 
honoured and to be showcased at the conference in Washington, 
DC (District of Columbia). 
 
And would I ever appreciate it, Mr. Speaker, to hear the 
opposition bragging about some of these successful 
Saskatchewan people instead of tearing down, moaning and 
groaning, gloom and doom, on and on, ad nauseam. 
 
Now the last thing I want to talk about in this particular section 
of my response to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker — and a 
most excellent address I thought it was that Her Honour gave, 
well delivered and well presented — but I want to talk just 
about active school communities and the benefits of physical 
activity. You know, over the past several years we’ve put a little 
more emphasis in schools on, you know, some of the justice 
needs, some of the counselling needs, the food programs, etc. 
But in the midst of all that, that we can’t also forget that young 
people need activity. They need physical activity; they need arts 
and culture to develop. 
 
I really do believe the Aboriginal model that there’s four areas 
of development: intellectual, spiritual, emotional, and physical. 
And I think it’s very important that young people have access to 
that full range of developmental activities. 
 
And I just want to mention that in studies of regular physical 
activity, people experience improved concentration, enhanced 
memory and learning, enhanced creativity, better problem 
solving, and improved mood state for up to two hours following 
exercise. Now moderate to vigorous physical activity enhances 
skill performance in classroom in arithmetic, reading, 
memorization, and categorization, and as well improves 
self-esteem and self-concept. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, those are all positives. But there’s 
some negatives we have to be concerned about. Childhood 
obesity is increasing and it’s directly linked to a lack of physical 
activity. 
 
Now 40 to 90 per cent of overweight youngsters become obese 
adults who are at high risk of developing heart disease and 
diabetes. And one of the particularly disturbing trends lately has 
been the children who never before have had Type 2 diabetes, 
adult-onset diabetes, are now starting to have this as children 
directly related to diet and lack of exercise. 
 
And so this is a serious medical problem developing that’s 
going to have long-term consequences for the health care 
system and for our Minister of Health over here who is going to 
have to figure out how to increase expenditures in the health 
care system for growing unhealthy people. 
 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

And one of the things that the research shows is that exercise 
actually has more to do with bone development than drinking 
milk does. So even if you can’t afford a glass of milk, you can 
afford a walk around the block. And the important thing is for 
us to educate, encourage, and motivate children to participate. 
And maybe in motivating them, Mr. Speaker, we’ll motivate 
ourselves. 
 
Certainly there’s a number of grandparents in the legislature 
here and taking your grandchild out for a walk is a good thing 
to do. So I’ll just say that we very much appreciate the active 
schools community’s efforts and programs like the In Motion 
program in Saskatoon where they’re actively working on 
getting schools to sign contracts to increase the physical activity 
within the school area. 
 
And again, just in wrapping up this section, I’m going to 
mention a thank you to the school boards, Social Services, 
Justice, community service agencies, parents, police, 
community schools, and all the service providers who are out 
there working to make communities better for children. 
 
And you know there are some people, Mr. Speaker, who said 
there’s not much new in the Throne Speech. Now I want to talk 
about that for a minute because, you know, building highways 
goes on every year. And it’s not new to build a highway but it is 
new to twin a highway, and it is new to upgrade roads, and it is 
new to use new road technology. So don’t expect that we’re 
going to quit building roads, we’re going to continue doing that. 
And I know they’d like something new and exciting, but I think 
improvements and twinning in roads and road technology is 
exciting. 
 
Putting in high-speed broadband Internet is now not new 
because we started it last year, but it’s new to the people that 
didn’t get it last year. 
 
And community schools aren’t new but adding 43 more, 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan, 
and adding high schools is new. And every community that is 
now under SchoolPLUS will be moving to a model of 
community-based control of education — this is new for those 
communities. 
 
Especially when other provinces are discussing how to privatize 
their schools or how to get into charter schools, people in 
Saskatchewan are focusing on how to make the schools we 
have better; to focus our resources around the schools and to 
work co-operatively, not using our individual money to improve 
some school where we can take our kids out of the mainstream 
and put them over there so they are separate from the rest of the 
kids in the community. No, this is about making the schools 
better for all of the kids. 
 
And I think it’s a Saskatchewan model that I really appreciate, 
and would not appreciate having to think about sending my 
granddaughter to a private school so that she could get a quality 
education. I’m happy and feel good about the fact that all the 
kids in her school are getting the same quality education. 
 
Now, improving health care isn’t new but there are many new 
service improvements that have been begun in the health plan 
announced a few months ago. There will be service 

improvements and new accountability measures. And I just say 
to those who are always looking for something new and I ask 
them, Mr. Speaker, to give their heads a shake because value 
added is about building on what you have. Value added is about 
building on your strength to grow and improve, and value added 
is about using what’s uniquely yours to lead in world 
development. 
 
So we don’t need to be like somebody else. We need to look at 
what our strengths are and value add on top of those strengths, 
adding to the areas that are working and that are doing well. 
They may not be brand new but they’re constantly improving. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And to the Leader of the Opposition, not mentioning any names 
— the leader over there will know who they are — I have to say 
that the quip about the recycling logo on the back of the Throne 
Speech was particularly offensive; because I have to tell you, I 
live in a neighbourhood where a whole bunch of people who 
believe that reduce, reuse, and recycle is a very good concept 
and all in all a pretty sensible idea. 
 
These folks are happy to hear about new wind power, about the 
development of ethanol, about the investment in leading edge 
technology for communications, about increased investment in 
research. They like fiscal responsibility and they like the 
enhanced role that the Minister of Finance has in quarterly 
reporting. 
 
So you say, is it more of the same? Well you’re darn right it is. 
It’s more good stuff and I’m not at all worried about supporting 
a Throne Speech where there’s more good stuff. 
 
Now, I have to say we’ve heard about the Alberta situation with 
all the public servants that were hired last year because they had 
an upturn in oil and gas revenues, as we did. This year, being a 
sensible government apparently, as we are, they’ve understood 
that some things that they had hoped they could do, they’re 
going to have to not stop doing but maybe reduce expectations. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit for a moment about the 
opposition’s view of the public service, Mr. Speaker. Here we 
have the MLA for Wood River who his version of this is to 
imitate BC, the latest bandwagon going by, on their core 
services review. But in the very same article his leader says, I 
know where the skunks are in government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He said that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — He says, I know where the skunks are. 
 
What does that imply about the viewpoints of public servants? 
We don’t think of our public servants as skunks. We think of 
them as people who applied and legitimately got jobs which 
they work hard to fulfil their commitment that they made when 
they took those jobs. 
 
And I ask the opposition to say how they are going to maintain 
a public sector or teachers or health care professionals when 80 
per cent of every budget is the workers. 
 
And when they promised — they talk about keeping promise — 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

 

they promised zero for health care, zero for education, and they 
also promised that they would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
they promised that they would cut social services and we can 
certainly provide them with the quotes if they’ve forgotten what 
they said. They promised they would do that. Well I have to tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, there’s no way that you can save money in a 
budget where 80 per cent is people when you are at zero. It is 
absolutely impossible. 
 
So they have just announced . . . their core services review, Mr. 
Speaker, is just code for massive layoffs and slashed programs. 
And anybody who thinks any different, I would have to say, 
Mr. Speaker, is not thinking very hard. 
 
And here’s the leader’s comment here — I knew I had it here 
somewhere, Mr. Speaker — the member from Wood River: 
 

The whole bureaucracy, the whole civil service has to be 
cleaned out. I can wield a pretty good-sized broom. And 
you know what I would do with that broom in there. 

 
An Hon. Member: — Men with brooms. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Men with brooms. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, that is a darned odd thing for a person to say who 
spent their entire life on the public payroll — their entire life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And here we are again. You know, you 
know you don’t want to always drag these old quotes out. But 
here we have the leader saying: 
 

Before I agreed to run for the leadership I asked the MLAs, 
do you know who the deadwood are? 
 

These are the public servants they’re talking about. 
 

Do you know who the deadwood are? Do you know who 
the skunks are? They assured me they know who those 
people are. 
 

I wonder how many people are on the list of some of the 
members opposite. And then it says, if you can believe this — I 
say to the opposition now through you, Mr. Speaker — they 
say: 
 

Civil servants can be very powerful. Look what they did to 
the Devine government. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when a government runs a deficit of $1 
billion a year for 10 years, I don’t think you can blame that on 
the public servants. As far as I know, there was a Treasury 
Board, there were ministers, and there was a premier. And if 
they didn’t like overspending of 1 billion a year, I guess they 
should have done something about it. 
 
Now the last thing I’m . . . Gee I hate to say this; I’m having so 
much fun. But I only have another half-hour or so here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know again they moan and groan, doom and gloom. And I 
want to just mention in 2002 January, KPMG completed an 

update on the competitiveness of 42 cities in Canada, 43 in the 
United States, and 30 in other countries, including — and we 
were very pleased to be included — Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, 
Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
Canada was the overall cost leader with a cost index average of 
85.5, representing a 14 per cent advantage over the US. And 
you know what? Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and 
Regina all came in under that. We have the most competitive 
cities in Canada. 
 
And so what does the opposition do? Do they spend their time 
going out there trying to attract investors saying, come to 
Saskatchewan; we have the most competitive environment in 
the world. And you know why they don’t do that, Mr. Speaker? 
Because they care more about political power than they do 
about the well-being of their Saskatchewan communities, 
including the ones they represent. If they actually cared about 
these communities, they would be out there telling people about 
the investment opportunities in Saskatchewan instead of 
moaning and throwing a wet blanket on everything around 
them. 
 
Now I just want to mention that the Governor of the Bank of 
Canada — now this is not somebody who you would ignore; the 
Governor of the Bank of Canada, David Dodge — in speaking 
about Saskatchewan . . . Now the Governor of the Bank of 
Canada knows this, he says: 
 

I know the difficulties your people face. (He was speaking 
about Saskatchewan.) I know the difficulties your people 
face. 

 
He says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s economy was weakened in the past year 
because of low commodity prices in agriculture and in the 
mining sector. 

 
But the Governor of the Bank of Canada says: 
 

It will pick up. 
 
Dodge said: 
 

There is much more to Saskatchewan than agriculture and 
even the agriculture sector is far less dependent than it once 
was on grains and oilseeds. It’s a better situation than it was 
a decade or two decades ago. 
 
The economy here is becoming more diversified and that 
diversification is extraordinarily important and will stand 
Saskatchewan and Saskatoon in good stead as you move to 
the coming decade. 

 
Now why don’t they tell people about that, Mr. Speaker? That’s 
what I wonder. 
 
And you know, there’s an article here . . . Now this is not about 
Saskatchewan. It’s a woman from Kamloops, BC who moved to 
Red Deer. But when asked why she thinks it’s so successful 
there, she says, people are excited. They feel good about being 
here. There is no negativity. I’ll just say that again — no 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

negativity. 
 
You know, in Saskatchewan we have the whole province — the 
whole entire province except for the opposition — united in the 
attitude project. I was driving down the street today and a bus 
went by with the Seeds of Success program involving the 
Aboriginal corporate circle and many corporate sponsors in 
highlighting the achievements of Aboriginal business people in 
Saskatchewan. We have the media outlets, including John 
Gormley involved in the attitude project. We have the chamber 
of commerce involved in the attitude project, Tourism 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And then, I find it hard to understand how all these people 
could be involved in the attitude project except for the bad 
attitude dudes across the way there who just can’t seem to get 
on the Saskatchewan bandwagon. They’ve been on the Ontario 
bandwagon. They’ve been on the Alberta bandwagon and 
they’ve been on the BC bandwagon. Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s 
time they got on the Saskatchewan bandwagon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You know as supposedly responsible 
adults — the opposition or the Sask Party — I would ask them 
to think before they speak because we might differ on how 
Saskatchewan could be better, but we should start from a place 
of pride and encouragement. That should be our starting point. 
 
So in a desperate bid for power, when people become reckless 
about what they destroy, arrogant in their basic disrespect for 
people who don’t share their point of view to the point of 
affecting the viewpoints of the next generation, and I just 
remember in keeping promises, Mr. Speaker: zero for health, 
zero for education, and cuts to social services. They would 
build their progress in this province on the backs of the most 
vulnerable. 
 
And you know when you look at the people who do have vision 
in this province — these are just a series of articles; I won’t go 
through each one — but who do we have on the attitude 
campaign: Mayor Al Schwinghamer of Moose Jaw, Mayor 
Mike Fisher of Melville, Mayor Dennis Korte of Humboldt, 
Mayor Fiacco in Regina, Mayor Jim Maddin in Saskatoon, 
Mayor Gabe Fournier in Meadow Lake. 
 
And you know what all these communities have in common? 
They have a positive attitude, they’re working hard on 
economic development in their communities, and 9 times out of 
10 their communities are either growing or doing very well on 
building the fundamentals for the future. 
 
And I’ll just quote our Regina mayor, Pat Fiacco, here, who 
says: 
 

He hopes all city residents become ambassadors for Regina 
and tell visitors how great the Queen City is. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that all MLAs become ambassadors 
for Saskatchewan and tell everybody how great Saskatchewan 
is. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . I don’t want to use 

more than my share of time so I’m just going to finish off with 
a quote here. And this is a quote from Ed Galenzoski. He says: 
 

The cost of living on the West Coast, the cost of licensing a 
vehicle, the cost of commuting time, I was on the highway 
for two hours a day in and out of Vancouver. Now I live 
three minutes away from The Leader-Post. I live in a house 
that I couldn’t even dream about owning in BC. I look at 
the economic opportunities in this marketplace and I say 
we have all there is to take advantage of what’s there. 
 
While opportunities abound in Saskatchewan, what’s 
missing is a can-do entrepreneurial spirit. We always put 
ourselves down and look across the road for something 
better. But I tell you it isn’t better. 

 
So I just urge the opposition to help be ambassadors of 
Saskatchewan. I’m proud of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to be of Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan. And aside 
from wishing I was a little bit warmer for some parts of the 
year, I really don’t have too many complaints. 
 
So is the Throne Speech more of the same? You’re darn right. 
It’s more of the same good stuff and we never get enough of 
good stuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m glad to see you back in charge of the ship of state, but 
I have a few other people I just want to quickly mention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my family and my staff; they are 
my own personal support system. And I hopefully I give back 
to them a bit in their direction. We’ve been through many kinds 
of weather together in many family circumstances. 
 
And, you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not always easy to accept the 
support of friends and family. But I believe in Saskatchewan we 
pull through for each other. We share through our tax base. One 
person said to me one time, taxes are about doing the things 
together that you couldn’t afford to do alone. And I think that’s 
a very good description of what taxes are all about. 
 
We share through our charities; we give of our time, our skills, 
and our caring. And what we give is returned to us a hundred 
fold. 
 
So I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be a 
Saskatchewan resident. I’m proud to be a Saskatchewan MLA. I 
will be voting against the amendment. And I am very pleased to 
support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure 
for me to be able to respond today to the Speech from the 
Throne. I think it’s an opportunity and a privilege being elected 
to this Assembly, representing our constituents. And I think to 
be able to make comments regarding the direction of the Speech 
from the Throne, also directions that I see happening from my 
particular region, I think is very, very important. And I’m 
looking forward to this. 
 
The Speech from the Throne is an opportunity for showing 
what the expectations are and the hope of what this province 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

 

should be, what the planning for the future should be. Just as 
we’re into a new session, we’re also into a spring session or 
very close to the spring season, if the weather would co-operate 
a bit. We look forward to a renewal and a re-vigour. And we 
want to make sure that we get that thought process put forward 
and the Speech from the Throne is an ideal opportunity. 
 
What a traditional Speech from the Throne is, from my earlier 
reading of speeches from the throne, it’s a direction that is 
given to the people of the province by the government. It’s a 
plan; it’s a direction. People should be able to review the 
Speech from the Throne and get some kind of an idea how they 
can also organize their own lives and their own businesses in 
response. And I think that’s very important. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I think speeches from the throne should speak directly to 
the people who are still here in this province particularly. I 
think that’s important. 
 
But the Speech from the Throne should also be directed to the 
people who are planning to leave this province. Those are the 
people that need to have some, some hope that there is a plan, 
there is a direction. And a speech to the throne should be 
directed to the youth of this province because they are going to 
eventually become citizens of this province and we want to give 
them the hope and the opportunity. 
 
I’ve mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, that I have two members 
of my family in this province. Neither of them have left. I have 
five granddaughters in this province and I’m looking forward to 
the day when they will be able to recognize the opportunity here 
in this province. 
 
We all want, we all want a better opportunity for the future. We 
all want a better tomorrow. We need to have a positive attitude 
and I agree that positive attitude is a very important part of how 
we approach our future. And I believe that traditionally the 
spirit that we have exhibited in this province to raise . . . to rise 
to challenges and to be able to make the best of these 
opportunities is an important part of our tradition, of our past, 
and I think we can build on that. 
 
So what we really need is a substantial plan. And that is a 
phrase that was used in the Throne Speech and the problem that 
I have however is that the words that are used in the Throne 
Speech are just not enough. Hoping that people will rally 
around just the words is just not enough. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, cheerleaders don’t play the game. We 
need the players to be in there playing the game and you just 
can’t, can’t use pompoms and words. You need to make an 
action plan and you need to put the game together. 
 
So people are looking for a plan and the plan is very important 
because the plan puts the fundamentals in place. It’s the 
fundamentals that are in place that will complement the attitude 
and the spirit that we need in this province. We need both of 
those to complement one another to build on this province. 
 
The conditions that we need based on the fundamental plan and 
the proper elements of that plan, they need to be in place for the 

sustained growth that we so desperately need in this province. 
We need to have reasons — as we’ve talked about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — we need to have reasons for people to stay in this 
province and not to leave. We need these reasons of opportunity 
and growth to keep the people here. We need to grow this 
population and we have a plan to grow the population by 
100,000 people in 10 years. 
 
Because when I look at page no. 6 in the Throne Speech, I see 
investment in the infrastructure. And when you look down the 
infrastructure requirements in this province as outlined in 
highways, better roads, telecommunications, high-speed 
Internet, infrastructure renewal, municipal infrastructure, what 
is needed in all of those is investment, and investment must 
come from the taxpayers in this province. And if we’re not, if 
we’re not having an expanded taxpayer base, all of those 
infrastructure investments are in jeopardy. Those are 
fundamentally what we need to keep attracting other people 
here . . . people here and to attract them back. 
 
If you don’t have the taxpayers . . . We have a real problem 
attaining that, as I said. We need businesses in order to offer 
jobs to taxpayers. Before you have businesses, you need 
investment. The investment is very crucial in this particular 
cycle. 
 
What we don’t need in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
lowered expectations. And that’s what this government is trying 
to do — we’re trying to lower the expectations of what is 
possible in this province. We keep hearing in the paper, in the 
media, in reading in the paper that maybe there’ll be tax 
increases coming in this province. I’ll be anxious to see what 
comes down in the budget next week in terms of tax increases. 
 
We keep hearing rumours that the public service . . . there may 
be layoffs in the public service. We keep talking about tough 
times in the economy. So we’re told not to expect too much 
anything new. In fact we may expect to have something less 
than what we have now. I see in the . . . on page 3 of the Throne 
Speech the words that: 
 

. . . require . . . (your) co-operation of (the) Saskatchewan 
people to live within our means . . . 

 
This is rather a hollow plea, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to live within 
our means. This plea comes from a government that has been 
spending on an increasing basis year after year, at at least 6 per 
cent per year. And this includes the last budget that came out. 
And in that last budget when revenues were projected down, 
spending was still on an increase at that same . . . at that same 
rate. That was . . . With the revenues down, it was reconfirmed 
at the mid-term financial report. It was reconfirmed again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the third quarter report. 
 
People are looking for direction, as I said, from this Throne 
Speech, but what we have seen is . . . we have to look at the 
record of what has happened in this province. Even though the 
Throne Speech might have some optimistic projections, we 
have to look at the record that has happened in this province. 
What has gone down are jobs. We’ve had job losses in this 
province. We’ve just recorded the population loss in this 
province. We’ve lost farm safety net coverage, for instance the 
hail loss insurance. 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

Year after year we’ve seen a deficit in this province when you 
talk about expenses over revenue — this year alone nearly a 
$50 million deficit. 
 
A number of small businesses have left and, in fact, in the third 
quarter it showed that the revenue . . . tax revenue from small 
corporate businesses were so low that it was . . . that it really 
caused a problem. 
 
At the same time, we’ve had increases in Crown investment in 
the economy, often in direct competition with the private sector. 
We’ve had medical waiting lists going up, fewer health care 
workers associated with those waiting lists. We’ve had an 
increase in the government employees in this province. 
 
What we hear is, we say one thing, but the records really show 
another. 
 
So what did we hear in the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? We saw in the Throne Speech that there was a bus 
trip; there was a whistle-stop photo opportunity throughout the 
province. I know the Lloydminster city council was waiting to 
welcome the bus trip to the city of Lloydminster. There was . . . 
there was no mention of meeting with the city of Lloydminster 
and no indication that they were or were not coming. 
 
What we did hear also in the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was that the programs and the initiatives that were 
announced in fact had been announced earlier. It’s a restatement 
of the health care, the action plan on health care. It’s a 
restatement of the action committee on the rural economy. 
Those are going to be . . . the ACRE (Action Committee on the 
Rural Economy) committee is going to be reporting shortly but 
that has been announced before. 
 
Programs that were announced and initiatives are being set 
aside for further review. They’re being set aside for further 
study and they’re going to evaluate these programs and studies 
even further. What we need is not further study but we need 
some positive action. 
 
We’ve heard about some of the initiatives that were considered 
a success by this government. We’ve heard about three projects 
in this province that were specifically mentioned in the Throne 
Speech — Centennial Foods, Harvest Meats, the Meadow Lake 
plant, the OSB plant (oriented strand board) in Meadow Lake. 
All three of these projects, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
require significant public money — all of which had been 
announced earlier as well. 
 
We’ve heard about some of the good comparisons that this 
government did in the Throne Speech using the GDP (gross 
domestic product) comparisons, but they were using them on a 
per capita basis. And it’s about business numbers they talked 
about and they were talked about on a per capita basis. Now if 
these comparisons look good to this government, it’s because 
they’re really based on a declining population and on a per 
capita basis. I guess the thinking would be that the more people 
who leave, the better we’re going to look per capita. 
 
We’ve heard blame time and time again and all through this 
Throne Speech, blaming problems other than what has been 
created by the NDP. There’s blame on the feds, there’s blame 

on the drought, blame on the poor economy; they’re blaming 
the US. There’s members . . . even the member from Athabasca 
yesterday talked about the Saskatchewan Party and blaming us 
for driving the young people out of the province. 
 
That same member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, said that he’s 
confident that people who have left this province will come 
back. Well the question would be, why haven’t they been 
coming back; why have they been leaving? It might be 
something to do with things like no perceived opportunity here 
in this province. It might be that there’s a lost opportunity. It 
might be that the taxes are not in line with competing provinces. 
It may be that they see their future somewhere other than trying 
to work in this particular province and they believe that their 
best future might be outside this province. 
 
I think that we can make a difference in this province if you put 
the fundamentals in place and make sure that when this . . . 
when we put the fundamentals in place, that there is 
opportunities here. 
 
I look in my own region, and I’ve talked about this before, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’ve talked about the city of Lloydminster 
specifically because it is in such a unique position. It has unique 
problems and it has unique opportunities. The growth rate on 
one side of the city is outstripping the other side by a significant 
margin, and I’ll talk a little bit about that in a moment. 
 
But in fact it’s the same environment; it’s the same wind 
blowing, the same sunshine. It’s the same people, the same 
resources. The only difference between the two sides of the city 
on either side of the border is taxes and regulation. 
 
Well those two things — those two things alone — make the 
decisions for people to move across the border and work 
outside of Saskatchewan. And that’s why it’s growing on that 
side of the border. 
 
Those two things — taxes and regulation — they lead to an 
attitude. And there is a different attitude in . . . on that side, on 
either side of the border. And I don’t really mind talking about 
Alberta and the comparison that I’ve made to my neighbours to 
the west, because I think there’s something that we might be 
able to learn from them. 
 
I want to use a quote from the member from Regina Dewdney. 
That was back in March 31, 2001. And I quote from Hansard, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

It’s about hope and opportunity for our children. It’s not 
about Alberta envy. Our children don’t need to hear about 
how . . . much better (it is) in Alberta because the more you 
tell your children it’s better in Alberta, the more likely they 
are to leave. 

 
That is quite an attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If you keep the 
lid on things — keep everybody in the dark — maybe it’ll be 
fine and nothing will come of it. 
 
What we found in our Lloydminster region, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that it doesn’t matter how wonderful we’re being 
told it is in Saskatchewan. People choose to make the decision 
themselves. People choose the best opportunity for them. They 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

 

choose the best living and they choose their own future. 
 
(15:45) 
 
What I found as well, it came out very clearly in the local paper, 
the Meridian Booster, on Sunday, March 17 and there’s an 
interesting couple of quotes in here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 
think should be put on the record. 
 
The population numbers in the 2001 census released this past 
week showed a 16.2 per cent increase of population on the 
Alberta side of Lloydminster — that’s a 16.2 per cent increase 
on that side. That was compared to a 10 per cent increase on the 
province of Alberta. Saskatchewan grew as well during that 
census period; it grew at 2.7 per cent. 
 
And the mayor is very cognizant of the difference in where the 
growth potential is. And he makes this comment in noting the 
2.7 per cent increase on the Saskatchewan side, while it’s 
positive, that it exceeds the provincial average by about 3 per 
cent. He goes on to say that they have made every effort to try 
to make both sides of the city with the same opportunities. 
Unfortunately, they have to come to the fact that there is those 
differences of taxation and regulation. 
 
And that brings up an interesting comment. The city . . . and 
here’s a quote from the paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Presently areas of provincial jurisdiction like health care 
and education are managed by the Saskatchewan 
government. As we expand the Alberta side of our city, if it 
keeps growing at the rate it’s going and you project out 25 
years from now, you’re going to be in a situation where 80 
to 85 per cent of the people in the city will be on the 
Alberta side. Now will they want an outside province 
managing the affairs related to the city? 

 
I think that’s a real tough question to come to grips with, 
particularly when the population is expanding so rapidly on that 
particular side. 
 
There is an attitude too, not only in people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but in the business climate as well. For instance, why 
did Husky Oil, the company that has a considerable . . . it has a 
considerable investment in Saskatchewan. It has an investment 
in the upgrader on the Saskatchewan side. Why would Husky 
Oil invest $5 billion in northeast Alberta, just across the border 
from Saskatchewan, when the resources are the same on that 
side of the border? It comes down to strictly an attitude and the 
taxation and regulations problem. 
 
When we’re disappointed in the Throne Speech, we’re not 
alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The reaction in the media has been 
disappointing as well. When I looked at some of the other 
throne speeches from other provinces, there was a much 
different focus; they were much more in line with what the 
population expected. They expected to hear the direction and 
vision that was presented. 
 
For instance, the Throne Speech that was presented last fall in 
Manitoba, it covered a lot of areas that were not . . . I did not 
see in our speech. They talked about . . . in Manitoba they 
talked about the security of the people in Manitoba. They talked 

about developing a plan for security in the wake of September 
11. They talked about the bioterrorism possibilities, and lab 
testing, and mail handling, and expanded emergency services. 
 
They also talked about . . . while the interest rates are low, it 
was an opportunity to really build on their infrastructure, not cut 
back on their infrastructure. They talked about building in the 
health care centres, and the Red River colleges, hydroelectric. 
And they talked about matching that dollar value with private 
sector investments. I never heard anything about that in our 
Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They talked about agriculture research. They talked about the 
possibilities in nutriceuticals and functional food research. They 
talked about biomass, geothermal, hydrogen development in the 
energy field. They talked about training and health care 
professionals. They talked about their education, with a 12 per 
cent increase in both public and university systems. 
 
They talked about the immigration increasing actually 24 per 
cent in Manitoba. Imagine a population through immigration 
increasing at 24 per cent. That was . . . that was actually through 
a partnership with private business, labour, and multicultural 
communities. They actually talked about e-government and 
initiatives with the new governing formats needed. They talked 
about the Kyoto accord and climate change and environment. 
 
Those are the kind of things that people, I would have thought, 
would have expected to hear from a Throne Speech. It wasn’t 
only Manitoba. I looked in the Internet and looked at the 
Throne Speech from New Brunswick. They had 30 new 
initiatives and actions to help secure New Brunswick’s future. 
Those were the things that the people of New Brunswick could 
look at and get a feel for where the government was heading, 
what they wanted to do, what their objectives were. 
 
When I looked at the Throne Speech from Ontario, here’s the 
kind of thing that we received . . . the people in Ontario 
received from their Throne Speech — 21 steps into the 21st 
century. And they talked about things like paying down the 
debt, smaller and more efficient government. And they talked 
about the new e-government processes and the new economy. 
They talked about national leadership and improving health 
services. Those are the kind of things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
should have been in our Throne Speech to give us some 
direction and some hope of where we’re going. 
 
What we actually got from this government in the Throne 
Speech here however was some wonderful rhetoric and some 
good intentions, but we got . . . the federal government got 
blamed for a lot of things in there. They got blamed for the 
health problems. They got blamed for highways. They got 
blamed for agriculture, crop insurance, national farm safety net. 
Those are the kind of responses that we got in ours, in our 
Throne Speech. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to rebuild the confidence in 
this province. We need the pride in this province, and that’s 
what’s people want. And that requires a plan to be put in place 
so that the fundamentals are in place. 
 
And what we need is the confidence of people that are either 
here or looking back in Saskatchewan and saying yes, there is a 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

confidence, there is opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
But in order to get . . . and here’s the cycle: if you have 
confidence and you recognize opportunities, investment will 
come. And with investment you get development, you get 
businesses establishing, you get employment. You get the 
taxpayers and you get the infrastructure, ability to pay for the 
infrastructure that you need both in development and 
maintenance. That’s the cycle. 
 
And that cycle can be a spiralling up or it can be a spiralling 
down cycle. And we need the spiral to start moving upwards 
and not in the other direction. 
 
We need more promises kept than we’ve been seeing. The 
platform promises in the 1999 election by the NDP have been a 
real failure. And we need, we need program announcement. We 
need promises when programs are announced that there’s going 
to be dollars at the end of that program to make the program 
work. And a good example was brought up again today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about the well assistance and assistance for 
digging dugouts in this drought year. 
 
We don’t need the Crowns and the CIC in competition with 
ourselves. Those are the things we don’t need in this province. 
We need to make sure that the enterprise that is coming here has 
an opportunity to operate without competition from money 
coming from the public sector. 
 
We don’t need Crown investment in cable television 
distribution. We don’t need it in home security systems. We 
don’t need Crown investment or public money in dot-com 
companies or in publishing or in information transfer company 
systems. Those are the kind of things that are best handled by 
the private sector. 
 
You can’t build the confidence of our people in this province by 
taking more money out of the region than is actually coming 
into it. We have, we have money in taxation leaving the region, 
in royalties, in VLTs (video lottery terminals), and very 
precious little coming back into our region. An example is that, 
in my area, the rural municipalities are in fact net taxpayers to 
this government. They pay more money in taxes to this 
provincial government than they receive in operating revenue 
sharing. And that is not a way to build confidence that we can 
move in the right direction. 
 
When we have the Department of Education offering zero, zero 
operating grants to three of the school units in my area — zero 
operating grants. And I want to refer to a letter that I received 
from one of the board members of the Battle River School 
Division. And he outlines the problems specifically here. He 
says: 
 

(Our school budgets) . . . of our school budget, 54 per cent 
comes from commercial/industrial oil field assessment, 39 
per cent from farmland, and towns at 7 per cent. There are 
very few families living in the rural. Most of our students 
come from our small towns and acreages. 

 
So what we have, what we have now, people who use the 
system the most pay the least taxes. That is causing 
considerable problems all through the province and particularly 

in my area of the province where the operating grants to school 
divisions are in fact zero. 
 
We have royalties leaving our region from an increased amount 
of heavy oil production. And that’s a positive thing for 
everyone. It helps us regionally; it helps the province. The 
problem, though, is that we’re talking about heavy oil. It is not 
conducive for pipelining and the pipelines in my area are really 
the roads and the trucks that use the roads. And those . . . the 
maintenance of all those rural roads are really on the back of the 
local taxpayers, and that has been a real concern from some of 
our RMs (rural municipalities) in that area around 
Lloydminster. 
 
There is some positive things that are happening in my area that 
I’d like to just mention. This weekend there’s going to be the 
opening of the Vic Juba Theatre for the performing arts in 
Lloydminster. And there was a donation from this 
Saskatchewan government to that theatre and it’s very much 
appreciated. And I think it’s going to serve the community very 
well. 
 
You have to remember that my community there is growing at a 
considerable rate compared to some of the other parts of the 
province. Lashburn is growing at about 16 per cent, for 
instance. They’re trying to develop a sportplex in that area. And 
the reason that they’re doing that is that towns like Lashburn, 
Marshall, Maidstone are all trying to adapt to a changing world. 
They’re trying to keep their communities vital and keep them so 
that they can attract people to come and live in those rural 
communities rather than always attracting to the larger centres. 
 
So we need, we need to make sure that there are places like 
sportplexes, recreational centres, community centres, social 
centres. I think those are very important. There is no granting 
available for those kinds of structures and facilities from this 
government and in fact from the Alberta government for my 
area as well. 
 
So what we’ve done in my area is try to get people representing 
all the RMs, the towns in that region, come together and ask 
some simple questions. Are rural communities vital, and if they 
are, how do we attract people there? 
 
(16:00) 
 
We need, of course, the schools, the hospitals and the roads. But 
there’s other parts of the community that’s needed too and 
that’s the recreational, culture and social infrastructure. And 
presently we’re having representatives from all those 
organizations get their heads together to try to figure out a way 
to be able to sustain those communities without having to 
depend on outside help. 
 
Waseca is an example of a water problem similar to the one that 
was talked about today in Perdue. They have been told that their 
water supply might be in danger of a health warning and they 
have to switch to a different source — and then immediately 
told that there’s no funding for that kind of facility or 
infrastructure. 
 
So what we’ve heard is, from this government, we should live 
within your budget. You should have been planning ahead. 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that comes from a government 
that’s had a track record of planning that I’ve already outlined 
and it’s a little disappointing to hear that kind of a response. 
 
So opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, really is something based 
on attitude. It’s based on spirit, but it has to be more than that. 
We have to make sure that the fundamentals are in place and 
once they’re in place, we have a much better chance of success. 
 
Using the Irish example, when they were right up against the 
wall in terms of economic disaster they had the foresight to put 
some fundamentals in place in terms certainly of education, tax 
reduction, and regulation. They have an overall plan that they 
put in place involving everybody in the economy. They put in 
place partnerships to be able to address those objectives. And as 
a result, when the economy started to turn around, the 
fundamentals were in place and the Irish success is a matter of 
record. 
 
I would agree with the member from Regina South who talked 
yesterday about he believes in Saskatchewan is a province of 
opportunity. I too believe in that. But in concurring with that, I 
would say that we have a plan to make the province into an 
opportunity and, presently, there is nothing but an opportunity 
gap. 
 
We have not developed as we have in Manitoba or in Alberta 
for that matter. And I really believe that if we do things right, 
the world will take advantage of this opportunity gap and we 
will prosper; we will be attracting people and investments here; 
we will be retaining our people in this province. 
 
And the attitude is quite important. When I listened to Premier 
Doer, for instance, from Manitoba, as he addressed the 
Romanow health review commission, he made reference to the 
pride he had in his province and what they’re going to be doing 
in terms of economic potential and how they’re going to tap 
that. 
 
And one of the things that he mentioned specifically to that 
committee, Mr. Deputy Chair, was the fact that the health care 
system in Manitoba is an economic advantage for them. He 
made the statement that compared to the American states next 
to them, each person had a $5,000 advantage in the health care 
system, and he was prepared to invest in the health care system 
and make sure that that remained an economic advantage. 
 
That’s the kind of confidence and the kind of hope, the kind of 
expectations, and the commitments that we should have been 
hearing from the Throne Speech. We didn’t hear it from that 
Throne Speech, and I believe that’s an opportunity lost, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, I cannot support the Throne Speech, but I 
will be supporting the amendment put forward by my colleague, 
the member from Moosomin. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, 
I’m very pleased to have my family here to support me as I give 
my speech and participate in the plan for the Speech from the 
Throne . . . and in support of the Speech from the Throne, and 

opposition from the . . . the motion from the opposition. 
 
Before I begin, I’d like to say thank you to my constituents. It’s 
a great privilege to serve them in this legislature. I take that 
privilege very seriously and I’m very proud to be the MLA for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
It is the constituency that basically is a little microcosm of the 
province. You have First Nations people in the Muskeg Lake 
First Nations band — they’ve got one of the fastest growing 
businesses in that area with Kocsis Trucking — a dry cleaning, 
insurance, even an art studio. Within the constituency is the 
University of Saskatchewan, and St. Thomas More College, and 
all of the colleges that are on the university. 
 
As well the synchrotron is . . . falls within that constituency. 
And it’s one of the best innovative ideas that is publicly 
supported investment in education and technology. 
 
I’d also like to thank my family. And I’m sure all members can 
appreciate how difficult being an MLA is at times. Probably for 
the next half an hour for most of the MLAs in this room, it’ll be 
one of the toughest jobs they’ll have. 
 
But I want to thank my parents for their support, I wouldn’t be 
here without them. But I especially would like to thank my wife 
and my three sons. I couldn’t be here and couldn’t continue on 
without the support from my home. My wife, Karen — I mean 
she’s beautiful. She’s caring; she’s supportive; she’s very 
powerful; she’s married to me. She only has one flaw. There’s 
only one flaw that my wife has and that she’s got a bad taste in 
husbands, so . . . 
 
But a lot of people question about whether or not they would 
want to support me, but then when they meet Karen they think I 
must be okay if she’d stay with me for 17 and a half years. So I 
appreciate that support. Actually we got married very young 
and she just believes in commitment, I think. 
 
I would like to congratulate the member for Idylwyld, both for 
his election and his very good campaign — to be elected with 
58 per cent of the popular vote, which is again an increase from 
the previous MLA who also served her constituents well. 
 
I also want to congratulate the member for Idylwyld for his 
excellent seconding of the Throne Speech. I had that honour in 
1999 and it’s a very challenging opportunity to be able to speak 
in the House very soon after you’re elected at such an important 
event. And I thought he did a fantastic job. So thank you, 
member for Idylwyld. 
 
I also want to congratulate the member for Greystone for all of 
his work in supporting his constituents and also for moving the 
motion in support of the Throne Speech. I thought he did a very 
good idea . . . a very good job in that aspect as well. 
 
I also want to welcome back the member for Battleford-Cut 
Knife. I know that he’s had some varied challenges in the past 
while and our thoughts and our prayers were with him over the 
past while and I’m very glad that those prayers have been 
answered. So welcome back to the House, Rudi. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

Mr. Addley: — Now, Mr. Speaker it is the first day of spring 
today — and it’s minus 27 degrees in Saskatoon and it’s minus 
30 in Prince Albert and minus 25 in Regina — but it’s the first 
day of spring. 
 
It’s also another important day today. And if I could have the 
attention of all of the House, it is the first anniversary of Mr. 
Speaker’s ascension to the Chair there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — So I just want to congratulate Mr. Speaker for 
his fine work that he’s done this past year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — And I know even though I’ve said nice things 
about you, Mr. Speaker, that you won’t let me get away with 
anything here today. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on September 11 the world changed. Now 
for many people it was a whimper; for many people it was a 
bang. For me personally I was on an airplane the morning of 
September 11. I flew from Saskatoon and was on my way to 
Toronto. And you check in and you sit down and you say hello 
to the people you’re sitting next to and then you studiously 
ignore them. 
 
About an hour into the flight the flight attendant comes on and 
says we have an important message from the pilot; please listen. 
Now I’ve been on planes before and that’s not the usual patter 
that Air Canada follows. So then the pilot comes on and says 
there’s a terrible tragedy in New York, that two planes have 
flown into the World Trade Center and there’d been three 
hijackings. So suddenly the plane is very excited and we’re 
talking with our neighbours. How many kids do you have? How 
are things going? Everybody’s a little stressed. 
 
About 15 minutes later he comes on again and says there’s been 
additional 11 more hijackings in the United States and all 
planes have been ordered to land in North America. It turned 
out there was not an additional 11; it was an additional one. But 
we were forced down to land as other members were. And I was 
forced down in Sault Ste. Marie. 
 
Now it’s a long way of saying is that on the way back . . . the 
flights were rescheduled several times and cancelled. And the 
Clerk Assistant and the member for Cannington were forced 
down in Toronto. And there’s a long story about that, but they 
rented a van and were travelling back to Regina and picked me 
up in Sault Ste. Marie. 
 
And the member from Cannington is giving me his support as 
he usually does and I appreciate that. But I have to say that that 
experience travelling from Sault Ste. Marie back to Regina with 
Viktor Kaczkowski (I learned to pronounce his name), the Clerk 
Assistant and also the member for Cannington . . . and what that 
did for me is . . . the member for Cannington — as a new MLA 
I’ll admit this — he’s one individual that can really stick it to 
members on this side of the House. And I’m sure he’s just as 
annoying to the members on that side. 
 
He’s one member that I really, really wanted to dislike. Just as 

there’s members on this side I try really hard to like, there’s 
members on that side — and he’s one of them — that I really 
wanted to dislike. Unfortunately I got to know the member for 
Cannington. While I still disagree with his political views, I got to 
know him as an individual and that’s one of the silver linings in 
September 11. I’m sorry; that’s about as nice as I can be, member 
for Cannington. But I did enjoy the ride back from Sault Ste. 
Marie with Viktor and the member for Cannington. 
 
Now the other nice thing I was going to say is that one of the 
things that I have been able to participate in the last two and a 
half years as a member is my work on the Tobacco Control 
Committee, the all-party committee on Tobacco Control. 
 
And I think there was some very good work in that piece led by 
the member for Prince Albert Carlton, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 
just like to thank the member for Saltcoats, member for 
Weyburn, member for Estevan, member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, and the member for Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
I mean we travelled the whole province, got to know the 
province very well, and I think we came up with some very 
good legislation — very good recommendations. So I just 
wanted to say thank you to those members. 
 
Now the Minister of Health took those recommendations and 
formulated some legislation that I think is a great step forward 
in protecting youth. In other countries and provinces, they’re 
looking at Saskatchewan as leading edge on some of the aspects 
within our legislation. Now some people may say, what’s the 
point? Why are we going down this road with tobacco control? 
I just want to let the members know, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
no known safe or beneficial exposure levels to tobacco. 
 
Tobacco-related diseases are major public health problems — 
80 per cent, and we’ve heard in some cases 90 per cent of 
deaths due to lung cancer are tobacco related; 40 per cent of 
strokes are tobacco related; 25 per cent of heart disease; 70 per 
cent of chronic lung disease is tobacco related. 
 
Children exposed to second-hand smoke have an increased 
frequency of bronchitis, pneumonia, ear infections, and health 
problems. We’ve also just recently learned that young mothers 
and fathers that smoke around their children, infants, that they 
have an increase incidence of SIDS, sudden infant death 
syndrome. 
 
Twenty-six per cent of Saskatchewan residents are regular 
smokers. The national average is 23 per cent. The overall 
number of smokers in this society has declined. However, the 
number of children who are starting to smoke remains very 
high, particularly among young women. 
 
Young people are starting to smoke at an earlier age than in the 
past. In a recent survey, 8 per cent of teens aged 12 to 14 were 
current smokers. Of these, half were daily smokers and half 
were occasional smokers. Children who start using tobacco 
early have more difficulty quitting and are more likely to 
become heavy smokers. 
 
The Canadian tobacco use monitoring survey indicates our 
youth smoking rate for 15- to 19-year-olds is 31 per cent. The 
national average is 23 per cent. BC, which has had the toughest 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

 

anti-tobacco legislation, is only 17 per cent. 
 
(16:15) 
 
I’m proud, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure all members of the 
committee are, to be part of legislation that is actually going to 
save lives. I’ve spoken out in the past about this in my 
community and elsewhere. And as an MLA I’ve learned that 
most of what we do is either speeches, or writing letters, or 
attending committee meetings, improving the process or 
hopefully not making it worse. This piece of legislation, I 
believe, will actually save people’s lives. 
 
It’s not unlike the seat belt legislation. Ten years after the seat 
belt legislation was introduced and the compliance was well 
into the 90 per cent, there were people alive that would not 
ordinarily be if that legislation had not been enacted. And I’m 
confident that with this legislation in ten years there will be 
people alive that ordinarily wouldn’t have been if we hadn’t 
taken these measures. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s a great step forward but it’s not the 
whole answer. There’s still more work that needs to be done. 
But I do just want to advise that I’ve been in contact with some 
tobacco control individuals from other parts of the world. And 
what I’ve learned is that the tobacco advertising ban that we’ve 
introduced here, and I’ll just explain it for some members; is 
that the federal government in the past put in legislation that 
basically banned the advertising and promotion of tobacco in 
public. 
 
Now what the tobacco companies did is they took that money 
and they allocated it to where their customers are . . . their 
future customers reside, and that’s in convenience stores, gas 
stations, small grocery stores, that sort of thing. And what they 
did is they took . . . made power walls, displays, the smokeless 
tobacco, the individual tobacco right beside the till, so that as 
people who have young children know, that they cannot go and 
spend their allowance without working their way through all the 
tobacco products. 
 
Now one thing business people know, and I’m sure the member 
of the opposition know and members of government know, 
advertising works. Otherwise people wouldn’t do that. Now the 
tobacco industry is advertising. They are advertising to our kids. 
And we know that it’s killing our children. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to be able to support that piece of legislation 
and that component of that legislation. 
 
Now what I’ve learned is that in other parts of the world they’re 
considering this piece of legislation as groundbreaking. 
 
And what we did learn with the federal legislation is that 
smoking rates started to go down. What we have learned is that 
there is not any one piece of legislation that’s going to be the 
answer to everything. It’s a comprehensive approach. You do 
10 things, most of them work. You do another 10 things, most 
of them work. 
 
Well, one thing that I’ve learned is that Ireland is very 
disappointed but very pleased with the Saskatchewan legislation 
because they are in the process of implementing that very same 
ban on promotion of tobacco to kids in convenience stores, and 

gas stations, and those sorts of things. 
 
So we beat Ireland to the punch, Mr. Speaker. We hear a lot 
from the opposition about how great Ireland is. In this aspect 
and in other areas, I’ll be able to say that we also beat Ireland. 
 
Now the tobacco industry is resisting this of course. Because 
that’s where their future customers are. But I have to say it’s a 
matter of credibility with the tobacco industry. Earlier on the 
tobacco industry said no, tobacco is not addictive. Then we 
found out later after many studies and many years that yes, it is 
addictive; and yes, they knew that it was addictive when they 
said that it wasn’t. Then they said, well it may be addictive but 
it’s not harmful. Well then we find out years later that yes, it is 
harmful — in fact, it’s deadly — and that the tobacco industry 
knew that it was deadly when they were saying that it wasn’t. 
 
The tobacco control agreement that was signed in the United 
States was largely as a result of the tobacco industry going in to 
Congress and perjuring themselves. They realized that they had 
lied to Congress and they knew that they had to get a fix out, 
and they did that by paying billions of dollars to keep 
themselves out of jail. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the . . . one of the things that the opposition 
talks about is the loss of 12,000 people in the last five years 
based on the census result. Now I suspect that when we go back 
and we look at the numbers that it won’t be 12,000 people. But 
let me just . . . let’s accept that it is 12,000 people. 
 
In that same 5-year period, tobacco killed in Saskatchewan over 
6,000 people. Over 6,000 people in the last five years in 
Saskatchewan were killed because of tobacco. So when you say 
that a population loss of 12,000, we know where half of them 
went. And we are taking steps in this legislation to fix that 
aspect of it and I’m proud to be part of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Lloydminster just finished his, his speech and he had a few 
comments to make which I have to question. He’s talking about 
the Saskatchewan confidence, that it needs to go up. Well what 
we hear day and day from the members of the opposition that if 
— and from my interpretation of it anyway — that if the 
Saskatchewan confidence goes up, the Sask Party’s political 
fortunes go down. So it’s not in their best interests to have the 
good news be broadcast in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have heard the new line from the 
opposition that somehow the Fiscal Stabilization Fund doesn’t 
exist. That there is no money. Now this is news to me because 
in the . . . now the member for Swift Current calls it a 
laundering agency. Now isn’t this interesting. In the last two 
and a half years that I’ve been in this House I’ve heard many 
speeches from the opposition saying spend the money. Spend 
the money. We want you to spend it on this great project in my 
constituency. We want you to spend it in this part of my 
constituency. The member for Kindersley gave a very 
impassioned speech last year about how everybody’s bank 
account is empty except the government’s. Spend the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

So what do we do? We said then that no, we are going to keep 
this for a rainy day — for when the downturn comes. For when 
there’s incidences in the economy that we have no control over. 
And now we . . . now that has come upon us with September 
11, with the softwood lumber dispute, with the drought, with 
the downturn in the oil and natural gas prices, we are now 
spending the money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they also said that it was an election slush fund. They also 
said that we were sitting on it, or the Minister of Finance was 
sitting on it. And he would keep sitting . . . standing up and 
looking and find out that no, he’s not sitting on it. 
 
Well now today what does he say? What do the opposition say? 
That it doesn’t exist. That there is no Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
Now we have the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee 
saying that there is no money. 
 
Now let me give you . . . let me just give you a simple 
explanation. Now it is a very simplified model so it may not be 
100 per cent accurate but I think it illustrates the point. Let’s 
just say that we have a $50,000 mortgage — a $50,000 
mortgage . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m going to explain it 
to the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Let’s just say we have a $50,000 loan . . . a mortgage. And at 
the same time we have people working away — we’ll even use 
a family. We’ve got two people working at a job; one them 
wants to go back to school so they’re saving up money to go 
back to school. And they’ve saved up . . . set aside money in a 
special fund of $10,000. Now they have a mortgage of $50,000 
over here; they’re paying their 5, 10 per cent — 5 per cent. 
They put their money in a savings account and it’s earning next 
to nothing per cent. That’s what the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is. 
 
Now what this family did is instead of saying we’re going to 
keep the $10,000 for the next number of years and earn nothing, 
we’re going to take that $10,000 and plunk it on the mortgage 
— on the debt. So now we have $40,000 mortgage and zero in 
savings. 
 
Well the opposition can’t have it both ways. Either we have 
$50,000 debt and 10,000 in savings or we can have $40,000 in 
debt or nothing in the rainy day. Now any member that’s been 
. . . Now the opposition stands up and say there’s no money 
there. There’s no money there. But they still go on and on that 
we have a $50,000 mortgage. Well, you can’t have it both ways. 
Either it’s a $50,000 mortgage and 10,000 in savings or it’s 
40,000 in debt and nothing in savings. Now we don’t get the 
credit for that $10,000 cut. 
 
Now the other illustration I’ll give is anybody that’s on a church 
board or any kind of a voluntary organization and they get their 
finance statement. They’ve got money in this fund, money in 
that fund. They’ve set aside money from a donation from a 
parishioner that’s passed away. Now does anybody here think 
that the church or the volunteer organization has 20 chequing 
accounts or 20 savings accounts? No. They have one and they 
itemize it based on where that money goes and where that 
money is allocated. So you can’t . . . It’s not that complicated, 
but obviously the opposition has some difficulty with it. 
 
Now here are the facts. We’ve paid $3.7 billion down in debt, in 

public debt. The tax supported debt, the 43 per cent GDP has 
declined down to 23 per cent GDP. Now this is not like British 
Columbia which have just implemented a $4.4 billion deficit 
and laid off 25 per cent of the civil service. That’s the 
opposition for you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the second aspect that they seem to go on and on about are 
the Crown corporation sector. Now the problems with that, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the Crown corporations have done very well, 
thank you very much. 
 
In SGI, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, we have the 
second lowest rates in Canada. Good Crown corporation. For 
example, a 2001 Taurus in Saskatchewan would be $1,183. 
How much would it be in Calgary — $2,335, but it’s better in 
Calgary. 
 
SaskEnergy. We have had for years the lowest or almost the 
lowest cost of natural gas in all of Canada. Now with the 
insurance that we purchased or SaskEnergy has purchased 
we’re still among the lowest, but we may not be exactly the 
lowest. But the one province that is lower doesn’t have the price 
insurance. So if the price of natural gas spikes, guess what? 
Saskatchewan’s is capped, while Alberta’s could go through the 
roof, just like it did last year. 
 
Now the Sask Party and the member for Swift Current goes on 
about the gigajoules and the spot pricing and all of this sort of 
stuff — while maintaining he’s no expert — but he never . . . 
and he criticizes the price insurance protection as if that’s 
somehow a nefarious NDP mismanagement. Well I hope we’ll 
never have to use that price insurance, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
glad that the seniors in my constituency that are on a fixed 
budget, they can rest assured that their price will not go through 
the roof. 
 
Now the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m also glad, Mr. 
Speaker, the member for Swift Current is saying that he’s . . . 
are you glad you’re paying more? I just said that we are among 
the lowest in all of Canada and when you average over the last 
five years, we are the lowest in all of Canada. 
 
Now SaskTel — the basic monthly rates for SaskTel. We are 
the lowest in Western Canada. At the same time, we have 
probably the broadest high-speed Internet coverage and the 
digital cell phone coverage. 
 
So it’s very frustrating, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand the 
opposition says, we don’t want SaskTel, we don’t want money 
putting into SaskTel. You’re wasting the money, you’re 
investing in places outside of Saskatchewan, plus you’re 
investing in places within Saskatchewan. 
 
At the same time they say, we don’t . . . we want cell coverage 
in my particular constituency. Could you please increase . . . put 
a cell coverage tower in my area. Also they say, could you 
expand that CommunityNet thing, that high-speed Internet 
thing; I’d like it in my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke last year about Crown corporations. All 
Crown corporations are, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting together, 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

 

we’re earning money in other provinces and other countries, 
we’re taking that money and we’re subsidizing our rates here. 
Now I know that members like to go on about this particular 
one didn’t make money or this particular one didn’t make 
money. But I know my money is in mutual funds. Some of 
them go really well, some of them not so well. But over the 
long-term and over the year you make money year over year 
over year. 
 
And he could . . . Mr. Speaker, the members can quote and pick 
out this little one that hasn’t made money or that one. But 
overall when you put them together in the basket, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskTel and all of the Crowns have paid back a huge dividend 
to this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower. We have among the lowest 
rates in Canada. And we’re the leader in green power, Mr. 
Speaker. Now one of the things that the opposition has talked 
about is that they’re going to sell the Crowns. Then they said, 
no we’re not going to sell the Crowns. Then they said, well 
maybe we’re going to sell some of the Crowns. Well then 
maybe we’re going to review the Crowns, and if the review 
says to sell some and keep some, we’ll sell some. 
 
(16:30) 
 
One thing that they have said, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re going 
to sell STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company). 
 
Now as someone who was born and raised in Loon Lake but 
now lives in an urban setting, I don’t understand where the 
opposition is coming from. The people who use STC, Mr. 
Speaker, are by and large rural residents. This is basically just 
an investment into their constituencies. So they seem to be 
blinded by their ideology to get rid of the Crowns even though 
it’s benefiting their own members and constituents. 
 
Now, for example, the parcel service to farmers, we have 
private industry providing parcel service in this province. But if 
you went to most of those private parcel delivery services, they 
would not want STC gone. Because they know that STC . . . 
What the members don’t seem to realize is that the way the 
private firms work is that they send the truck out from an urban 
centre to the rural and they drop off the parcel. 
 
Now what the STC does with the parcel on the bus is that they 
actually come in in the morning and go out at night. So if I’m a 
farmer or I need a part, at the end of the day I can phone and 
say I need the part here. And it’s here at 5 o’clock — not the 
next morning . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 9:30, the member 
for Canora-Pelly says. 
 
But if I’m in the middle of seeding or harvest and I need to get 
the crop off — that’s in harvest, not in the seeding; I’ve learned 
that — that I’m willing to get my part at 9:30 at night and work 
when it’s dark to fix my tractor or fix my combine. And I can 
do that. 
 
Well with the private what happens is you’ve got to pay a 
hotshot. That’s basically whenever it comes, it goes, and it 
could be a couple hundred dollars. So talk to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members are upset, but I would suggest that 

they go talk to their rural constituents and ask them if they’d 
like STC gone. 
 
Now with passenger service, it’s students that are into 
university wanting to go home for the weekend. It is seniors 
coming in for medical appointments. And it’s First Nations 
people that are coming into the cities as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I know that the opposition says, well a private bus line — 
and they’re on record — a private bus line can do it better. Now 
I know that with STC there’s two or three profitable runs. And 
even with those profitable runs, they don’t earn enough to 
subsidize the less profitable runs. 
 
Well guess what. Saskatoon to Regina is a profitable run. It’s 
not going to hurt me if Greyhound is going between Saskatoon 
and Regina. But if you are trying to go from up to Tisdale or 
Nipawin or out to Wilkie or Kindersley — well Kindersley 
would be — those are not going to be profitable runs. And I 
know business people — they’re not going to do it for nothing. 
They’re going to want to have a profit. That’s how it works. 
This is part of the social network of this province. 
 
Now, here’s one thing. When you compare North Dakota to 
Saskatchewan, very similar provinces, but we have double the 
population. And part of that — not all — but part of that is 
Crown corporations, the other part is public policy. 
 
A billion dollars were spent in Saskatchewan by the Crown 
corporations in 12,000 businesses in our community and largely 
in rural Saskatchewan. There’s a $500 million payroll that the 
Crowns spend in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And they also 
provide infrastructure to business and service to individuals. 
 
Now we can look at, yes, $500 million that’s a huge cost that 
we could get rid of. Well, a lot of those are head office jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re people that . . . if we turned that over to 
the private sector they wouldn’t stay here. 
 
They would do it out of, I mean . . . another example more 
recently in the news, Mr. Speaker, is the breweries. How many 
private breweries are in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? They are 
consolidating and they’re brewing out of one place in North 
American, one place in Canada, in their different areas. If we 
hadn’t . . . if Crown corporations had not invested in the 
brewery in my hometown, my city, they wouldn’t be doing that. 
 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker, of the infrastructure 
that the Crown corporations provide. If you . . . and this is how 
the Sask Party, the opposition, would interpret this as the 
Crown corporations competing with private business. 
SaskEnergy has a very good program to . . . where you phone 
up SaskEnergy and you say, I’d like to have my furnace 
inspected. 
 
Now that is providing infrastructure by the Crown corporation. 
Those are all private operators that have signed on to 
SaskEnergy. And there’s a whole lot of individuals that are 
getting their furnace looked at and inspected that they ordinarily 
wouldn’t have gotten because of the promotion and the 
infrastructure that SaskEnergy has provided, Mr. Speaker. So 
that’s another example . . . just one of many that I could . . . but 
I only have an hour today, Mr. Speaker. 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I appreciate 
the advice. Now the other comments that the member for 
Lloydminster talked about — and I think it’s indicative of the 
opposition — first off, they’re saying how great things are in 
Alberta. Then they say how great things are in Ontario. And 
then things aren’t so great there. So then they switch, now BC, 
we’re going to do exactly what BC does. Well then when BC 
doesn’t turn out real well. We hear today that the member from 
Lloydminster is quoting the Throne Speech from New 
Brunswick. Now they have New Brunswick envy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, I can understand why they wouldn’t be talking about 
Alberta now. Here’s just some recent comments in the Alberta 
press: “Albertans pay more under budget plans.” Here’s one 
Premier Ralph Klein said, quote, the only way taxes are going 
down in this province is down . . . pardon me, “the only way 
taxes are going in this province is down.” 
 
And this group says there’s no need to increase taxes 
considering that Alberta spends more on government programs 
per person than all the Canadian provinces. Spending is up 57 
per cent higher than five years ago. And who is saying these 
things? 
 
Here’s another quote from the same group, quote: 
 

Alberta could have already been debt free already today. If 
the government had implemented spending control 
legislation in 1996, they would have saved Alberta $825 
million in debt servicing costs for this year alone. The 
Premier of Alberta is challenged to keep his promise of no 
tax increases. 

 
Now do you want to know who’s saying this? Well lo and 
behold, it’s a good friend of the government here, the Canadian 
Taxpayers Federation. Yes they’re saying the Canadian 
Taxpayers Federation has challenged Alberta Premier Ralph 
Klein to honour his pre-election promise that the only way taxes 
are going down in this province is down. 
 
Health care premiums are a tax, period, the CTF (Canadian 
Taxpayers Federation) director said in Alberta. It’s money 
earned by individuals then taken by the government and spent 
by the government. Health fees soaring. Alberta families now 
pay $800 a year for health care benefits, and BC as the only 
other province to charge premiums has also increased them in a 
recent budget. 
 
I can understand why, Mr. Speaker, now they are quoting New 
Brunswick, because their friends in Ontario, their friends in BC, 
and their friends in Alberta have abandoned their policies. 
 
Another one: Alberta may delay business tax cuts. Alberta’s 
plan to slash business taxes by a billion dollars by 2004 will 
take a hit on Tuesday when the government hands down its 
budget. Now remember . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. It may be just a little distracting 
to somebody who is trying to listen to the speech of the hon. 
member from Saskatoon. Order. So could we give our attention 
to the member for Saskatoon Sutherland? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that. 

Now if you think back . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, yes, 
I appreciate the kind comments from the member for 
Cannington. Say a few kind words and you get a fan for a day. 
 
Now if you think about . . . now the member from Kindersley 
doesn’t want to hear some common sense. Now the Alberta 
surplus, not very long ago, was $7 billion — $7 billion. Now 
they’ve cut almost a billion out of their bet . . . (inaudible) . . . 
and they have a slim surplus today. 
 
Here’s another headline from Alberta, “Alberta budget belies 
status as low-tax mecca.” Whoops. “The Alberta budget breaks 
promise.” “Health care premiums to rise sharply as taxes for big 
corporations reduced.” That’s Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’ve already talked about the challenges facing all of 
Saskatchewan and all of the world. And it’s even talked about 
in some of the reasons why Alberta has done these things — 
September 11; oil and natural gas prices depressed; the 
softwood lumber dispute; the drought. 
 
BC is now, under the able guidance of the Gordon Campbell 
government, is now a have-not province. They have a $4 billion 
deficit with a 25 per cent cut to civil services and get this, Mr. 
Speaker, a more than 200 per cent — 200 per cent — increase 
in tuitions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition talks about Ireland. And I 
resent that, Mr. Speaker. My grandfather was Irish and he was 
born in Quebec on the way over from Ireland. 
 
Now what did Ireland do, Mr. Speaker? Other than 
implementing the tough anti-tobacco legislation. What did 
Ireland do, Mr. Speaker? One, they cut taxes. What did 
Saskatchewan do? They cut taxes. What did Ireland do? They 
invested in education and technology. What did Saskatchewan 
do? They invested in education and technology. And Ireland is 
set to introduce some of the toughest anti-tobacco legislation. 
And what has Saskatchewan already done? Introduced that 
legislation. 
 
Now one of the things, Mr. Speaker, the opposition talks about 
what a low-tax area Ireland is, but did you know that Ireland 
has just introduced a 20 cent per bag tax on those plastic 
grocery bags to save the environment. Would the opposition 
support that I wonder? Their silence is deafening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we have cut the business tax, we’ve cut personal income 
tax, we’ve cut PST, Mr. Speaker. In 2002, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan residents will pay one-third less income tax than 
in 1993. The business tax for small business will be 40 per cent 
lower than in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a province of opportunity. 
 
Now here’s some comments from the Throne Speech directly 
that there’s opportunity in many sectors, that Saskatchewan has 
earned a bronze medal in becoming the third largest mineral 
producer. We’ve got a silver medal for being Canada’s second 
largest producer of oil and gas. We’ve got a gold medal, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan has lead the way in increasing gross 
domestic product per capita. And we’ll continue to lead the 
country in many other ways. 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, last summer, last July and August, I was 
pleased to be on the bus tour with the Premier. We met over 
6,000 people in many communities in all corners of the 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, we plan to do it again in July. 
We’re coming to their . . . their small town in July, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll be there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member for . . . Some of the members 
are saying that we weren’t there long enough. Well you know, I 
remember saying we don’t want you there at all. Now we’re not 
there long enough. Well, we’re coming back and we’ll stay a lot 
longer than we did last year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the . . . The ironic part is this was 
supposed to be a nurturing building part of my speech. 
 
But I was born and raised . . . I was born and raised . . . I was 
born and raised in Loon Lake. Okay. Just . . . Just give me a 
minute. A very good community. And I am very proud of my 
hometown of Loon Lake and I thought that I had a quiet pride 
that nobody else had. 
 
And one of the things that I learned on this bus tour last year, 
and I’m sure it’ll be reiterated in this July’s bus trip, is that in 
every community that I was in and I’m sure other members as 
well, the deep sense of pride that each member of their 
community had is very good. 
 
And I know we joke and we criticize, but I know the members 
on that side of the House also have a pride in their communities 
as well. No, the member for Kindersley says he doesn’t have a 
pride. 
 
Now the nurturing part of my speech is over. 
 
Let’s compare with the Sask Party’s response to our bus tour. 
I’ll just quickly read some of the headline: 
 

Indian Head-Wolseley, dismal turnout for presentation. At 
one point Friday morning, there were more politicians than 
visitors. 

 
Always a scary thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The old Saskatchewan meeting stunted by indecision. The 
Saskatchewan Party may want to form the next government, but 
it recently had trouble deciding on a meeting place in Meadow 
Lake. Only four residents showed up. 
 
Northern . . . (inaudible) . . . Sask Party preaches to a few on 
tour. But they stayed a long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although Saskatchewan Party may have aspirations of winning 
the next provincial election, they were only able to attract a 
handful of people to a special meeting in Meadow Lake. The 
Saskatchewan Party leader, quote: 
 

Elwin Hermanson, who was originally listed as a speaker, 
was not present at the meeting. 

 
The next quote, Mr. Speaker, from another newspaper in The 

Wilkie Press: “Grow Saskatchewan or gut Saskatchewan.” 
 
The Gull Lake Advance: “Sask Party fails to outline position on 
health care.” 
 
The Tisdale Recorder, a letter to the editor. Just a copy of 
Devine’s. “Upon becoming premier . . .” And I’ll quote from 
the letter: 
 

Upon becoming premier, Lorne Calvert promised to tour 
Saskatchewan and to listen to people of Saskatchewan. The 
people told him they didn’t want hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan closed. The premier listened. Also the 
people stressed the need for our highways to be improved. 
Saskatchewan has a big work program planned for this 
summer. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the letter goes on and on but in the interest 
of time I’ll past it on, but that letter goes on about all of our 
promises made and the promises kept. 
 
Saskatchewan Party discusses Grow Saskatchewan in Morris. 
Seven people came out to listen to these MLAs talking about 
growing Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I quoted a little bit from the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation. Here is some of their stuff about how great it is in 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Total per capita public debt. Saskatchewan third lowest. 
Compared to provincial debts from 1989 to 2001, 
Saskatchewan second lowest. Some of the good things in 
Saskatchewan, government lowers red tape. 

 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now these plans, or these . . . the Grow Saskatchewan that the 
opposition has talked about, initially it was open to the public; 
anyone could come. Then they were closed public meetings. 
Then I heard they were focus groups. Then they became kind of 
executive meetings, committee meetings, or junior caucus 
meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after hearing about their changes whether they are 
going to support Ontario, Alberta, BC, or New Brunswick now, 
just once I wish they would support Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — It seems the inconsistency of the Crown 
corporations can’t invest outside of Saskatchewan or outside of 
Canada but they also can’t invest inside Saskatchewan. It seems 
that their plan can be summed up in three words: ready, fire, 
aim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan alliance party on the other . . . 
I’m sorry, the Saskatchewan Party, here’s another 
inconsistency. Stockwell Day for leader, can you remember 
hearing that two years ago? Now we don’t hear anything from 
the opposition. They refuse to admit that they supported the 
Sask Party . . . the Stockwell Day. Now they’re all depressed 
that Stockwell Day might actually win tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2002 

 

We have members, MLA’s who were PC (Progressive 
Conservative)Party workers, supporters, staffers, MLA’s that 
were members of the PC Party. I’m proud that the NDP came 
out of and grew out of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation). The Sask Party does not seem to be proud that they 
grew out of the PC Party of Saskatchewan. They say — they 
say that the . . . that they’re not gloom and doom. 
 
Okay let me restate that Mr. Speaker, I said, I’m proud to say 
that the NDP grew out of the CCF movement. It seems to me 
that the members opposite are not proud to say they grew out of 
the PC, Liberal banner . . . the Saskatchewan alliance party, I 
guess you could call them, Mr. Speaker. They say they’re not 
gloom and doom but then they seem to run down all of the 
accomplishments that Saskatchewan people have. 
 
Now the member for Rosthern gave a very nice speech about 
how his party, pardon me, how his constituency never voted 
NDP, and he ran down the socialists. Now I’ve gotten to know 
the member for Rosthern, and I still think he’s a closet socialist. 
Now he talks about neighbours helping neighbours. I just think 
he should come clean and admit it. It’s really not that bad. I’m 
married to a Mennonite, and their values and their platforms . . . 
it links right up to with what the member for Rosthern is talking 
about. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, some more goods news for Saskatchewan 
that we don’t seem to hear on the opposition benches, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan leads in shipments, Saskatchewan led 
the country with it’s increase in manufacturing shipments for 
January, Stats Canada said. Shipments increased 7.7 per cent. 
The national increase was only 3.1, Alberta lagged behind at 
2.4. 
 
Rural Saskatchewan communities success stories. Border city 
continues upward trends. Davidson flush with surplus funds. 
Economic development officer says Fort Qu’Appelle will 
bloom. 2002 a promising year economically for Unity. 
Rocanville’s main street getting busier. Rocanville booming. 
Economic development picture encouraging. Despite what too 
many pundits and naysayers would have us believe about 
investing locally and investing in Saskatchewan generally, there 
are entrepreneurs out there who see great opportunity in 
launching or expanding businesses. 
 
A&W, welcome to Melville. Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just 
the best. Upbeat polls surprise business officials. Over 93 per 
cent of respondents say their company is either in stable or 
growing stage or with just over half saying they’re growing. 
The . . . yes, the number one reason for this increase was a 
change for demand in products and service. 
 
Critics forget Tory debt. Crown corporations had a 90 to 10 
debt/equity ratio. Today they’re within industry standards. 
According to the Dominion Bond Rating Service only the 
federal government, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and PEI (Prince 
Edward Island) — not BC, not Ontario, and now not even New 
Brunswick — reduced their debt in the last five years. 
Saskatchewan has gone from worst in Canada to better than 
most, with higher credit ratings. 
 
Saskatchewan’s debt . . . I already read that part, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Melville mayor remains optimistic for city for 2002. 2002 looks 
promising says mayor of Meadow Lake. A big year for 
construction, Mr. Speaker. This is one of the highest building 
values on records. 
 
Here’s a member that . . . a Saskatchewan person that says he’s 
glad he came back to Saskatchewan. I looked at the economical 
opportunities in this marketplace and I say all we have to do is 
take advantage of what’s there. 
 
It’s an attitude adjustment which is the first order of business, 
with business leading the way. Business has to make it happen. 
Business needs to take the leadership role. I don’t think we can 
sit back and rely on government. I don’t think we should be 
blaming the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Economic game plan developed for the city. City’s economy 
should have healthy hike in 2002. Mayor predicts huge year for 
Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. But do we hear the member for 
Humboldt talking about the huge year in Humboldt? 2002 
market force. Consumer confidence rebounds. New home starts 
increase. 
 
Saskatchewan, land of plenty for Alberta ranchers. This is 
Kevin Hursh. 
 

Saskatchewan has many challenges, but you don’t hear 
about Saskatchewan farmers packing up and moving to 
Alberta to farm. 

 
Everything considered, the agricultural advantage is here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
City shines in growth projections. If you follow all of the 
numbers being generated it looks as though Saskatchewan 
should outperform or . . . at or about the Canadian norm. Based 
on that, Saskatoon should outperform the Saskatchewan norm 
and perhaps the Canadian norm. 
 
A KPMG competitiveness study from January 2002: among 17 
major cities in Canadian and US Midwest, Saskatoon ranked 
second behind Edmonton and ahead of Calgary; ahead of 
Winnipeg; and ahead of all the US cities including Sioux Falls, 
South Dakota; Phoenix; Minneapolis; Dallas; Fort Worth; and 
Houston, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have very many good things in Saskatchewan. 
We have very many challenges but we are a province of 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. We have the First Nations 
demographic advantage. One of the things that was the engine 
for Saskatchewan and Canadian growth was the baby boom 
after World War II from the 50s and the 60s and into the 70s. 
 
Now every other area in North America is worried about their 
population decline and the fact that we don’t have enough 
young people. In Saskatchewan we have a demographic 
advantage in our Aboriginal people. And I’m pleased to 
represent a constituency that holds Muskeg Lake First Nations 
Urban Reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province must live within their means. But the 
economic outlook is good. 
 



March 20, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end this evening or this afternoon with a 
couple quotes. One from the Throne Speech and one from the 
newspaper. 
 
Chief Ahtahkakoop said: 
 

Let us not think of ourselves but our children’s children. 
We hold our place among the tribes as chiefs and 
councillors because our people think we have wisdom 
above others amongst us. But let us show our wisdom. Let 
us show our wisdom by choosing the right path now while 
we yet have a choice. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to end with a quote by a resident that came 
back to Saskatchewan Christalee Froese. And the article is 
entitled: “Why are you moving there?” Why are you coming to 
Saskatchewan? Quote: 
 

As the days stretched into months, the lament about what 
we had left behind quietly turned into a newfound love for 
what we have rediscovered here in our home province. Our 
walks and jogs on Prairie roads were constant sources of 
amazement as the Saskatchewan sky unfolded its wings 
before us, revealing colours the Crayola company could 
only dream about. This sky was as awe-inspiring as any 
mountain or jade-coloured lake had ever been — we just 
never realized it before. 
 
A sea of wild grasses and planted crops came to life daily, 
dancing in the breeze, folding down onto themselves and 
rising up again in ripples of wonder. The sloughs too 
revealed their unique beauty, creating a mirror for the sky 
and a reflective home for ducks and geese. 
 
(Well . . . ) Saskatchewan? Why . . . (would you move) 
there? (And she answers, quote.) Well, my friend, stand 
with me surrounded by the full height of this golden crop 
against the colours of the setting sun or sit with me in this 
Poplar bush next to a blazing winter fire and you will know 
of what I speak, without either of us having to say a word. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment and I’ll be 
supporting the main motion. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and at this time I’d like to 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 


	Recognition of Athletic Achievements
	Recognition of Athletic Achievements

