















































Hansard: May 06, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1203 
 May 6, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, first of all I’d 
like to welcome the minister and his officials to the debate in 
estimates tonight, and look forward to a . . . I’m not sure if we’ll 
get very spirited; it all depends where the minister goes. And 
maybe we can head us off in a direction while we wait to hear 
what the score is in the hockey game. We won’t worry about 
that right now. 
 
But this past week, Mr. Chair, the minister and his government 
were talking about the reduction in the number of people on 
welfare and receiving welfare, the services of welfare. And I 
think the minister went to great length to brag about their 
accomplishments. And I would have to say as I did last week, 
that I don’t think there’s anyone, certainly on this side of the 
House, that would condemn the government for working, at 
least beginning to realize, that for an individual there’s a lot 
more value in having a good job rather than just coming to 
assistance. 
 
And I’ve got a couple letters on my desk of people who in the 
most recent while ended up having to go to assistance for a 
while — and not because they wanted to — and this was the 
first time that they’ve ever had been put in that situation. But 
then the problems that arose as they went and sought the 
assistance of Social Services and the complications that arose as 
a result of some income that they were receiving, and at the end 
of the day when they were able to find employment again, all of 
a sudden find themselves with a bill on their hands as a result of 
what Social Services called overpayments. And we’re going to 
get into a little bit of discussion in that at a later time. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I think you were talking of — I’m not 
exactly sure what the numbers were the other day — but if I go 
back to ’94, ’93-94, I think we were looking at something 
around 56,000 caseloads in the neighbourhood of about 80,000 
individuals on assistance. And today, I believe that’s caseloads, 
this is we’re talking somewhere in the neighbourhood of 33,000 
with individuals around 56. 
 
And you talked about a number of areas that you thought may 
have had an impact in addressing the needs of individuals, who 
moving from assistance and actual . . . into some actual job 
opportunities. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, a number of years ago when the Premier, the 
current Premier was sitting in your chair as Minister of Social 
Services, one of the areas we talked about at length was the fact 
that a number of the complaints that were being brought to my 
office and the office of my colleagues was individuals who 
would find employment, but they found that if they sought and 
actually found employment, and especially in rural 
Saskatchewan more than anything, most of the times they were 

finding themselves on . . . they were finding themselves on a 
minimum wage. 
 
And when they sat down and did the calculations, because they 
had their own employment, they had their rent bill to pay, they 
had their power, they had their heat that they had to cover, and 
their telephone as well as their health-related costs; and at the 
end of the day they sat back and said to themselves, now why in 
the world would I even try to struggle and survive at this job 
opportunity when welfare is actually looking after me much 
better than I am actually working at a job, even though I’d just 
as soon be working as to live on welfare? 
 
And the discussion we had with your colleague, the current 
Premier, at that time was some kind of bridge financing to assist 
people as they actually got into the employment fields. And I 
believe one of the reasons we needed something of that nature 
was, for many of these individuals, that job may have been the 
first or the second job and they really didn’t have . . . possibly 
in some cases they were lacking the training that was needed for 
the quality jobs that were out there. And as a result, they ended 
up with the low-paying jobs and found themselves trying to 
determine, should I just live off welfare or should I get into the 
workplace? 
 
And I remember, Mr. Minister, when you were sitting on this 
side of the House and efforts were being made . . . and I think 
. . . to actually put people into the workplace and the 
condemnation that came from you and your colleagues about 
treating poor people in that manner, forcing them to work. But I 
think it’s good to see, Mr. Minister, that your colleagues have 
finally realized, and maybe people on welfare have brought the 
point out very clearly, that they’d just as soon have a quality job 
as to live on welfare. So I’m pleased to see that we’re moving 
in a direction that is beginning to put people, give people the 
opportunities to find the quality jobs. 
 
And I think that bridge financing, the Saskatchewan 
employment fund, was certainly a positive tool because I think 
that that has been something that has assisted people in their 
application for a job, and finding that maybe the first job 
available was a low-income job but they had some bridging, 
they had some financing to help them meet the needs that they 
were lacking. They also, if I’m not mistaken, they get the health 
and dental benefits if they’re under a certain level of income. 
And there’s a couple of questions we’ll get into in that regard as 
well. But that was bridge financing. 
 
And then we had to go from there. And, Mr. Minister, I’m 
wondering what your department actually does and what social 
workers are doing today. I think I’ve mentioned this even last 
year, talked about the fact that I think social workers need to be 
more than individuals that just help people get a welfare cheque 
and are looked after when they are in need. 
 
And quite possibly I think they would feel even much better 
about themselves if they were looked upon as not only someone 
out there to help somebody when they have a financial need but 
also an individual that could almost in some ways act as a 
counsellor and start steering them in a direction of maybe the 
education tools that would assist them — finding out what that 
person would be good at and maybe steering them into an 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

education forum or putting them into a job opportunity that 
would be the beginning of long-time, quality employment. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering exactly what your 
department is doing in that regard, what you have done just in 
the past year, the past few years, and what your objectives are 
for the future. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Before the minister answers that 
question, I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
And maybe I should begin with the introduction of the officials 
and then respond to the hon. member’s comments and 
questions. 
 
I think that when we get into our discussion here that we’ll . . . 
as I think we found when we were last before the committee, 
the Social Services critic of the opposition and I, I think we 
have many common views about what works successfully. And 
we’ll enjoy very much a dialogue about that. 
 
If I can first of all introduce then the officials who are here to 
assist us in responding to questions in committee. To my right 
is the assistant deputy minister, Shelley Hoover. And to her 
right is the assistant deputy minister responsible for housing, 
Darrell Jones. And immediately behind Ms. Hoover is Don 
Allen, the executive director of financial management. And 
behind me is Phil Walsh, executive director, income support. 
 
We’re also assisted today by others who are behind the bar; I 
guess they’re all behind the bar. We have as well, Larry 
Chaykowski, executive director of housing financial operations. 
Marilyn Hedlund, associate executive director, income support. 
Deborah Bryck, director of child care. Dorothea Warren, 
associate executive director of family services. Larry Moffatt, 
executive director, community living. And Barb MacLean, 
executive director of Saskatchewan career and employment 
services. 
 
And I think that outlines the A team here tonight. 
 
Mr. Chair, just responding to some of the comments and then 
proceeding to the question raised by the hon. member opposite. 
And putting into context, in fact it’s fair to say, that exactly on 
the theme that we’re talking about here since the committee last 
met, there’s been an update of the numbers since the 
introduction of the building independence program. 
 
And so since the building independence program was 
introduced with a combination of supports to help 
Saskatchewan families attach themselves to the labour market, 
we’ve had I think very significant reduction in our welfare 
caseload. Our caseload is down since that time by 8,400 fewer 
cases of people . . . sorry, cases, welfare cases. 
 
Now in that will be a reduction of 6,000-and-some . . . nearly 
6,000 families. And probably what’s most exciting of all, I 
think, when we look at the objectives to tackle the issue of 
poverty, and then with a special concern for child poverty, is 
that what the numbers tell us now is that there are 13,000 fewer 
kids growing up on welfare today than there were at the time 
when we introduced building independence. That’s very, very 

significant. The current caseload — the hon. member referred to 
the level it used to be — is now under 31,000; 30,815 as of 
March to be exact, with some 56,000 individuals. And that’s a 
significant reduction in the number of individuals, families, and, 
most importantly, children who are growing up in families with 
income security. 
 
It has always been my view, going back even to the time that 
the hon. member refers to when we were on, when each of us 
was on the other side of the House, it has always been my view 
that the absolute most effective and also the most desirable 
form of income security is a job. 
 
And it’s why I’ve said a number of times that I am particularly 
proud of the achievement that we’ve been able to have here in 
our Saskatchewan as we decided by way of policy objective to 
tackle poverty with a particular focus on child poverty that . . . 
Contrary to some other provinces who said, when they set out 
to reduce their welfare numbers, that their solution was to give 
people a one-way bus ticket out of the province, we said, that’s 
not our style here in our province. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan our objective is to give people a ticket to 
employment, and believing that at the end of the day the 
supports that’ll help with that transition will be the things that 
most effectively address the causes of poverty. And recognizing 
that the reality is not that kids grow up in poverty; kids grow up 
in families where their parent or parents live in poverty; that it 
supports the parents to make that transition to the world of 
employment, or if they’re in the world of employment, to avoid 
having to make the transition into social . . . or into income 
security, I should say. That is in everybody’s best interest. 
 
Now the hon. member referred to the employment supplement 
program that we had some dialogue about in the last night. I do 
want to agree with his characterization that it is a program that 
provides some financial help to bridge . . . it’s a tool to make 
that bridge to employment and, quite frankly, is a vehicle by 
which some of those expenses that come about . . . When you 
move to the world of employment from not being employed, 
and have children, to help deal with things like child care 
expenses is very, very helpful. And when he asked the question 
then, whether there are child benefits that are . . . that also come 
into play, the answer is a clear yes. The family health benefits 
are available to address the expenses of child health care for 
families who are receiving the employment supplement. So 
those two pieces are tagged together as supports for families. 
 
Now to come directly to the question that the hon. member, Mr. 
Chair, concluded his comments with — what about the social 
workers then? What do the social workers see as their role? I’m 
pleased to say that I think there we’ve been making some very 
nice progress that I’m told, as I get around the province and talk 
to social workers here in the province, that I’m told is 
benefiting in some very real and direct kinds of ways. 
 
We can get into some discussion. We haven’t really had any 
discussion in estimates here yet so far about the phase 2 
redesign of income security and some of our process of 
registration of people who find themselves in need in applying 
for financial support. And I’ll maybe just make a brief reference 
to it here. 
 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

 

One of the things that we’re doing is introducing what we call 
the jobs first program which means, in essence, that individuals 
who are capable of employment will find themselves then 
coming to a meeting to learn about their entitlements but which 
— say typically here in the city of Regina and will be parallels 
around the province — which is held at the Career and 
Employment Services centre. 
 
And what we’ve been finding is that as . . . and I know the hon. 
member and I had a private conversation about this, I think it 
was last week, and I think it’s worthwhile having the 
conversation in a sense out loud, on the record, so others can 
understand it too. They may not know that when individuals 
come then to the meetings at the Career and Employment 
Services centres, not only do they learn a bit about their 
entitlements as citizens for income security, but they also 
become familiar then with what I believe is the absolute best 
system of information and support for people who are looking 
for employment, looking for career development advice, and for 
employers who are looking for people. 
 
In all of Canada I think, in the Career and Employment Services 
centres, I hear the 20 that we have around Saskatchewan are the 
best in the nation — the best use of technology and the use of 
the resources there. Because when they come to the jobs first 
programs, we’re finding that in fact 30 to 40 per cent of the 
people who show up don’t ever come on the welfare rolls 
because they’re in fact finding the vehicle to get to the place 
that they’d prefer to be and I think everyone would see as best, 
and that’s into the world of employment. 
 
So we’re helping to make that bridge there and hopefully as a 
result of that, helping people recognize that there is a long-time, 
lifetime resource for help in getting themselves connected to 
jobs that’s anywhere in Saskatchewan. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Having said that, I just want to acknowledge as well then what I 
think is part of the wisdom in the reorganization, of bringing the 
Career and Employment Services into Social Services, as well 
as the housing piece into Social Services to enable us to 
continue to work to find some synergies to support people being 
independent and particularly attaching themselves to the labour 
market which is in their best interests and ours. 
 
And what’s happening as a result of this is that, I’m pleased to 
say, social workers are finding themselves having a bit more 
time because social workers are doing less pushing of paper and 
manipulation of numbers dealing with entitlements and are 
therefore able to do exactly what the hon. member asks about, 
and that’s to spend some time one-to-one with their Social 
Services clients. 
 
And what the process that we refer to that’s happening in an 
increasing phenomenon here in the province, specifically 
because of training that we’re doing and the developing of a bit 
of a shift in culture, is referred to as transition planning so that 
social workers are engaged with people of Saskatchewan on a 
one-to-one basis in helping them to plan for their own 
transitions to independence and as they do that, doing it on a 
strength-based kind of approach. So it’s very much not social 
workers telling people what they should ought to do, but 

helping people understand what their strengths are, and then 
assisting people in making decisions for themselves about their 
own lives where the social workers will be sources of 
information about resources, can make suggestions, and Career 
and Employment Services is very much a part of that picture, to 
assist people in moving to independence. 
 
But just if I may conclude again on the Career and Employment 
Services, one of the things that happens there that’s different 
from what we’ve traditionally thought as the old Canada 
Manpower centres, is that now when you come to the Career 
and Employment Services, what you have is a swat of 
computers. And for people who are not familiar with how to use 
the computer, there’s somebody there that can help you learn 
pretty quickly and find the absolute best, most current 
information about employment and opportunities and in 
Saskatchewan where they are, what they pay, and all that kind 
of information that’s very relevant for people who are job 
hunting. 
 
And what that means is that the human resources, the people 
who are at the Career and Employment Services centres, then 
can dedicate their time to doing what’s most valuable, and 
that’s spending it with clients talking about, you know, what do 
they see as their vehicle to get to employment? What are the 
barriers between where I am now and where I want to be? What 
does that mean in terms of training and education, for example, 
and what kinds of resources, federal or provincial, are available 
to assist people to do those things. 
 
And so that someone who’s coming there looking for 
information, don’t even necessarily talk to anybody if they 
know how to operate the computers — just go do that. In fact 
they don’t even have to come in; they can go to a computer at 
home and come on-line. And I think I was told that last month 
that there was something in the neighbourhood of 600,000 hits, 
I think, on the Career and Employment Services line. So it’s a 
resource that is being used frequently. But if they’re . . . if 
people are needing the counselling kind of advice to do 
planning, personal planning, that’s the place to get it. 
 
And so if you’re thinking about education, if you’re thinking 
about work, and you don’t know where to go, the answer is one 
place — the Career and Employment Services centres. If you’re 
an employer who’s looking for somebody and you don’t know 
where to go, the answer is the same thing — it’s the Career and 
Employment Services centres. 
 
In addition to that also, the centres do have the ability as well to 
make refer . . . then people as well to some of our 
community-based organizations who provide employment 
training kinds of supports, which will tend to be at the basic 
skill levels or job entry kinds of levels, to help individuals do 
direct employment entry kinds of services. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I apologize for being so lengthy, but I get kind of 
excited when I get this kind of a question because I think 
there’s some exciting things happening that are good for people. 
I don’t think we’ve got it entirely cased yet, but we’re working 
hard and I think it’s fair to say we’ve made a lot of progress; 
and as a result, a lot of people have had their lives positively 
affected by the contact with the department. 
 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, thank you so much. 
One of the comments you talked about was access to benefits. 
And I believe individuals, even though not on assistance, can 
apply to Social Services for assistance if their income hits a 
certain criteria. 
 
And I believe if on — what was it, Friday morning, if I’m not 
mistaken — you were on the Gormley show for a while. I just 
don’t remember; was it . . . or Thursday or whatever, yes. A call 
came in from an individual who had called, indicating that their 
gross — in order to receive benefits it’s based on your gross 
income rather than your net income — the result being they 
didn’t qualify, and yet their net income was, actually ended up 
being quite low. 
 
And I’ve got a letter in front of me that’s much the same thing. 
The fact that with the benefits, health benefits, or accessing 
them being . . . any benefits from social assistance, I believe. 
I’m not sure if even your income . . . your income supplement, 
if that’s affected by it. But if it’s based on your gross — what 
the letter I have in front of me and it appears what the caller had 
indicated too — by the time all the deductions were taken off, 
they were well under what would qualify. That would mean 
what they actually had in their pocket to work with. 
 
So I’m not exactly sure where your department is coming from 
or how they view this. Because if you’re out working, and you 
and I know you’re taking home a wage, but by the time your 
deductions are all taken off, what may be net in your pocket 
could be actually a lot less than what the criteria is to actually 
ask and seek assistance in those matters of some of the benefits, 
the health benefits especially, and the income supplement. 
 
So what I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, is if there is something 
that your department has been looking at, the reasons why they 
would look at gross versus net. Because of the fact that I think 
what we’re looking at is the fact of what people are actually 
living on. Everyone in this room doesn’t live off their gross 
salary . . . would be awfully nice. 
 
But the facts are we’re living off of net, and if that net is 
actually below what the trigger mechanism is, maybe it’s time 
we looked at the net because if you’re looking at maybe 100 or 
$200 below your trigger and you happen to be unfortunately in 
a situation where a child needs some additional medication or 
maybe you, as a family, you face extended medical costs, that 
what you find yourself in is then having to draw out of your 
limited amount of income just to meet the medical 
circumstances that befall you. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what I’d like to know is what your department 
has done, if you’ve looked at this issue, and if you’ve come up 
with a solution to the problem that a number of people have 
raised. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think what the hon. member 
refers to — I state the obvious — is that gross is higher than net 
and that it would be preferable, if you have a number, that it’s a 
net number rather than the gross number. And I understand that. 
 
In putting the employment supplement — I think it’s the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement that the hon. member is 
referring to — in establishing the employment supplement, it 

was decided that the most effective way for people to deal with 
it is to set the income levels at gross simply because it’s the 
simplest. We looked at income levels, and then from that 
determined what is, you know, what is the level of gross that 
provides you that net income. 
 
But as the hon. member will be aware, people will register for 
the employment supplement by telephone. And so it’s a lot 
simpler to do that process when you’ve got the gross figure 
because that’s at the top of the income statement. Everybody 
knows what that is without missing things perhaps when you 
start to get into the different kinds of deductions and so on. 
 
So the reasons of simplicity of understanding and for clarity, 
then it was decided that when the program was implemented to 
do it on a gross figure rather than a net figure. 
 
And the other part of your question . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . We’ve both forgotten the other part of the question, but I’m 
sure we’ll come back to it. Well if it’s a good one, we’ll come 
back to it, Mr. Chair, I’m sure. 
 
It is also accurate then that the family that is receiving the 
employment supplement will receive the family health benefits. 
And the level of income that’s used then is dependent on the 
number of children in the family so that it’s a higher gross that 
serves as the cut-off line, so to speak, for each child, depending 
on the size of the family. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. That was the 
employment plus the health benefits. 
 
Now I guess the question coming back, Mr. Minister, is whether 
or not the level you’ve set at or that trigger, if it’s too low. If 
we’re discussing gross . . . and I can see why you’re arguing 
gross because a person knows exactly right off the top what 
they’re going to be taking, what their monthly take-home pay, 
and everyone’s deductions will be somewhat different which 
may create a bit of a problem. 
 
But would there be any benefit in looking at whether or not 
maybe that trigger should be moved a little higher because you 
are using that gross figure? And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if 
you could give us what those trigger figures are as far as a 
family and whether or not we should be looking at maybe 
moving that a little higher. In relating it to the fact that if a 
family comes and actually has some extra medical needs that 
normally the average family wouldn’t have, whether or not that 
has a bearing on how you arrive at this figure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for his question, 
Mr. Chair. First, maybe let me talk about the income levels, and 
then the health benefits, and then the value of working. 
 
Currently, if you are a family who has one child, then if your 
income is less than 1,996 per month, there will be employment 
supplement coverage of some level. The cut-off point is 1,996. 
And with each of these we have to then conclude by saying: and 
if you have employment supplement coverage, you also have 
family health benefit coverage for the kids. Okay? 
 
So one child, 1,996 per month. So just about 2,000 per month if 
you have one child. If you have two children it’s 2,172; 2,172 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

 

per month. Three children, 2,348 per month. Four children, 
2,525 per month. So four children would be excess of 30,000 
per year now. 
 
And five children or more — and these are children under the 
age of 18, by the way — five children or more, it’s 2,701 per 
month. So with five children that would be, if my math serves 
me correctly — and now we’re getting dangerous here — but I 
think it would be about thirty-two four . . . it would be about 
32,400, a family with five children with a gross income of 
32,400. They wouldn’t have very much but they would be 
eligible. They would be in the eligibility for supplement but in 
many cases, perhaps even more importantly, then they have the 
family health benefit coverage. 
 
And you’re quite correct. These can be families . . . we may be 
talking about a family that is currently on assistance, receiving 
income security and has got some supplementary income. Or 
this may be a family that is receiving no welfare at all but their 
income is completely and totally earned income, self-employed, 
or maintenance income and those are the amount figures then 
that will trigger that they are eligible for some level of 
supplement and then the family health benefit. 
 
Now the employment supplement budget is $1.3 million more 
this year, for a total of now 8,200 families, which is up from 
just over 5,100 in 1998. 
 
(19:30) 
 
So we think that there are still some families who are eligible. 
When you look at these income levels, we think there are still 
some families who are eligible that are simply not claiming it. 
You have to call and register. And we continue to advertise so 
that Saskatchewan families who are entitled can get that kind of 
protection. 
 
Now the family health benefits that are provided then will cover 
the children’s health costs. We can go into that in more detail if 
you wish but, to answer your question directly, the coverage is 
comprehensive. It’s not a cut-off on it. If the kids are sick, then 
the kids are sick and they need health care, and that’s what’s 
covered for it. 
 
And I think what’s really most important in this discussion then 
is to understand the context, because what it really means is that 
here in Saskatchewan . . . and I think about this we ought to be 
proud because I think we’re a little more progressive in our 
thinking here about how our social safety net, so to speak, 
supports people attaching themselves to the best form of income 
security which is employment. Because what this means is with 
the employment supplement and the family health benefit, 
families will always, always be better off working than not 
working. 
 
Now the truth of the matter was, before we introduced this 
system here, that you could come up with lots of examples 
where families in fact would be better off not working than 
working. And let me tell you why. 
 
Because if you had kids who had health problems — and in 
low-income families that’s not an uncommon phenomenon. So 
if you had kids with health problems, with the system before we 

did the reform of the welfare system in building independence, 
what that meant is in the real world if you had a chance . . . you 
were unemployed, for example, had no income, only social 
assistance with health benefits, and you had a chance to go to 
work, I could give you lots of examples where people would sit 
down with pencil to paper and say, now if I go to work — 
which does my dignity a whole lot of good, and does our family 
function a whole lot of good, and is for the benefit of my 
society . . . I think everybody would say, a positive thing, if I’m 
capable of doing that. 
 
Many people would say, but when I look at the health costs 
related to my kids, what that really costs me out of my pocket, 
that I lose by leaving welfare, I can’t afford to leave. I can go to 
work and I can earn money, and my family will be worse off for 
my doing that. We looked at that and we said, that’s goofy. 
That’s goofy. That doesn’t . . . That’s not the kind of social 
support system in an informed society that helps people do what 
they want to be doing and what society most needs for them to 
be doing which is working as much as they possibly can. 
 
And so that was really in many ways what you’re putting your 
finger on, I say to the hon. member, Mr. Chair. What you’re 
putting your finger on is really the essence of what is the 
philosophy and the thinking behind the building independence 
program and I think we have evidence that it’s working. 
 
Just to go one step further, as I said too when I was doing the 
radio interview last week, and we talked a bit about where are 
people going when they’re leaving the welfare rolls, we believe 
that the large per cent of them are going to work. Ad to state the 
obvious, they couldn’t be leaving to go to work if there wasn’t 
work to go to. And so one of the things that’s been very helpful 
to us in this process is what’s going on and the dynamics of our 
labour market that are around us in the province and in fact in 
the country today as the labour market is tightening. 
 
I would make the argument, not only is this a program which is 
good for those families that have been low-income families 
traditionally, and many have lived outside the mainstream of 
employment, this is good for Saskatchewan — this is good for 
Saskatchewan. And as we look in the years ahead in the 
increased tightening of the labour market, Saskatchewan 
employers need people. And I think there is a wonderful 
opportunity for those of us who believe in the social justice of a 
representative workforce. 
 
I would hope, and I think it’s fair to say that that would be an 
aspiration that would be shared by most if not all who serve in 
this room, that the building independence program is doing the 
right thing at the right time and assisting people making that 
transition to work. For some it’s their first job and we all started 
our first job, again to state the obvious, and you go from there. 
There’s nothing wrong with first jobs. They have to get that 
before you get your second job and that’s the way careers go. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his question 
and the opportunity to emphasize that with the support 
programs we have that it means that always, always, always the 
family is better off when they’re working. And that’s I think a 
criteria of an effective social support program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. Mr. 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

Minister, maybe it’s a little unfortunate that there weren’t a few 
more positive messages coming out when you were on the 
opposition side of the Assembly. I know that . . . because when 
we talk about it . . . like I indicated earlier many times because 
we haven’t acted totally as strongly in opposition — as I’ve 
been told some times, you’re in opposition to oppose — but 
obviously some of the suggestions that have been brought 
forward in the past, in the past eight years about some bridging 
has certainly, as you’ve just indicated, has certainly proven to 
be a benefit. 
 
And we look forward to the time when the tables are turned and 
a party that believes people should continue to work and 
continues to build on that is given the opportunity to just show 
how it can even . . . maybe even work a little better than it is 
today. But I think it’s important, Mr. Minister, and you’ve said 
it, it’s important that we give people the tools and the 
opportunities to actually find gainful employment. 
 
And one of the reasons I wanted to touch on the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement and health benefit, I remember some 
of the debate we had — it was about two weeks ago in this 
Assembly on private members’ day regarding social assistance 
— and one of your colleagues brought forward a motion 
complimenting the government on their efforts. And I believe, 
and I don’t just remember which one, one or two of them 
actually talked about phone numbers for people to call if you 
think you might fit within the guidelines, and you’ve given us a 
bit of an idea tonight of where an individual might be. 
 
And if they happen to be under that income and they find 
themselves struggling, certainly there is every indication that 
there is an opportunity for some other additional bridging 
assistance till that they can move to that higher quality job or 
paying job. 
 
But even today, Mr. Minister, last fall our leader forwarded me 
a letter from a lady, a single mother with three sons. And to be 
honest with you I had a hard time understanding how someone 
who is making just over $28,000 would be thinking well, you 
know, I’m struggling. But when I look at your numbers here, 
she’s just over what a family with three dependent children 
would fit under to actually qualify for some of the benefits. 
 
And she mentioned she just . . . so happened in that case was a 
child that needed additional medication due to some health 
problems, and then of course, by the time she paid for that and 
all the other payments that she was covering, like her housing 
and her utilities, there wasn’t a lot left to provide . . . get her 
children into . . . Her sons really wanted to play hockey, and 
you know what it costs to put a young fellow on skates these 
days and suit them up to go and play hockey with their peers. 
 
It’s not just getting them some skates and some equipment, 
because there are avenues that can be certainly pursued to find 
equipment for young people to play hockey. It’s a matter of the 
transportation and getting your child to the hockey games and 
back two or three times a week. So those all add up to be part of 
the cost. 
 
But I think what we see here is, while the levels seem to be high 
enough — and I think any one of us at a first glance would say, 
you’d ask yourself well how come somebody can’t survive at 

that level of income — but it’s just the cost of living today that 
puts people behind the eight ball. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you mentioned 8,200 families actually 
currently receiving the Saskatchewan income employment 
supplement. What are you paying, what would it come to a 
month for families that work right now? What’s the average, 
and would that have increased over the last three years? Has 
there been a notable increase per year at the monthly 
employment payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for his comments. 
Again just to start at the same point he started, Mr. Chair, I 
would recommend that he not be too enthusiastic about lining 
up the moving vans just yet in terms of people being where they 
are. But I do want to say to him, I guess, you know, we can all 
engage in the political rhetoric and go back and say whose good 
idea is this. And God bless us all if we can all claim that it was 
our good idea. I mean that’s the best-case scenario. At the end 
of the day when you’ve got a good idea, it’s much more 
important that it’s implemented than who claims credit for it, 
and that’s the critical thing. 
 
Just to comment about the circumstances of a family with three 
kids: $28,176 would be the cut-off point for employment 
supplement for the family with three children. And what may be 
most significant, and it may be . . . it’s not our place on the 
forum here of estimates of committee to deal with particular 
cases. But it may be that for a good number of families the 
significance of registering for the employment supplement may 
not be the dollar support itself. For example, if you’re making 
$28,000, there won’t be much by way of employment 
supplement dollars that you’re receiving, but the really 
important factor for many families will be though that you then 
also qualify . . . it’s the family health benefit because if you’re 
receiving any employment supplement at all, then you’ve got 
the full child family health benefit. 
 
And that will be, I think in some cases, it’s important for 
families to keep in mind, when they have high expenses, that if 
those expenses include children’s health expenses, they may say 
oh, what the heck, it’s not worth it to me, I’m not going to 
hardly get anything because I’m right near the cut-off line. 
 
My advice is apply anyhow. It may not be much, but it is just as 
valuable as dollars paid to help meet your costs to have family 
health benefits covered that aren’t covered under the medicare 
program. So I think that’s a worthwhile piece of advice for all 
of us to keep in mind as we’re dealing with constituents. 
 
On the specific question of the average amount of financial 
benefit then, received by Saskatchewan families under the 
employment supplement for the last three years, start then in the 
year ’99-2000, it was $147 per month average; 2001 — it was 
$148 per month average; the last fiscal year, ’01-02, was $183 
per month average. And in the current fiscal — that’s the last 
three — in the current fiscal year we’re forecasting so far, based 
on our numbers, looks as though we’re going to be about $190 
per month average direct financial assistance to families who 
receive an employment supplement. 
 
Again I want to emphasize that above and beyond that then, not 
counted in that, is the value of the family health benefits which 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

 

for some families will be very, very significant. And just also 
maybe to put that into a context, in ’99-2000, 5,839 families at 
that time; today, 8,200 families. 
 
So Saskatchewan families are learning that employment 
supplement is there. Many of these families have never been on 
welfare and it’s helping them to make, you know, make ends 
meet. And that’s exactly what the system is there to support 
them. And we’ve moved from a budget in ’99-2000 to 15.2 
million to projected budget this year of 18.2 million. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, I just have a couple of questions. 
First of all, we’ve been talking about help for those that need 
assistance. And I had a constituent of mine who was not on 
social assistance but who was just making ends meet. They 
wanted some help to go to a specialist in Saskatoon, and what 
they needed was dollars for travel, and they did not want to go 
on social assistance and did not feel they needed to, but they 
just did not have the funding available to them to make this trip. 
 
When they went to Social Services in Weyburn, they were told 
no there is no funding for this. If you want to apply to go on 
social assistance, we can look at that, and if you are on social 
assistance then we would provide funding for your 
transportation to Saskatoon to a specialist, but if you don’t, we 
will not give you anything. Could you please explain that to me 
and why that policy’s in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — To the hon. member, again I know that it’s 
not appropriate for us to be dealing with specific cases on the 
public record and I think what the hon. member is asking is a 
. . . I’ll interpret as a policy question. Yes. 
 
In response to her question, let me say two things: one about the 
employment supplement and one about social assistance 
benefits and there being cut-off lines. Just following up on our 
conversation I was having with the hon. member’s colleague 
from Moosomin, what may have been . . . I don’t know but 
should have considered at least by that particular family was 
eligibility for the employment supplement. They may or may 
not, depending on the income. If you knew what the gross was 
and the number of kids, we could tell you whether they’d 
qualify or not. 
 
But if families are eligible for the supplement, there’s no — 
now I’m talking about the payment itself — there’s no 
requirement to use it for a specific purpose. It’s just money to 
assist with meeting family costs. 
 
So point number one, in that circumstance I would always say 
to any family, if you’re pressed for financial needs and you’ve 
got another, you know, pressing need and your money is not 
large enough, first of all check out the . . . phone and call and 
see if you’re eligible for the employment supplement. If you 
are, then that kicks in and that’ll come to you. 
 
In addition to that, there’s a family health benefit which will not 
provide travel costs for health appointments, but it may in fact 
cover some health costs that then otherwise when you have to 
pay for them free up the money to do that. So sometimes there’s 
more than one way to approach solving a problem. So that 

would be my first approach if they were approaching me or if 
they approached you to say, look at the employment 
supplement. 
 
Now on one of the protections that is provided then under the 
Saskatchewan assistance program, I should say, the assistance 
program or income security — welfare, then will be the means 
to have transportation to get to your medical appointments. And 
that will be targeted specifically to go to specific medical 
appointments. And it’s there because for those whose incomes 
are low enough to qualify for welfare, those are pretty low 
incomes. And so when those extraordinary costs arise, the 
reality is that it’s extremely difficult if not impossible to get to a 
medical appointment if it’s in another place, unless you have 
the means to do it. So that’s why the benefit exists. 
 
As I suppose with any program, there is a cut-off then at some 
point above which you no longer qualify for welfare because 
your income is higher than that — good for you. If it’s lower 
than that, then by virtue of the provincial taxpayers, you have 
the funded program and then the benefits apply. And I suppose 
the fact of the matter is, no matter where you have that line, it’s 
always somewhere, and there’s always someone then who will 
be just above that, that which may occur in some cases. 
 
But the reason for the support for transportation for health 
appointments for people who are welfare recipients then is 
because in that case it’s their only means in reality to get there. 
And again then for a family who is fortunate enough that their 
income is higher than that, that qualify for welfare, please check 
out the employment supplement because there may be 
assistances that are available to you that you just haven’t been 
taking advantage of. 
 
We, the Saskatchewan government, has no vested interest in 
trying to have anybody who’s eligible not take advantage of a 
program. It’s there to support families in need and help them in 
difficult times to meet their family expenses. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to follow up on 
that then, if a person, in the case that I’m speaking about, went 
to a Social Services office and indicated to them their concern 
and their problem, would the Social Services workers tell them 
about this problem or do they have to know about the program 
and ask about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — No, they would tell them about the 
employment supplement. But there will be many people of 
course who won’t actually go to a Social Services office and 
who can just phone and register. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On another point 
then, I was speaking with a gentleman that works in the field of 
addictions, and he has on many occasions need for or works 
with people that have need for emergency assistance. He 
brought to my attention that now you cannot just go into a 
Social Services office and apply for emergency assistance; you 
must phone ahead for an appointment. His concern is that many 
of the people that are in need of emergency assistance do not 
have access to a telephone. 
 
He also indicated that people have gone directly to the offices 
and have been told that they have to go elsewhere and phone 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

back and make an appointment, that they will not be looked 
after at that time. Could you tell me the rationale behind this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, first of all, 
one of the things that’s happened as a result of the income 
security redesign to make the whole process more effective is 
that we’ve implemented the call centre, and that’s . . . so that’s 
what you’re referring to when you’re saying that someone has 
to register by phone. And the call centre enables us then to do a 
good job of collecting information, referring people to the 
appropriate route quickly, and also doing a quick assessment of 
their own needs. 
 
Now if someone goes to a Social Services office, because that’s 
the way it’s traditionally been done, and they get there and they 
find out, oh you have to phone, there will be . . . there is a 
phone available that they’ll have at the Social Services office 
that they can do that from there. So even if somebody doesn’t 
have a phone and they find themselves traditionally going in 
there, they use a phone and will register. 
 
Now if someone indicates when they register, just tells the 
person who takes the call — and these are all trained 
Department of Social Services personnel — if they indicate that 
it’s an emergency circumstance, they’ll make an appointment 
for them right away. So it should ought not to be the case that 
someone in a true emergency doesn’t get an appointment right 
way, and it should ought not to be the case then that someone 
who doesn’t have a telephone will, you know, will be unable to 
register because they’ll facilitate that through the Social 
Services office if they don’t have another more convenient way 
of doing it. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I . . . my 
understanding is this is not happening in Regina and it might be 
a good point to inform the people that are working at Social 
Services offices that this is the way it is to be handled. Because 
it’s my understanding it is not being handled like that today. 
 
I just have one more area I’d like to speak to you about, Mr. 
Minister, and that’s the area of mental health. And first of all 
before I go into that, I would like to ask if mental health 
services are under the Department of Social Services still or if 
they are under the Department of Health. And if they aren’t 
yours, I’ll leave it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for . . . first of all 
to respond. Here in Regina the current standard is if 
somebody’s just calling in normal circumstances, the current 
standard is that they would get their appointment within two to 
three days. If they call in and indicate that it’s an emergency, 
then they would get their appointment tomorrow if they were 
calling in today. So it would be the next day for an appointment 
there. 
 
So if the hon. member is aware of someone’s experience which 
is different than that, then I’d appreciate knowing of that. I’d 
welcome that. Sometimes I think too what may happen is that 
because it is call centre, as is the case with all call centres, the 
phones stack up. And so if when you phone they’re all busy at 
that time, then you will get a . . . I guess a recording . . . a busy 
signal or you’ll get into the queue. 
 

And what I think happens unfortunately sometimes is that 
people, not realizing that, will hang up and then they’ll phone 
back. And if so . . . Advice is if you’re talking to anyone, to ask 
them to pass along as well, just hang in there because if they’re 
all busy you just keep getting closer as the call centre person 
can take the next person. 
 
Mental health services are not under the Department of Social 
Services and so I’m not in a position to entertain questions in 
that regard. Thank you for the questions. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, coming back 
to travel assistance, I had an inquiry recently from an individual 
who is in some ways volunteering his time to take people to 
some medical appointments, but felt that if he didn’t volunteer 
that time, and while he’s volunteering, he felt that it . . . it was 
costing him money as well and he should be at least able to 
qualify for some financial assistance. 
 
I think he said he was receiving something like . . . I’m not sure 
now — 15 cents, 15 cents a litre, 25 cents a litre. I’m not 
positive whether or not there was for health. But I guess what 
I’d like to know is, is there a policy in place if someone actually 
does call and needs assistance to get to a medical appointment 
and you can call on a volunteer, versus if all you’ve got is a 
social worker and this person is on assistance and actually 
needs to get to an appointment that worker would probably be 
receiving the government rate? 
 
What’s the policy when it comes to people on assistance 
needing travel help to get to medical appointments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the hon. 
member, the policy is this, is that a social assistance client 
makes a request for the transportation to attend the medical 
appointment, for example, and based then on the distance, the 
funding is provided directly to the client. My officials don’t 
have the . . . I can’t be precise. 
 
Just a second, I can be precise. I was just kidding. Okay. I was 
just kidding. I can be precise. 
 
The hon. member I knew had confidence that if he waited long 
enough the answer would come through. And the current rate 
provided is 18 cents per kilometre when a driver is required, 
except when driving a member of the family unit and it’s 13 
cents per kilometre for a private vehicle. 
 
So the funding is provided to the recipient and then he or she 
makes their own arrangements. And whatever arrangements 
they would use, they’re responsible of course for their own 
arrangements and the department doesn’t do it for them or 
doesn’t take them somewhere. It provides the funding and the 
recipient then would use whichever is the appropriate level of 
funding, 13 or 18 cents per kilometre, to make their own 
arrangements to get to the appointment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what do department officials or 
social workers receive for travel assistance per kilometre? 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The fact that . . . we had a little difficulty 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

 

coming up with the answer because the fact of the matter is it is 
not very often that social workers drive their own vehicles. The 
large, large majority of the travel that workers do in carrying 
out their duties is to use the pool cars that are available. 
 
I believe the current rate is . . . it is either 32 cents, or I think it 
may have just recently changed to 34 cents. I’m not absolutely 
positive which of those two it is, but I believe it is currently 34 
cents per kilometre if a private vehicle is used in carrying out 
duties of the job. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So, Mr. Minister, if indeed you’ve got a welfare 
client who actually needs assistance, transportation assistance to 
a medical appointment, he had no other alternative, and I don’t 
know which form you would choose, but if you said, for 
example, no other alternative but the worker driving their own 
vehicle, they’d receive the rate of 32 cents. But you’re asking 
private individuals, you’re offering them only 18 cents. It seems 
to me, Mr. Minister, that that isn’t quite fair, and I think that 
was the point the individual was trying to raise, that they’re 
trying to provide a service and they felt that they should be 
treated a little more fairly. 
 
One of the other problems I think though that may be cropping 
up here is the fact that if the welfare recipient makes application 
for transportation for this medical appointment, and the funding 
goes direct to the recipient, then there’s no way of the person 
who provides the travel of maybe even knowing exactly what 
they’re getting because there’s no guarantee, I would take it, 
that that recipient or client can actually pass on, they could pass 
on, can you drive me for 15 cents a litre or whatever the case. 
 
And I think that’s where part of the fault is. It seems that there’s 
too much of a disparity between a private vehicle versus 
someone who may be a caseworker who may — and I don’t 
know if this happens or not — but if they were forced to . . . 
you needed to address a medical situation that was immediate. 
And the second thing is payment exacted directly to the client 
that may never actually, all of those funds, reach the hands of 
the person who provided the care. So I think that’s something, 
Mr. Minister, that was brought to my attention. I think that was 
the argument that was raised. 
 
And having said that, I go to another argument. And that is how 
the power and utilities are covered and rent is covered. If I’m 
not mistaken now, cheques are made directly to the clients. And 
I don’t know if . . . I think there was one time, and maybe it still 
is, where the client and the lessor, lessee, where both had both 
names on the cheques. And it’s been raised just recently with 
some where the — and I think we had a discussion or I talked to 
your office maybe last fall in fact a little bit about it — where 
the cheques are now going directly to the client. 
 
What people are running into is they’re not being paid their rent 
money because the . . . and even utility companies; it creates a 
problem for you and I as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly). All of a sudden we’ve got the landowners coming 
and saying, well I need my cheque or otherwise I’m going to 
evict this person. We’re trying to beg them to hold; well it’s 40 
below, would you please give them another night’s rest or 
whatever, even the gas or power. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering what the policy is currently, 

what the department is doing to guarantee that landlords and the 
utilities actually receive their payments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the hon. member for both of his 
questions. Let me respond first of all to the travel question. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that there is a difference in the philosophy 
in the arriving of the two numbers. The 18 cents per kilometre’s 
being provided in essence to cover out . . . direct, out-of-pocket 
expenses for a very specific amount of travel to be done. And 
it’s not intended to be . . . no one’s pretending that it’s intended 
to cover more than just the direct, operational, out-of-pocket 
expenses related to travel, which will be a different standard if 
someone is using their private vehicle on a regular basis. 
 
That’s why I say we had to scramble a bit to come up with that. 
Because when that system is used, it’s intended to provide for 
the long-term operating costs of a vehicle, which is more than 
just a direct operating costs — gas and oil — but it’s 
maintenance and tires and depreciation and wear and tear and 
insurance and all those sorts of things and I . . . that would enter 
into the calculation for an employment rate for employees who 
are regularly using their own vehicles. It’s for that reason, it’s 
felt to be more cost-effective that the department doesn’t do 
much of that and provides pool vehicles that Social Services 
staff would use. 
 
Now going to the shelter, there has been a recent increase 
within — by recent I mean within the last few months — 
increase in shift of assuming of responsibility and the 
importance of that. When we talked before about the building 
independence program, it is a program that is based on the 
assumption or the basic philosophy that it is a healthy thing that 
policies related to acquiring income security support 
independence and taking of responsibility for your own life and 
managing your own affairs — and so too, in my judgment, 
should good social policy when it relates to income security. 
 
It would not be our objective to create a sense of dependency on 
the system, so to speak, by having people’s benefits being tied 
to, in effect, the rules, making their decisions for them in 
managing their lives for them. And it would be my judgment 
that it’s good healthy social policy then when people who are 
on tough times, facing income shortages, are being assisted as a 
result of taxpayer expenditure, that they’re also doing it in a 
way that . . . And there’s no apologies for wanting to do it in a 
way that supports a sense of dignity, but also that supports 
independent financial management because at the end of the 
day that’s what serves the individual best and that’s also what 
serves the province best. 
 
And so there has been a shift in emphasis so that based on the 
belief that most clients are capable of managing their own 
affairs — I say most, I don’t say all — and that budgeting and 
money management are important skills for independence, so 
our policy, in my judgment, should reinforce and support that. 
 
What happens is that the department then will screen clients to 
determine whether they’re ready to pay their own bills, 
including rent and utilities. And if the client is someone who is 
experiencing problems in that area, then arrangements can and 
will be established for options like joint payment that you refer 
to — that’s one option — or the use of a trustee which is 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

sometimes used. And we also want to acknowledge that 
landlords are an important part of this picture. And if a landlord 
is aware of a client experiencing difficulty, they may contact the 
department and, as a result of that, the social worker will review 
the circumstances related to the client and will develop the 
appropriate plan of action. 
 
Now just to give you an indication as to how frequently . . . So 
as we implement this, I think we’re moving rather cautiously 
and prudently. We’re wanting, as I say, to reinforce good 
money management and financial management. That’s a good, 
healthy thing for clients. 
 
In the previous fiscal year, there were 21 per cent of social 
assistance clients who were receiving the money directly 
themselves. The other 79 per cent were a different arrangement 
that you referred to. The number who are currently receiving 
the direct payments themselves is 30 per cent. So it’s by no 
means the . . . it’s still less than a third of the total. There is a 
movement towards supporting the rights to make independent 
decision about management of financial affairs, and I think 
that’s a good and healthy thing. It’s still a long way from being 
the majority circumstance, and that’s the status as we are today. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister. So, Mr. 
Minister, what you’re saying is if a landlord is finding that 
they’re being somewhat shortchanged, the funds aren’t all 
coming through, they can contact the department and ask the 
department where their payments are, their rent payments, 
agreed-to rent payments are, and at that time then the 
department will then do a follow-up and see whether or not the 
client has actually been making the full rental payments. Is that 
what I understand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Yes, that’s correct. That’s what will 
happen. And then the social worker will use his or her judgment 
and then proceed as they see appropriately in terms of the 
client’s plan, wanting to support the financial assistance being 
used to support the person’s real living costs, and at the same 
time wanting to support the healthy objective of the client 
developing their own responsible financial management. So you 
can’t predict the outcome of the conversation in advance, but 
clearly if a landlord would make the call and say to a worker 
that this person has not been meeting their expenses, then that 
would trigger the social worker raising that issue and addressing 
it with the social assistance client. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what happens in the cases of 
utilities? If your power and SaskEnergy or your telephone find 
that the cheques aren’t being made, would the utility contact the 
office or does the client just find themselves without either of 
the services at some time or other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — It could happen either way. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, recently you received a question 
regarding your department about rate increases, service fee 
increases, and other increases in charges. In your answer you 
mentioned something about a graduated rent scale being 
introduced for calculating social housing rents. Now are we 
talking of a higher level of rental or shelter allowance available 
or what exactly are we talking of there or . . . just the cost of 
housing, what exactly are we related to there? Are the shelter 

rates actually increasing to recognize the higher cost of rental 
fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — To the hon. member, Mr. Chair, the 
graduated rent scale is related to the social housing units that 
are provided by Sask Housing and so this isn’t related to the 
shelter allowances in the social assistance program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, regarding the shelter allowances, 
are those changing at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The answer is no. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, we originally started talking about 
the reduction in the number of cases, the number of individuals. 
We talked about families, the number of families, that have 
actually moved off of the assistance programs. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could actually indicate 
what the actual numbers are. And you talked about, I think you 
indicated something like 8,400 fewer people, and I’d like to 
know what time period that is because I think there was — was 
it just a week or a little while ago — we talked about a 
reduction of 4,600. But in the overall scheme, even if we go 
back ’94, ’95, what were the number of caseloads at that time 
and the individual families? And not necessarily up to today, 
but what we were in 2000, and probably we maybe could go 
right to the most recent numbers versus the last annual report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I apologize for the numbers changing, but 
they’re changing because they’re getting better. It’s also 
changing, of course, because they’re being updated. And when 
we last met, then what I was reporting to the committee at that 
time were numbers that I think were nearing about six months 
old or so. And the current numbers released last week then are 
current as of March of 2002. 
 
And so comparing March of ’97, the numbers I’m using then 
are pre-building independence. So March ’97 to March 2002, in 
that period of time, the number of cases of people — welfare 
cases — that are open is down by 8,400. 
 
Of those 8,400, 6,000 of those are families. So I guess the 
remaining 2,400 would be single individuals. So we’re down 
some 2,400 single individuals, down 6,000 families, and then as 
I said as well, within those families there are 13,000 kids. So 
it’s accurate to say that today there are 13,000 fewer kids 
growing up on welfare than there were prior to the introduction 
of the building independence program in 1998. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what were the actual numbers in 
March of ’97 — cases and families — and March of ’02? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, I don’t 
have the precise March ’97 numbers here. I can give you the 
precise March ’02 numbers and I can also give you the March 
’94 numbers if you want those. 
 
When we were releasing the numbers last week we were . . . I 
was reporting then on year over year, and I was reporting since 
’94. And so we’re . . . and I’ll provide to you tomorrow the 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

 

precise March ’97 numbers if you’d like them. 
 
But in March 1994, there were 41,058 cases. In March of this 
year it’s 30,815. So a reduction of 10,243 or a reduction of 25 
per cent. 
 
In March of ’94 there were 83,000 people. And I think these 
were some of the numbers actually that you were referring to 
earlier, I say to the hon. member, Mr. Chair, through you, 
earlier in the estimates. In March of ’94 there were 83,000 
people then . . . 83,120. In March of ’02 it’s 56,074, a reduction 
of 27,046 fewer people receiving social assistance and a 
reduction of 33 per cent. 
 
And then in terms of children: in March of ’94, 34,103; in 
March of ’02 — okay, here we are — in March of ’02, 21,938; 
and a reduction of 36 per cent fewer kids — 12,165 by these 
numbers. 
 
I do have the March ’97 here now. We’ve been able to find that 
in the tonne of paper that we brought with us. In March ’97 then 
there were 39,235 cases. And at that time beneficiaries . . . 
79,908 actual people who were in households that were 
receiving social assistance. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’d have to say those statistics are fairly impressive. 
However, one would have to ask where are . . . where is 
everyone? 
 
You talked a moment earlier about people being handed a 
one-way bus ticket out of the province in order to get them off 
assistance. We’ve seen, and by the annual reports I see that as 
well, a significant number, a decrease of the caseloads and the 
number of individuals on assistance, and yet the statistics in this 
province are lower than they were a few years ago. The number 
of jobs that are available to people are, as well, Mr. Minister, 
are down. 
 
And so one would have to ask exactly where is everyone that 
was on welfare. How many of these . . . how many of these 
individuals actually themselves packed up their bags and left 
the province? And I’m not exactly sure whether your 
department finds everyone . . . follows everyone on assistance 
to find out where they went, whether they actually found a job 
in the province, or with the number of people . . . number of . . . 
the population actually decreasing and the number of jobs, that 
we have fewer jobs here in the province. 
 
And then with these reductions, something isn’t quite adding up 
here, Mr. Minister, as in regards to where people are actually 
going and are they all finding jobs. Or are we transferring some 
of the people that were on welfare, are they ending up in 
educational programs? Are they ending up on student loan 
programs as they further their education so therefore they’re not 
in the welfare numbers? 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can kind of give us an idea of 
how we have accomplished this as the province has actually 
shrunk and the opportunity to work has shrunk. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well I very much appreciate the question 
actually, and the answer is some of all of the above, I think is 

the complete answer. But I think it’s fair to say, as I said earlier, 
people couldn’t be leaving to jobs if there weren’t jobs to leave 
to. 
 
And one of the things that sometimes we’re inclined to not 
recognize is the reality of what’s going on outside of the 
agricultural sector. I think we are all, I think, very, very 
sensitive in this Chamber to the significance of the agricultural 
sector on Saskatchewan and how things are hurting on many 
farms and the fact that there’s been significant decline in 
employment related to the agricultural sector. 
 
But the other side of the coin is that outside of the agricultural 
sector there have been a number of things that are really 
happening that are very helpful to us in making the transition 
from welfare to employment. 
 
Since 1996, outside of the agricultural sector — if I remember 
correctly — there has been a growth of 33,500 jobs. And that’s 
been . . . that’s province-wide. There’s been significant growth 
in the oil and gas sector, and in construction, wholesale and 
retail trade, in the accommodation and the food service 
industry. So when you put those together that’s a big chunk of 
some 33,500 jobs. 
 
And in the two larger cities of Regina and Saskatoon, in the last 
year from March of ’01 to March of ’02, there has been an 
increase of 8,300 jobs in the last year alone. So those are real 
jobs and they need real people to work at them. 
 
Now the hon. member is quite correct when he says that we 
don’t have a precise follow-through tool; because when people 
leave social assistance, of course, they’re not required to report 
what they’re doing, so we can’t say . . . we can’t be precise as to 
exactly what people are doing. But there will be some who will 
have moved to training, and as part of building their academic 
qualifications and going on then to, in many cases, to 
post-secondary and so on. So there will be some in that 
category which would be in the range of . . . we’ll see if we can 
get an estimate there. But it’ll be a small percentage of the total. 
 
In terms of student loans, it has long been the case that if you 
were receiving a student loan that you weren’t eligible for 
assistance. So nothing’s changed in the policy there. 
 
What I think is worthwhile to note, is that over the . . . our 
numbers have been going down for a substantial time. The 
reductions have significantly increased since the introduction of 
building independence. And in my judgment, the income 
security redesigned phase 2 is also contributing once again to 
reductions in numbers. 
 
And so the fact of the matter is, when the Saskatchewan 
population numbers are increasing, our welfare numbers have 
been going down. When Saskatchewan population numbers 
have been steady, our welfare numbers are going down. And 
the fact of the matter is — one more update since the committee 
last met — is that as of March, we have now gone 88 straight 
months in which our welfare numbers have reduced. By that I 
mean year over year, March over March of the previous year. 
 
So we’ve gone over seven years, 88 consecutive months, in 
which our welfare numbers have gone down. So that’s not a 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

coincidence or if it is a coincidence, it’s the longest doggone 
coincidence I’ve ever seen because that coincidence is running 
over seven years now. So the fact of the matter is that policies I 
think have contributed to the reductions in numbers. 
 
It’s also interesting when we look at the . . . what’s going on in 
some of our centres where we’re able to look at the experience 
of participants in Yorkton — looking at Yorkton, which is the 
first centre here in Saskatchewan — where a year ago we 
started to implement the pilot of the phase 2 redesign and the 
introduction of jobs first, so Yorkton is the centre that’s had the 
most experience. And in January in Yorkton, 39 per cent of the 
jobs first participants were working six weeks later. In February 
. . . or February participants in jobs first, 50 per cent were 
working six weeks later. 
 
So those are indications, Mr. Chair, that say to me that there is 
absolutely no reason to believe that the numbers are indicative 
of anything other than people transferring from welfare to 
employment. There will be some who are transferring to . . . 
Some of the numbers that I can give you that will also indicate 
that as well is that — this would be in the last year — that there 
have been 3,400 opportunities — JobStart, Future Skills — that 
people have moved to, so those are real jobs, and 2,660 through 
employment programs who have moved to employment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one of the disturbing facts, however, despite the 
reduction in the number of people on welfare, is the fact of the 
number of people who are hungry in our country, and certainly 
our province is no exception. A headline in the most recent 
paper talks about . . . in fact, on Friday’s paper: 
 

The numbers are pretty staggering and upsetting. It’s a 
Canadian tragedy that hunger and the need for food banks 
are increasing in this country. 

 
And the numbers are staggering and quite upsetting. This 
announcement was made at the Regina Food Bank where they 
talked about a joint program and collecting, I believe, cartridges 
from, used ink-jet cartridges and reprocessing them — just a 
means of actually generating some funds for the Food Bank. 
But the realities are the Food Bank is still struggling to keep its 
shelves full on many occasions, and I’ve been down to the Food 
Bank here in Regina, and I must compliment them for the fact 
that they’ve gone beyond, in most cases, just handing out food 
hampers. 
 
(20:30) 
 
One of the things I think that was a positive move, and I believe 
it’s better than a year ago, where they put in four small kitchens 
just so they can begin to train people. While they handed out the 
hampers, if people didn’t know how to actually create a meal, 
that hamper wasn’t much of a benefit. So I think that was a 
positive example of reaching out. 
 
And Souls Harbor Mission here in the city as well, Mr. 
Minister, has been having difficulty just meeting the needs of 
the individuals who come to its doorsteps. 
 
So while we talk about reducing the . . . while we talk about the 
number of people being reduced on the welfare rolls and this 

comment here: 
 

In the past year, demand has increased at the Regina and 
district Food Bank. Approximately 80 tons of food are 
handed out monthly to feed between 8 and 10,000 people. 
Approximately half are children. 

 
Mr. Minister, one has to ask if indeed we’re finding fewer 
people actually needing the services of social assistance, more 
people actually working, why are we finding the food banks 
actually continuing to have to meet such a large need, 
organizations such as Souls Harbor continuing, I believe almost 
on an evening basis of feeding over 300 people on an on-going 
basis. It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that we should 
actually find the need for these services to begin to decrease 
rather than even just holding their own if we’re actually 
meeting the needs of hunger, and people themselves are finding 
gainful employment, and we’re seeing the reductions in the 
caseloads that you’re talking about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The hon. member, Mr. Chair, and I are 
having a good time here, and I’m afraid that all good things 
must eventually come to an end, and this is just about it, but if I 
may just, before moving into Municipal Affairs, if I may 
respond very briefly to the question the hon. member raises. 
 
It was, as a matter of fact, in February I think it was, that I was 
over to the Regina Food Bank here, and I certainly concur 
there’s some excellent support programs that are running out of 
the Regina Food Bank. And interestingly, and I was there to in 
fact help to enhance that with an announcement of some 
support for a child care centre that helps with the meeting of 
child care needs for families who are coming and getting other 
kinds of training and supports. 
 
And it was quite interesting because we were talking there 
about this very phenomenon, the reduction in the welfare 
caseload in the province of Saskatchewan. And what I found 
interesting . . . This kind of comes, Mr. Chair, to the 
phenomenon, if the glass is half empty or half full. 
 
But when we were there I was talking about the reduction that’s 
been going on province-wide. And we had an interesting 
discussion after the formalities were over, where some of the 
officials of the Regina Food Bank were saying to me . . . they 
said, you know, it’s interesting that you say that, minister, 
because we see the effects here. 
 
The fact of the matter is — and the Regina Food Bank does a 
very good job of keeping stats — is that in the year 2000 their 
growth in terms of use, compared to the year . . . Sorry, in the 
year 2001 the growth of Food Bank use compared to the year 
2000 had increased by less than 1 per cent. And what they were 
saying is that that is the smallest change that they have seen 
ever, I think, in the Regina Food Bank. 
 
And so they were saying to me that they certainly saw an 
indication that something was changing and that they were 
seeing the impact of that by the fact that the growth in the use 
was negligible and less than 1 per cent. 
 
So is the glass half full or half empty? I guess it depends on 
your point of view. The folks at the Food Bank thought that that 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

 

was an encouraging sign. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think that the time has come to move along. 
There’s different ways of doing different programs, and in this 
one we do it with a motion. And so, Mr. Chair, I think we have 
an agreed upon understanding that we will now move to 
estimates for Government Relations. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Chair, I would move that the committee 
report progress on Social Services and move to Government 
Relations. 
 
I want to thank the hon. member for his questions. I appreciate 
the dialogue tonight. This is an important discussion we’re 
having. And I also want to thank the officials for their support 
here tonight in providing answers to the questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce, once again, Mr. Brent Cotter, deputy minister; Larry 
Steeves, who is the associate deputy minister who is on my 
right here; John Edwards, who is the executive director of 
policy development; Russ Krywulak, who is the executive 
director of grants administration and provincial municipal 
relations; Doug Morcom, who is the director of grants 
administration; and Wanda Lamberti, executive director, 
finance administration and information technology. And as well 
this evening I have Marj Abel, who is the director of finance 
and administration, and Ralph Leibel, who is the manager of 
community planning. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, 
Mr. Minister. Welcome to your staff tonight. I want to 
commend you, Mr. Minister, and commend your staff. Actually 
every time we phone a number at Municipal Government we 
actually get Municipal Government. So that’s one plus. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like just for a minute to . . . I would like to just 
touch on tonight, to start out, Mr. Minister, with the 
restructuring of Municipal Government and the departments 
that you gave up. Could you maybe just start off tonight by just 
giving us a bit of an overview of the departments you gave up 
and how Municipal Government is actually structured at this 
point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the hon. 
member for the question. The restructuring of Government 
Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, what I might do is read into 
the record the mandate of the department: 
 

. . . to promote Saskatchewan’s interests through 

management of the Province’s relations with . . . 
governments, in Canada and abroad, and to work with 
Aboriginal peoples in the province and their organizations 
to advance . . . (their) common interests. The Department 
works in partnership with (the) communities to support 
local governance, provide financial (service) and technical 
support and develop legislation, regulations and other 
policies to meet the changing needs of municipal 
governments. 

 
And the department as well: 
 

. . . also coordinates and manages matters related to 
Government House, French-language services, official 
protocol, provincial honours, and provides administrative 
services to the Office of the Lieutenant Governor. 

 
Mr. Chair, there are a number of other specific areas if the hon. 
member would like me to elaborate on, but if that would suffice 
for now I’ll be glad to offer any additional information. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — No, that’s fine for now, Mr. Minister. 
Thank you. I guess I’d like to . . . I’m trying to understand how 
downsizing of Municipal Government has made it simpler for 
the people out in Saskatchewan that are running municipalities, 
whether it’s urban or rural. 
 
What was the number of employees that you had under 
Municipal Government before and where are we now with the 
number of employees that work for Government Relations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the change 
in the full-time equivalent status from 2001-2002 went from 
233.6 FTEs (full-time equivalents). For 2002-2003, it will now 
be 200.5, so there has been a significant reduction. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Were all these 
positions transferred to another area, or were there actually 
people that were terminated from their job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there were some vacancies 
within the whole department that were eliminated. Some of the 
positions were in fact terminated, and there were a number that 
moved to different areas within the department. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A couple of areas 
that I’m having problem actually finding where they fit under, 
and I think I know, but RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) funding, for one thing, is that totally under Justice at this 
point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is correct; 
policing is all under Justice. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So there’s no funding, Mr. Minister, for 
policing or RCMP or anything like that through Government 
Relations at this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Not directly, Mr. Chairman. I think the 
hon. member may be asking about any type of revenue sharing, 
but the revenue sharing goes to municipalities, so they can deal 
with that as they see fit. There’s no direct relationship for costs 
of policing from Government Relations to municipalities. 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You know there’s 
areas like 911 and other areas that used to be under Municipal 
Affairs that are now, I guess, under different areas. 
 
I guess the problem that I may be having with the restructuring 
that you’ve done to Municipal Government . . . and this has 
been brought to my . . . concern has been brought to me by a 
number of . . . and it doesn’t always have to be urban, but even 
rural. When people out there go to deal with some department 
where they were used to dealing with Municipal Government, 
whether it was housing or RCMP funding, whatever it was, it 
was under the umbrella of Municipal Government. It’s become 
quite confusing, and I guess in time, it will become simpler, but 
they’re all over the place looking for . . . if a town is dealing 
with housing, they go through Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find it hard to understand how we’ve made this 
simpler for the elected people of Saskatchewan by doing what 
we’ve done. Would you care to comment about that? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, you’re 
correct. The housing services now fall under Social Services, 
and it seemed to be the appropriate ministry with respect to 
housing needs in a variety of communities. 
 
As far as municipal relations, Government Relations, there 
should be no question or at least no confusion with respect to 
assistance offered by Government Relations to municipalities, 
in many of their respects dealing with local governments. The 
Department of Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 
has had discussions with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM’s (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) executive regarding our 
advisory services that we’ve now put in place. 
 
And we’re planning once again in the future to consult with all 
these services as well to assure them that the availability of any 
assistance in their needs, in their governance needs, as well as 
the tool kit that’s been prepared for electronic obtaining of 
services or at least information on various services such as 
preparing or changing bylaws and the like, but municipal 
governments can contact just about whatever advisory service 
through Government Relations. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When housing 
was transferred to Social Services, how many positions would 
have been transferred with housing at that point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, it may seem like a large and significant number, but 
there were 122 full-time employees that would have been 
associated with housing that would have gone with Social 
Services. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 911 — did you 
touch on that? Is 911 still under Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that would come . . . 911 
now and all emergency service would come under the Minister 
of Public Safety which would be Minister Thomson’s 

department. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — And how many employees would have 
been transferred at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite. 
The specific number . . . the 911 services were on a contract 
basis, but with the employees that were connected with that 
would have been 10 to 12. I can get that specific number and 
advise the member later on if you wish. If not, it’s roughly in 
that number. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Good. Thank you, Mr. Minister. No, that 
doesn’t matter. That’s just a rough idea; that’s what I needed. 
Did you actually . . . did you comment on the RCMP funding 
and that? Was that a special group of people that looked after 
that or was that done under the existing people that are still in 
Municipal Government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the RCMP funding has 
always been a matter of the Justice department. There was 
never any direct funding related to Municipal Government, now 
Government Relations. So it’s strictly Justice that dealt with the 
funding issues for policing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, then after the restructuring, and these housing and 
then these other areas were transferred to another department, 
did you . . . did Government Relations then take on other 
responsibilities that you didn’t have before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it was . . . Actually what 
had happened with the reorganization, it was a merging of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, Aboriginal Affairs, and municipal 
governments, which then included municipal governments, 
provincial/interprovincial relationships with governments, as 
well as the federal, the national governments, and international 
trade as well. So there was a merger of responsibilities from 
some of these other departments that came under this umbrella. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — That maybe explains my next question, Mr. 
Minister, because the numbers you’ve given me tonight . . . I 
believe you said there was 233.6 employees originally with 
Municipal Government. You then went on to say there was 122 
transferred with housing; there was another 10 to 12 people or 
positions that moved to 911. I would come down . . . my 
numbers would, if my math is close to being right, there’s about 
100 employees that would be left, and yet you say there is still 
around 200 there. Did you take on an extra number of areas that 
would have brought 100 employees with those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I know 
that the hon. member’s math is correct. Maybe not right down 
to the decimal point, but it’s . . . What the explanation is that 
Municipal Affairs, prior to the re-organization and the 
restructuring and the merging of other departments, was in 
excess of 400 employees which included Municipal Affairs, 
Housing, and subsequently with the merging of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs, that number blended into 233. 
 
And from that 233 were the reductions as a result of the cutting 
of the positions that were vacant. So it was reduced by that 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

 

number. So that’s what would bring it down to the 200. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to just . . . I won’t go far into this, but Aboriginal Affairs, to 
me it looks like there’s parts of it in about three different 
departments. Do you want to elaborate on that a bit? What part 
of Aboriginal Affairs do you deal with now under Government 
Relations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the Aboriginal Affairs 
portion that is with Government Relations develops and 
coordinates government policies with respect to First Nations 
and Métis peoples. As well it manages and provides funding for 
any provincial obligations that exist pursuant to treaty land 
entitlement agreements. As well it provides payments related to 
the province’s obligations pursuant to the First Nations gaming 
agreements. It also supports special initiatives with Aboriginal 
organizations and promotes and facilitates Aboriginal 
employment opportunities across the public and private sectors. 
 
And you’re right, there are some other areas that are still related 
to Justice that’s dealt with specifically. But these are 
responsibilities under Government Relations that would fall into 
the purview of the responsibilities of this ministry. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll get off that 
topic now. 
 
And I’d like to just touch for a minute . . . I know you saw and I 
saw after the budget, SARM put out a release that wasn’t really 
totally happy with the budget this year. They talked about the 
$25 million education tax rebate that was cut. 
 
And I’m understanding the extra dollars you put into municipal 
. . . or was put into Government Relations this year for northern 
and urban and rural. But I guess what I’m wondering now, we 
saw Saskatoon put their mill rate up. Regina just lately put 
theirs up, and I think a number of the other cities. I’m 
wondering are you getting a trend — and I think every year we 
watch to see what’s happening out there with mill rates across 
Saskatchewan — are you getting a trend now with the towns? 
I’ve had some calls where towns have had to jack theirs up. 
And also with rural municipalities, are we getting a feeling, to 
what degree are they having to raise their mill rates this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that is a question, a 
concern that has been expressed. And the hon. member is 
correct; this is the first year in a number of years that there has 
been a turnaround and an injection of an additional $10 million 
in revenue sharing for all the municipalities — urban and rural. 
 
And I am aware that there are some municipalities that see fit or 
some urban municipalities that have seen fit to raise their mill 
rates in order to continue to supply the types of services for 
their communities. And, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, it’s 
as difficult . . . and again I appreciate the difficulties that some 
of the municipalities are having in meeting the needs of their 
communities, and it’s not unlike dealing with the entire 
provincial budget where you do the best you can with what you 
have and then when it comes down to meeting some 
responsibilities, once again you have to take from someplace to 
ensure that you meet your requirements in another area. 
 

It has been pleasing though however, with having said that, 
there are still some communities that have indicated as a result 
of the additional revenue sharing, increases in transit for the 
disabled, and the like, that there are no tax hikes, that 
municipalities have indicated that because of some of the 
additional monies and some of the areas where they’ve had to 
reduce perhaps their services, they felt that this budget at least 
gave them a little bit of hope and it was moving in the right 
direction for the support that this government was giving them, 
in the revenue sharing, in the transit for the disabled, in the 
provincial, in the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, 
money that was coming to the municipalities through a variety 
of targeted programs over and above the revenue sharing. 
 
So with having said that, I know that there are . . . As the 
province is facing some difficulties in meeting its financial 
obligations, if you wish, in some areas, you do what you can to 
ensure that the services for the people that you’re responsible to 
and for are met to the best of your ability under the 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, I 
believe the minister has seen this letter but I’d just like to ask 
him to comment on it and if he had replied to it. It’s a letter 
from the municipality of Redberry No. 435 and they passed a 
motion at their meeting March 12, 2002. The motion read: 
 

That we request Minister Hon. Ron Osika to grant us 
authority to tender with our own equipment on our 
approved Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program 
project no. 22091 in conjunction with the rules outlined in 
the municipal road program manual. 

 
And they go on to say, Mr. Minister, that they have been 
tendering on their own projects for the last 25 years and would 
like to tender on their own infrastructure programs. Would the 
minister reply to that, please? 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I’m aware of that, and 
I believe that’s not the only RM that has indicated or requested 
that type of consideration. 
 
I have to remind the member, Mr. Chairman, that it is the 
Canada-Saskatchewan municipal infrastructure program, and 
the criteria that’s set out is such that needs to be followed by the 
other partners. Or the criteria that’s set down by the other 
partners needs to be followed by the province and the 
municipalities, and one of those criteria is that they’re not 
allowed to use their own equipment and facilities to carry out 
their own projects. 
 
Now having said that, in extreme circumstances, in the event 
that there are no other opportunities or no other available 
construction people or equipment to do the work, they may 
submit a special request to the management committee. And 
that management committee is totally at arm’s length from my 
office. 
 
The committee is made up of SARM and SUMA and federal 
and provincial representatives who make the decisions with 
respect to any of the projects that come in that are requested for 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

approval. They make those determinations and 
recommendations based on that criteria and as it’s laid down. 
It’s very stringently followed in order that everybody’s treated 
fairly and equitably. 
 
And one of the criteria was that municipalities could not do 
their own tendering, their own work that they might tender out. 
But again I would encourage them to . . . and if that letter, I’m 
not sure what the date of that letter would be, but that would 
certainly be forwarded on to the management committee to look 
at and review. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The letter’s dated 
April 2. 
 
I think it would be obvious to everyone that municipal 
governments should be able to tender on their own projects 
considering they’re able to do that, you know, if it’s outside the 
infrastructure program. I was wondering, will the government 
be trying to amend that agreement sometime at some point in 
the future to allow municipalities to tender on their own 
projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, there has 
been representation made to the federal government, one of our 
other major partners in this project, in this program. And they 
are reluctant to make any amendments to that criteria at this 
point in time but are still willing to consider special 
circumstances submitted by municipalities with respect to 
projects under that particular program. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d 
just like to touch for a minute, talk about grants in lieu of taxes. 
Has there been . . . where last year you paid grants in lieu to — 
say — the City of Regina, City of Saskatoon or for that matter 
anywhere in the province, have you cut any areas where you did 
pay last year where you aren’t paying this year, communities 
for grants in lieu? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, there has 
been a change which will affect two provincially-owned 
properties, and they’re museum properties. And it’s a grant in 
lieu of exemptions policy in other jurisdictions that were 
reviewed to determine how their properties were treated 
particularly museum properties. 
 
In several of the other provinces heritage properties, all heritage 
properties are exempt from grants in lieu of. Here in this 
province a government decided not to exempt all heritage 
properties from the grants in lieu of payments but to exempt 
only museums. And so this affected two properties here, and 
that’s the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and Government House 
right here in Regina. So those were the only two properties that 
were exempt in this province as heritage properties: museums. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
why would you pick those now? Why this year would you 
decide not to pay grants in lieu instead of last year, or did you 
include that in your answer and I missed it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This was as a 
result of looking at what other provinces were doing, so we 
were on par with what some of the other provinces were doing 

with grants in lieu of property. 
 
But having said that, there was also an expansion to Highways 
properties throughout the province. So it was in fact expanded 
to include some Highways properties. Highways own properties 
as well throughout the province. So that’s a plus with respect to 
the rural areas. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And so the 
cutbacks to the grants in lieu on behalf of the museums then, 
would that affect communities all over the province, or are we 
just talking the cities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — There are just the two properties that were 
exempt, and that’s the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and 
Government House, here in the city. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I missed that part 
earlier. How many dollars then would that amount to for the 
city of Regina over what they were actually paid last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The impact of those two properties is 
approximately $374,000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess maybe, Mr. Minister, that would be 
one of the reasons that we saw part of a mill rate increase in the 
city of Regina then, because as I understand it then, they would 
have to pick up that shortfall that they had had paid to them on 
behalf of grants in lieu last year that they wouldn’t receive this 
year. So I guess that’s part of the reason that they had to jack 
their mill rate up here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to switch over for a few minutes and talk 
about SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency). And I don’t know if you are still receiving the number 
of complaints that we always have received for SAMA and the 
assessment of whether it’s rural municipalities or whether it’s 
towns or cities or whatever it is. And we still get the concerns 
coming from municipalities where they feel that maybe they’d 
be better off not being under SAMA’s assessment leadership 
and them coming out to do assessments. 
 
How many municipalities do we have at the present time that 
are considering opting out of SAMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, once again I’ll have to beg 
the indulgence of the member to get specific numbers of 
municipalities that have opted out or indicated their intention to 
opt out. 
 
Having said that — and I will get those numbers for you — I 
am pleased to report to the member, Mr. Chair, that some of the 
municipalities — subsequent to the budget and the additional 
funding for SAMA and, as you are probably aware, some rather 
significant changes that have been made with the review and the 
direction that SAMA will be taking for the future — I’m very 
pleased that some of the municipalities have indicated, again 
expressing their confidence that yes, we are going to be moving 
in a direction where there will be more parity perhaps and a 
clarification of some of the problems and some of the issues 
that were raised. 
 
So with the additional funding to SAMA, with some of the new 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

 

direction, and some of the reviews that are being carried out in 
order to ensure parity, equity, timeliness, and all the 
assessments for future years that, as I mentioned, I’m pleased 
that some municipalities who had suggested they would leave, 
are now looking at staying, at remaining with SAMA which is a 
very, very positive thing. Because I just want to share that, in 
my humble opinion, becoming fragmented in such an important 
exercise for the province would not be beneficial to everybody 
concerned. 
 
I think it’s very important that we recognize working together 
in that particular field as well. We have more parity, as I say, 
more continuity, and using information that’s applicable across 
the province as opposed to regionalizing on specific land 
values. 
 
So I do believe we are moving in the right direction, and hence 
those municipalities that were concerned have now indicated 
that they will give us an opportunity to give us back their 
confidence in working with SAMA to make it what everybody 
wants it to be. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I agree with 
you that we need that continuity completely across the province 
to set our taxation at a consistent level across the province. And 
I agree with you, understanding of course we have new 
leadership at SAMA, and I’m looking forward to that being part 
of the improvements we see there. 
 
I think we both . . . it’s been a headache for everyone that’s 
involved in government or opposition, for that matter, for the 
last number of years. Being involved in a RM before, I know 
the frustrations that they feel out there with the first assessment, 
and a lot of those problems seem to be there again. We didn’t 
seem to learn when the last assessment was done and a lot of 
those complaints came up, sometimes from different areas, but 
the problem seemed to be continuing and I understand why 
communities would get frustrated to the point of wanting to opt 
out. 
 
So to hear that some of those communities are kind of changing 
their mind and thinking of staying in now rather than go that 
way, I think, is definitely a plus. 
 
Mr. Minister, maybe you could touch on, I know you put 
additional dollars in for SAMA this year, could you maybe just 
touch on those dollars and what you’ve put into SAMA extra? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, thank you to the hon. member 
for that question. SAMA is being provided with $5,820,000 this 
coming year and that’s the increase which includes the increase 
of $1.67 million or 40.2 per cent over last year’s budget. 
 
That will be a great asset to them and it’s allocated and I’ll just 
give you the breakdown: $350,000 additional for SAMA’s 
operations related to the services required throughout the 
province, $990,000 for the development of a new 
province-wide, computer-assisted mass appraisal or CAMA 
system, and $330,000 for the implementation of the income 
approach for commercial assessment. 
 
So the provincial funding in this year’s budget will result in the 
province paying more than 50 per cent of SAMA’s total budget 

based on SAMA’s 2000 expenditures. So again hopefully with 
that kind of additional funding and the assistance to SAMA it 
will regain the confidence that we hope will regain the integrity 
of what people throughout the province expect of SAMA, of the 
assessment agency. And I’m quite pleased the direction that 
SAMA is taking and we’re looking forward to ensuring that we 
alleviate some of the concerns that have been expressed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The 1.6 million 
that you talked about, that additional dollars that you put in this 
year, is that a one-time funding or is this going to be an annual 
part of the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it’s one time. Now having 
said that, there will no doubt be requests for additional monies 
for the CAMA system as the program evolves and is developed. 
SAMA may require some additional assistance and we’ll just 
have to wait and see whether or not we can accommodate 
whatever needs. It will depend on what their needs will be and 
the costs for continuing to develop that system. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The 350,000 if I 
understood what you said, you said it was the $350,000 for their 
operating and their ability to service the municipalities. If I 
understand right that is to help them with their year to year 
ongoing budget. If you put in one time 1.6 million in and you 
take it back next year then there’ll be a shortfall of $350,000 I 
would presume. And knowing that the municipalities feel that 
they’re paying far more than their share right now because of 
the education tax system using the assessments as they do to set 
their taxation, I think the municipalities would be . . . won’t be 
very happy to hear that this is a one-time shot, this $350,000 
also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with the member 
that yes, SAMA will need that on an ongoing basis, and that’s 
the funding that will go to the audit functions that will be a 
requirement. So yes, you’re right, if that money’s cut out then it 
will once again be a serious blow. 
 
That’s why I say we’ll have to assess and evaluate and see how 
the entire program . . . They may not need as much money next 
year in the development of the CAMA system, so there may be 
an opportunity to move some of that funding around. But you’re 
right, the processes for the audits and all the related provincial 
interests that go with the assessment process will require this 
kind of help. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
talked about the $990,000 that you put in, I believe, for 
computerization of SAMA, which I think we’ve all agreed that 
they need. Will that be adequate? Will that be sufficient to 
totally bring them up to speed where they want to be? Because I 
think they also had goals of where they’d like to go and it 
seemed to me they wanted more money than that to bring the 
computerization up to speed. Is that going to cover it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that it will be 
something like a three-year project, so there will no doubt be 
additional funding required, and it would be a guess at this 
point, but it may be a similar amount, it may be slightly more. 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

But it is a program that will evolve over a period of years. So 
there will be a need for additional funding to ensure that that 
system is brought up to where it’s really functional. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Correct me if I’m 
wrong, but I think if I understood right that they were talking in 
the amount of probably $4 million to get this up and running. Is 
that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That’s an approximate amount, but it is 
anticipated. Again that number could fluctuate. That’s a 
long-term projection, so we’ll have to deal with it as it evolves, 
as I said. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — The requisitions for municipalities 
themselves, the money that they pay in to have SAMA provide 
the service that they do, are they also being asked this year to 
pick up part of that cost for the computerization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the municipalities were not 
asked to contribute to the computer systems. That’s strictly a 
commitment that was made by the government. The field 
services, and I . . . just once again with the increase, with the 
total increase, the provincial funding will result in the province 
paying more than 50 per cent of SAMA’s total budget based on 
their expenditures for the year 2000. 
 
So from the provincial interests and financial responsibilities, 
those financial responsibilities have in fact been met and 
perhaps even exceeded. So the development of the CAMA 
system is separate and apart from that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well then the 
requisitions that municipalities are asked to put in towards 
SAMA’s funding, will they stay as they were last year? Are 
they being asked to put more money in this year for other things 
then; or because the government has put more money in, will 
they be able to hold the line on those requisitions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I understand, Mr. Chair, that there would 
be . . . there is a small increase, perhaps as much as 5 per cent, 
in that vicinity, that the municipalities would have had to 
increase their requests, yes. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Another question to the 
Minister. I received a letter from the Gilmour Group Water 
Association, and they are six families living along the Gilmour 
Road approximately 10 miles west of Saskatoon and currently 
in the process of trying to get water from the city of Saskatoon. 
And they are within a mile and a half of the main line and 
they’re wanting to get some funding or help. 
 
Could you make us aware of what programs that this group 
would be eligible for to get funding to get this water? They 
have to cross the CN (Canadian National) rail line and some 
roads along the way as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the program available once 
again is the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
Those are the only programs. That’s the only program that’s 
available at this point for water and sewer projects of the nature 
that you describe. And the applications for the program for next 
year will likely be out sometime in July or August with a 

deadline return date of October, so I would encourage that 
community or those communities to apply. 
 
The alternative . . . and you just indicated that it was just 
individuals, or is it a community? I’m not sure. If it’s a 
community, they would need to apply as a community under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. For individuals, 
there is no specific grant that would be available for — say — a 
one-waterline hookup to a line that’s passing by a particular 
subdivision or a farmhouse. At this point I’m not aware of any 
specific programs that would be targeted for individuals outside 
of a project for an RM or a community under this 
Canada-Saskatchewan municipal infrastructure program. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. They are 
individuals. They’ve just formed an association of individual 
landowners that’s in the RM, but what they want to do is to tie 
into the city of Saskatoon water supply, which is just a mile and 
a half away. And they have a problem with their wells, the high 
bacteria and high iron in their water supply as well. So I was 
just wondering, is there any agreement between the city and the 
province, other than the infrastructure program, that they may 
be able to get some help from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Under those circumstances, either they 
could approach the city to apply on their behalf to offset the 
costs of the project or probably by the sounds of it, better still, 
they would go to the RM who would then make application on 
their behalf to help facilitate the connection to the Saskatoon 
water supply. Those would be the options. And if in fact the 
city of Saskatoon would be amenable to their request, I don’t 
know why they wouldn’t want to help them out by applying for 
some assistance under that kind of a program or the rural 
municipality, either one. And then if there were any costs 
associated that the city or the RM needed to recover, they 
would then naturally, I assume, would expect the community 
that you mention to pay for that service in some way, shape, or 
form. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:28. 
 


