















































Hansard: April 15, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 683 
 April 15, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the exorbitant increases with long-term care fees. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it looks like this petition is signed by the 
entire duly elected council of the RM (rural municipality) of 
Bjorkdale No. 426. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens of the province, 
honourable citizens of the province, who would like to see all 
49 recommendations of the Committee to Prevent the Abuse 
and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade 
implemented. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Macoun, Biggar, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
on behalf of citizens concerned about certain provisions in the 
tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signature on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Star City, Gronlid, Debden, and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Esterhazy, Binscarth, Langenburg, and Gerald. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with crop insurance 
premium hikes and coverage reductions. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premiums while reducing coverage in order to pay off the 
provincial government’s debt to the federal government. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Parkbeg and Mortlach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition asking that crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions be eliminated in this year’s contract. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatories to this petition, Mr. Speaker, are producers and 
other interested parties from the community of Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very glad to 
be able to rise and stand in the House today to present a petition 
on the terrible shape of the highways in our province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of lives and to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area. 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Regina, 
Weyburn, Francis, Qu’Appelle, and Bulyea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the long-term care fees. Ad the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Moose Jaw, 
and Lang. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
concerned citizens in Swift Current regarding the issue of 
increases to long-term care fees. And the prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of citizens concerned about the tobacco legislation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Chamberlain, Regina, Aylesbury, 
and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
read a petition from citizens concerned about the unreasonable 
annual deductible amount for prescription drugs. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Borden, Vanscoy, Radisson, 
Biggar, and Cando. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today with citizens who are concerned about the deplorable 
state of Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon, Regina, 
Watrous, Raymore, Lanigan, Lockport, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
and Sherwood Park, Alberta. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby received. 
 

A petition concerning responsible use of natural resources 
at Besnard Lake; and 
 
Addendums to petitions previously tabled as sessional 
paper no. 7, 8, 11, 18, 22, and 31. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 26 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: how many of the 
81 designated weather stations in the province are part of 
Environment Canada’s existing network; and further to 
that, how many new stations have been or will be set up by 
your department or the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance; and 
what is the cost of each of the new stations? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
to the members of the Assembly, I rise today to welcome and 
introduce a group of people from Zenon Park, Saskatchewan, 
and particularly 18 students from the Zenon Park School. 
 
They’re here today on a tour with their principal, Ulysse Léger, 
Mrs. Carol Fawcett, Mrs. Beatrice Thesen, Mr. Bernard 
Carpentier, and Mr. Leo LeBlanc. They’re here for the day to 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

 

tour the legislature and other places of interest in Regina and I 
would ask all members to give them a very warm welcome to 
our Assembly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m a little slow to 
my feet because I wanted to make sure the guest was in the 
Chamber today. In your gallery I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly and our guests 
here, Mr. Robin Kurpjuweit, representative of the organization, 
Focus on the Family. 
 
He heads up a program entitled How to Drug Proof Your Kids. 
And I will be meeting with him a little later this afternoon. And 
I appreciate his attendance here and I wish that we would all 
welcome him to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Leader-Post Poll 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s an old proverb 
that goes like this: “The man who can’t dance says the band 
can’t play.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the one with 
two right feet, was sure doing some interesting complaining this 
weekend about the guys in the band at The Leader-Post. 
 
It seems there was a poll taken by the paper for Saturday, a poll 
that shows only one person in five south of Davidson thinks he 
would make a good premier. And the people are always right, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know what he’s complaining about, Mr. Speaker. We all 
know that a poll is a snapshot of the moment and we all know 
these comment about poles and dogs. So what’s the fuss, Mr. 
Speaker? But the opposition leader and the boys on his staff 
were crying foul even before the poll was released that says 
only 23 per cent of women supported his party. 
 
They even went so far as to release — get this, Mr. Speaker — 
a special edition e-mail on Friday with their own poll, with their 
own numbers, Mr. Speaker. A special edition e-mail is 
something like a chocolate-covered hairball, and twice as 
effective — but it does show us how concerned they are over 
there, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the leader should do a core service 
review of his own staff and find out where the problems are. 
 
The real poll, of course, is the one at the ballot box — the one 
where twice Saskatoon and once Regina voters have registered 
their preference. We’ll trust that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Meanwhile the Leader of the Opposition should take some more 
dance lessons. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Convicted Johns Assigned to Clean Up Inner-City Streets 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
some news today that I think should interest all members of this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been informed that in Calgary convicted 
johns are being assigned to inner-city streets to pick up used 
needles, condoms, and other sex-trade debris. Mr. Speaker, 
these convicted johns are highly visible in their orange prison 
jumpsuits as they pick up garbage in the neighbourhoods where 
prostitutes stroll. 
 
The project is part of a strategy put together by police and 
community leaders from inner-city neighbourhoods in an effort 
to make these men realize the impact that prostitution has on a 
community. 
 
The communities felt that it was necessary to take the 
anonymity away from johns and, in part, for them to make 
restitution in a healthy way for their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a measure that would help deter 
johns from supporting the sex trade and, in part, I believe that 
it’s a way that we could certainly let them know that this sort of 
activity is not condoned in our society. 
 
And I think certainly, Mr. Speaker, that all Saskatchewan 
residents would be in favour of this and so I encourage the 
members opposite, as well as community leaders, to take the 
lead from Calgary and to put this measure in place. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The United Way of Regina President’s Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week at the 
United Way tribute luncheon a select group of community 
leaders were honoured for their contributions. 
 
The United Way of Regina President’s Award was presented to 
three individuals for their outstanding volunteer efforts. Dave 
Hedlund, regional director, Saskatchewan Social Services, was 
recognized for his tireless volunteer efforts and outstanding 
leadership. Some of these volunteer activities include: baking 
pies for local fundraisers; rowing in the annual Dragon Boat 
Festival; serving on the board of the Regina Symphony; and 
serving as a member of the Regina Crime Prevention 
Commission. 
 
Elmer and Heather Stevenson were recognized for their 
dedication to feeding hungry children through the Regina food 
for action and learning agency. The Stevensons have donated 
their time and energy to the great cause of feeding school-age 
children. 
 
The United Way also presented Distinguished Corporate 
Philanthropy awards to ISM (Information Systems Management 
Corporation) Canada and Global Television, both of who were 
recognized for their many years of support and participation in 
events of the United Way. 
 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, these award winners represent the best of the spirit 
of Saskatchewan and deserve our recognition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Cupar Lions Club’s First Annual Agri Supper 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Saturday evening I had the pleasure to attend the Cupar Lions 
Club’s first annual Agri Supper. About 250 farm managers and 
agribusiness people from across my constituency, as well as a 
number of business people from Regina gathered in the town 
hall to raise funds for the many community projects that the 
Lions Club support. 
 
The evening’s guest speaker outlined the many opportunities 
that exist in agriculture for Saskatchewan, especially in 
livestock production, value added, and processing. He went on 
to say that Saskatchewan has 75 per cent of the arable land in 
Canada; we’re number one in potash and uranium; we’re 
number two in oil and gas; and we have a large area of lakes 
and forest. 
 
When the question was asked, so why isn’t Saskatchewan 
cooking, a murmur of NDP (New Democratic Party) could be 
heard all across the hall. These entrepreneurs are tired of being 
held back and dragged down by this old and tired government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only question that people . . The only question people had 
is the same question that is being asked in Moose Jaw; the same 
question that is being asked in Regina; the same question that is 
being asked in Prince Albert and North Battleford; and the same 
question that is especially being asked in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know what that question is, Mr. Speaker? 
The question is, when’s the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Indigenous People’s Health Research Centre 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, on a more positive note, 
I’m happy to bring the Assembly’s attention to important 
developments taking place at the province’s universities and 
colleges. The Saskatchewan Indian Federated College, with the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan, will 
receive a $3 million federal grant over six years to develop an 
indigenous people’s health research centre in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the centre will be located on both campuses and will carry 
out research in indigenous health to increase the opportunities 
of people of indigenous ancestry to pursue health-related 
research and training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of only four centres across Canada and 
will focus on community-generated research in four areas: 
chronic diseases, nutrition, and lifestyle; indigenous healing, 
including addictions, mental health, and the judicial system; 
health delivery and control; prevention and environmental 
health. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to the bring to the attention of the 
legislature a program that will help to diminish the disparities 
between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people, and improve 
the quality of life in Saskatchewan as a whole. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Pangman Elevator Under New Ownership 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Doug 
Lewgood of Pangman, who was a Sask Wheat Pool elevator 
agent for 27 years, has teamed up with Robert and Alex 
Galarneau of Radville to reopen the Pangman elevator. Mr. 
Lewgood and his wife, Arlene, run a mixed farming operation 
in the Pangman area and the Galarneaus operate an organic 
processing plant north of Radville. 
 
The elevator has now been renamed Pangman Storage and 
Loading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a win-win situation for local area producers, 
the short-line Red Coat Road and Rail, and the new business, 
Pangman Storage and Loading. Producers will earn more 
money by hauling locally, reducing their transportation costs 
and repair costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, area producers are excited about this new venture 
and it will be a great boost for the town because of the many 
spin-offs which will benefit businesses in the Pangman and 
area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan are determined 
to keep their communities alive and this new innovative 
business is just one more great example of how individuals are 
taking the initiative and making things happen. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Communities in Bloom 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
spring has sprung, birds are chirping, and yes, the tiny shoots of 
prairie crocus and other plants are awakening from their long 
winter slumber. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Parks and 
Recreation Association, SPRA, in partnership with SaskPower 
is pleased to announce that Communities in Bloom . . . the 
Communities in Bloom program is well underway. 
 
Entering its eighth year and gaining in popularity, Communities 
in Bloom is a grassroots program that recognizes and promotes 
community participation in projects involving beautification, 
heritage, and environmental awareness. With a competition at 
the end of the year, communities are instilled with civic pride 
and local participation throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, 18 communities participated in the 
program and many have already pre-registered. This flurry of 
activity has caused the program deadline to be extended to 
April 30. Mr. Speaker, these are the kinds of activities that 
create a surge of pride in people’s communities and province. 
Furthermore, the work of the volunteers should not go 
unnoticed. The successes of programs like this are due to the 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

 

many volunteers involved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estevan Student Wins Skills Canada Competition 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Skills 
Canada held a provincial championship this past weekend in 
Saskatoon. Placing first in the men’s and ladies’ hair styling 
championship was Lindsey Vacary. Lindsey is a 17-year-old 
grade 12 student at the Estevan Comprehensive School and she 
will now compete at the national level in Vancouver on June 2. 
 
What makes this really special, Mr. Speaker, is Lindsey is my 
niece. Ad I would like to congratulate Lindsey and extend my 
best wishes as she moves on to the nationals. Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I would also like to congratulate all the participants in 
the Skills Canada competition, particularly those from the 
constituency of Estevan. The accomplishments of these young 
people deserve recognition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Information 
Services Corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, it has to do with the 
changes being faced by the oil and gas industry in the province 
of Saskatchewan as a result of the new automated land titles 
system. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has received a letter from a law firm to 
many of its clients in the province in that particular industry. 
And the letter says the following, and I quote: 
 

There are significant increases in registration costs 
associated with the new system. In a mid-sized transaction, 
involving a modest number of surface and mineral caveats, 
expect registration fees to increase from hundreds to 
thousands of dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister telling us that the new system 
is cheaper? How can the minister justify to the important oil and 
gas sector of the province of Saskatchewan that their new land 
titles system will drive up registration costs by thousands of 
dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member will know that for the vast majority of users of this 
system, they will save significant numbers of dollars in the 
process. 
 
Let me also say, Mr. Speaker, that the fees will be . . . the fees 
are set now based upon the complications and the work needed 
to be done, not based on the value of the land in question. And 
the member will know too from his contacts in the oil and gas 
industry that with the new LAND (Land Titles Automated 
Network Development) system, the process for facilitating 

changes and interests in land will be so much quicker and so 
much faster that it will be a significant benefit to the oil and gas 
industry in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well we’re 
going to get to the timelines that the industry faces now under 
the new system in a moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . but first, it’s important to understand that 
the big difference under the old system was that with the sale of 
one parcel of land, no matter how big it was, that particular sale 
resulted in one transaction fee. 
 
Under the NDP’s new simplified system, each lot or each 
quarter section is one transaction, and if there are multiple 
owners, each owner is one transaction, and for each transaction, 
there is a transaction fee. 
 
The letter I quoted earlier gives an example of a section of land 
with five owners. That means the existing title would be split 
five titles for each owner and the further . . . and further split 
into four titles for each quarter section. That means there are 20 
titles and the transfer would cost $800, the letter advises, where 
it used to cost 20. The old system, one title 20 bucks; the new 
system, 20 titles, 800. How is that cheaper? How is that 
simpler? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — One of the things the member will 
know is that one of the greatest costs for oil companies was 
time. And the delays in which they incurred as a result of 
transferring numbers of titles to land, Mr. Speaker, that time 
will be cut so short, Mr. Speaker, that these oil companies will 
benefit from it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me say this: that if there are many, many 
pieces of property being transferred, then the costs will 
increase, Mr. Speaker; but if there’s one piece of property, the 
costs will decline quite considerably. 
 
And I might give the member one example, for example, a 
commercial development in Regina under the old scheme 
would have cost $19,452, Mr. Speaker. Under the new scheme, 
$1,568, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister just seems to have rationalized the fact that cost to this 
important industry are going up exponentially by saying that at 
least the turnaround time will be quicker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote once more from this 
lawyer’s letter explaining how the NDP has simplified the land 
titles system: 
 

Each Application for . . . Transfer must be individually 
completed, using a separate Land Registry Packet Cover 
Page, (an) Authorization Page, and (a) Certificate Of 
Lawyer. Each such package must be separately faxed or 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

mailed to ISC in a separate envelope. 
 
As you can imagine, (the letter says) on a large transaction 
this will significantly increase . . . (the transmission) time 
and the cost (Mr. Speaker, and the cost). 

 
Mr. Speaker, only the NDP government could move from a 
paper system to an automated system and actually generate 
more paper for an important industry like the oil and gas sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, give the minister a chance to tell the 
oil and gas industry what is he prepared to do, what are the 
NDP prepared to do, to remove still yet another NDP barrier to 
this important industry in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d be certainly interested if the member would table that letter. 
 
I imagine that this is part of a transition process. I’m not sure if 
the member is talking about the automated process because 
under the automated process you don’t need pieces of paper, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what it’s all about. So I don’t know why 
he’s talking about faxing pieces of paper. 
 
Well let me just remind the member of a couple of other 
differences, Mr. Speaker. That commercial development that I 
talked about that would now cost $1,568; in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, $3,300; and in British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members are so happy to hold up as an example, $126,000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister just 
indicated to this Assembly, unbelievably, that, well there 
shouldn’t be any paper associated with transactions at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a normal agriculture transaction, there’s the 
paper associated right from ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) right to the client, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what the new system is generating in terms of paper. 
 
On Friday the minister confirmed that we’ve dedicated 80 
million tax dollars to this system, they’ve made no sales despite 
travelling all over the world and spending $200,000 to make 
those trips, Mr. Speaker, and now we’re hearing that for an 
important industry like the oil and gas sector, this ISC, this land 
titles automation, will wind up being still another barrier to oil 
and gas investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To the minister one more time: will he please outline for this 
important energy sector what he and ISC officials are prepared 
to do to address this major problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, this whole process is 
designed to facilitate. I don’t know where the member gets 
those pieces of paper from, Mr. Speaker. If the process is being 

used properly, it is paperless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me just say this, Mr. Speaker. The member should be 
careful because what he’s doing is scaring people in rural 
Saskatchewan in particular. He’s saying that people out there, 
Mr. Speaker, that the land they own, the piece of paper they 
have, the value they attach to that land, Mr. Speaker, is 
somehow at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. The member should stop 
spreading those kinds of rumours and uncertainty because he’s 
not helping anyone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP’s new 
system was supposed to simplify the process of land title 
transactions. I’d like to discuss an example of how the NDP 
simplifies thing. 
 
A woman in Kronau owns a piece of property in town, and it’s 
block 6, Kronau, Saskatchewan, plan 59462, minerals included. 
And on the back, as it’s been done for almost 100 years, we 
have charges, liens, and interest. That’s the way the old paper 
system worked. 
 
Now I would like to show what the new system works like. Mr. 
Speaker, under the new system, that same piece of property, 
you get . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to release the exhibit 
which he knows he is not to . . . To the page, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Very specifically, Mr. Speaker, 20 pages 
where there used to be one. How does that simplify the system? 
Why is the NDP making it more complicated with land titles? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member, I 
think, the member I think should drag himself into the 20th 
century, Mr. Speaker, and maybe even . . . maybe, Mr. Speaker, 
even the 21st century, which would be a big help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member will know very well that those pieces 
of paper now are no longer necessary, that that information is 
stored on computer electronically, Mr. Speaker. You can get 
copies if you want but you don’t need copies anymore. And the 
member knows that very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, that paper came right out of that 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

 

minister’s office. The paint is barely dry right. It’s right in this 
particular century. Only the NDP could come up with a 
computer system that actually generates more paper than the old 
system. And it’s not just paper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the old system it would cost you $2 for this; under the 
new system, Mr. Speaker, it costs $60 — $60. That’s to get a 
copy of the title. If you actually sold the land, Mr. Speaker, if 
you sold the land the increase would be a whole lot more than 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how on earth did the NDP manage to create a 
computer system that actually costs more and is more expensive 
than the old paper system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member will 
know that we’ve had visitors from all across the world coming 
to Saskatchewan to look at our land titles system, Mr. Speaker. 
Not, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a 19th century system but 
because it’s a 21st century system, Mr. Speaker. And from all 
over North America; from Australia for example, Mr. Speaker, 
we have people praising this system as one which is at the 
leading edge. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me just quote from John McLaughlin 
who’s director of New Brunswick’s land title Crown, and he 
said: 
 

There is nothing like this on the market with ISC’s land 
product capabilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a leading technology and the member 
should recognize that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is a whole lot like an old watch salesman who walks 
around and says see what I have, I have a computer for you. But 
no one’s buying it. He hasn’t sold one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only the NDP could invent a computer that turns 
out more paper, only the NDP could invent a computer system 
that is more complicated, only the NDP could invent a 
computer system that ends up costing more money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many more taxpayers’ dollars do the NDP 
plan to put down this black hole before they quit this? Mr. 
Speaker, will the NDP finally admit that the LAND project is a 
total disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps the member opposite should ask David Chow, who is a 
Moose Jaw lawyer who’s apparently interested in supporting 
the party opposite there, Mr. Speaker, who had some criticisms 
with this system in the beginning. He now says this: 
 

We’re quite pleased with the system now. It seems to be 
running smoothly. 

Mr. Speaker, this is what happens when people take the 
training, when they use the system, and when they see how 
beneficial it is. 
 
And in particular, Mr. Speaker, it enables somebody who, who, 
Mr. Speaker, otherwise would have paid $430 to transfer their 
house — a house worth $100,000 with a $75,000 mortgage in it 
— to cut those fees in half, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the member 
opposite should ask those people how they like the system — 
their fees are cut in half. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crop Insurance 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the betting window has now closed at the NDP’s new crop 
insurance rainfall program. And it turns out that hardly any 
farmers got a chance to get in on this program. Crop Insurance 
is only insuring 500 acres per farmer; they’re only insuring up 
to 12,000 acres per weather station. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s only 
24 farmers per station. Less than 2,000 farmers in the whole 
province are allowed to get in on this program. That’s less than 
5 per cent of farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP come up with a new program 
to deal with the drought situation in our province and then say 
that only one . . . or 1 farmer in 20 can take part in the program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, not more than three 
weeks ago the members on that side of the House said, why are 
you getting into this program at all? They said, you shouldn’t be 
in this program. 
 
And today the member opposite stands up . . . The member 
from Kindersley said, you know we shouldn’t be doing this; 
you know, this is a great big gamble and we shouldn’t be in this 
program whatsoever. And they mimicked it and they made a 
mockery out of the program, Mr. Speaker. And today the 
member from Watrous gets up and she says, why didn’t you 
make this program more available to more farmers in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Now what is it? Do you want the program to be across the 
province for all the farmers in Saskatchewan? Or do you don’t 
want the program at all? Which is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
remind the minister that the producers in this province have no 
other options. This is what they’ve been given. 
 
So once again the NDP ag policy makes no sense whatsoever. 
This rainfall roulette program was supposed to be the NDP’s 
answer to the potential drought, but now they’ve closed the 
program before hardly any farmers could sign up. And it’s the 
only program they have available to them. 
 
Only 24 farmers per weather station, Mr. Speaker. And you 
might be insuring your crop based on rainfall at all . . . at a 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

weather station hundreds of miles away from you, and it doesn’t 
make any sense. But your rain station may be filled up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is such a good program, if this is the NDP’s 
answer to another potential drought, why are most farmers 
prevented from signing up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to explain for the 
member the way in which the program operates. We talked at 
some length, Mr. Speaker, at the . . . during the estimates about 
how the program works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Absolutely, absolutely that farmers have an option, Mr. 
Speaker. Farmers don’t need to take the program at all. This is a 
buy up program. It’s a voluntary program, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s in the crop sector which producers don’t have to be a part of 
at all. 
 
And we provided that option this year, Mr. Speaker, as the 
follow-up to the forage program last year which, today, Mr. 
Speaker, the forage program is fully subscribed. Went from 
200,000 acres to over 3 million acres, Mr. Speaker, is what we 
have today. To 3 million. 
 
And we put this program out, Mr. Speaker, to test it — to see 
whether or not Saskatchewan producers want to see this as a 
full-fledged program, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll find, Mr. 
Speaker, that with the crop sector program, it will be fully 
subscribed as well this year, Mr. Speaker, when we’re finished 
— be fully subscribed. 
 
Because you know what? Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker, 
like it. The party opposite does not like it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that 
the minister has said that it’s a pilot program. They have 
blamed agriculture in the province with agriculture on their job 
losses, on the out-migration, on a downturn in the economy. 
 
And I hate to tell the minister, but this is not a pilot drought that 
we’re having here. So only a few farmers are allowed to sign up 
to this drought program. I wonder if the minister can guarantee 
that the drought will only hit those farmers who are allowed to 
get in on this program and it will leave the others alone. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what good is a drought program that gets cut 
off before most of the farmers are even allowed to sign up? 
What good is a drought program that’s only available to less 
than 5 per cent of the farmers in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this province this year 
what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve taken and provided a 
brand new forage program for all farmers in Saskatchewan, of 
which the opposition criticized, Mr. Speaker, saying we should 
not be involved in the forage program we’ve provided. 
 
We’ve taken it from 200,000 acres, Mr. Speaker, to today over 

three million acres for people today, for producers who want to 
be involved in the forage program. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that what the member 
opposite said just not long ago to The Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker, and she talks about drought. And the question that the 
reporter asked her is she said, what would you do specifically 
about drought — is what the member was asked. What would 
you do specifically about drought? 
 
And this is what the member opposite from Watrous said: 
 

Right now, I wouldn’t know exactly what to do (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
So here you have the member opposite not more than just a 
couple of weeks ago who said she has no idea what to do about 
farmers. We thought out a program. She scratches her head and 
says I don’t know what I should be doing about the drought 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it astounding 
when agriculture is so important to this province that the best 
that the Minister of Agriculture can do is criticize my inability 
in a 90-second scrum to lay out the entire Saskatchewan Party 
vision for agriculture, when he and his government have had 10 
years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the best that they can 
do is download the education taxes. 
 
They tear up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). 
They’ve gutted crop insurance. And now they’ve got this loopy 
little rainfall program for the drought. 
 
Could the minister, could the minister please tell us here today 
what the total cost of that program that’s only going to insure 5 
per cent of the farmers, what is the cost to the taxpayers of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting sort of 
comment from the member opposite because the member 
opposite is part of a party, Mr. Speaker, who said, over the last 
couple of years, they were developing a national . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. The minister will start over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a . . . this is an interesting 
question coming from the member opposite because over the 
last several years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working away at 
developing a national strategy on agriculture. And I know that 
the members don’t want to hear this because, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite don’t have any concept of what needs to be 
done in agriculture. 
 
In March, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite from Kindersley 
said, what we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to 
provide for Saskatchewan farmers — last March — a plan on 
agriculture. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s now the middle of . . . in 
February and March the member from Kindersley says, our 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

 

party has a plan on agriculture; you stay tuned and in six weeks 
you’re going to hear what it is, Mr. Speaker. And it’s now the 
middle of April and we haven’t seen a thing from the opposition 
party on any kind of a Saskatchewan agricultural plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what we have today is developed a plan. And when we 
asked the member opposite, what do you have on agriculture in 
terms of a plan, she says, I have no idea what to be doing for the 
agriculture plans; I have no idea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Environment. 
 
Over the weekend we were very pleased to see in The 
Leader-Post that the minister had decided to reverse her 
decision to drain the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. I 
was also contacted by a number of stakeholder groups who said 
that they were very pleased as well that the government 
announced they would not be using the surplus. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, we are hearing that the minister has 
again changed her mind and once again plans to use the Fish 
and Wildlife Development Fund to pay for departmental staff 
and the Wetland Conservation Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears that the minister has flip-flopped twice 
over the weekend. Does she or does she not intend to drain the 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, the events over the weekend 
prove that you cannot always believe everything you hear or 
read in the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal . . . the Liberal leader over the 
weekend issued a media release saying, quote: 
 

Lorjé declares government budget unbalanced. 
 
I would say that Lorjé declares somebody else in the Liberal 
Party to be unbalanced if he’s going to believing . . . believe 
everything he reads in The StarPhoenix. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation issued a 
media release today saying: 
 

“SWF members are very disappointed about the 
government’s decision to remove this money from the 
fund, but the recent confirmation from Environment 
Minister, Pat Lorjé, that the $1.1 million will be restored to 
the FWDF next year is encouraging”. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read one letter from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(14:15) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the positive reaction of environmental stakeholders who had 
heard that the minister was not going to drain the fund is a huge 
indication of just how strongly conservationists feel about that 
fund and the work that it does in this province. They don’t want 
that fund and the surplus drained, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The steering committee of the fund doesn’t want the NDP 
taking this money that they’ve built up for major habitat 
projects over the years and using it to pay for departmental 
staff. And, Mr. Speaker, now they will be crushed to learn that 
in fact the minister is going to go ahead with her plans to raid 
the fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has said she will meet with the 
steering committee of the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. 
Will she listen to her committee members and will she agree 
once and for all not to drain the fund’s surplus? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read in for the 
record a very classy letter that I received today from CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) producer Ian Hannah. Mr. 
Ian Hannah is producer for Radio Saskatchewan, and he says, 
 

Further to your phone message to me of earlier this 
morning, you are correct. The story was wrong. It should 
never have made it to air. 
 
It would be nice if I could say we were the victim of some 
political conspiracy or the poor work of our competition. 
However I have to take personal responsibility for the items 
on our newscast. 
 
The story was wrong, and I apologize for any harm it 
caused you. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Endorsement of Canadian Sport Policy 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some good 
news about what the province is doing to improve the health 
and well-being of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
I know that we know that physical activity can and should play 
an increased role in improving the health of the global 
population. You may know that World Health Day was April 7 
and the theme of World Health Day this year was physical 
activity for health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 6, 2002, my fellow ministers from across 
the country met in Iqaluit, Nunavut for the 2002 conference of 
federal and provincial and territorial ministers responsible for 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

sport, fitness and recreation, and there they endorsed The 
Canadian Sport Policy, which is the first ever Canadian sport 
policy to involve the collaboration of all 14 governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ministers embarked on this policy 
development process to underscore the importance of sport and 
physical activity in the health of Canadians. And if I could just 
mention that during a round of discussions in the community 
about the well-being of Aboriginal children in our community, 
that this issue was at the very forefront of the communities’ list 
of concerns for the children in the community. 
 
Over the next 10 years the policy will enhance four main areas: 
the first, participation; second, excellence — as we know we’ve 
had many athletes out there winning in national and 
international forums; the third is capacity; and the fourth is 
interaction. 
 
The policy commits all those involved to set targets in 
partnership with their respective sport communities. Mr. 
Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we worked closely with the 
sport community to develop Saskatchewan’s contribution to 
The Canadian Sport Policy. And on April 7, Mr. Speaker, a 
ministers’ presentation was made to the Romanow Commission 
on the Future of Health Care in Canada. And I want you to 
know, Mr. Speaker, that this presentation was initiated by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Provincial and territorial ministers responsible for sport, fitness, 
and recreation called on the commission to recognize the 
essential contribution of physical activity, sport, and recreation 
to the health of Canadians and subsequently to the impact on 
health expenditures. The ministers invited the Romanow 
Commission to advocate greater collaboration between the 
health system and the sport, fitness, and recreation delivery 
systems in fostering the health of people of Saskatchewan and 
all Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan supports and endorses the content, 
conclusion, and recommendations of the presentation to the 
Romanow Commission on the Future of Health Care and 
Saskatchewan also endorses approval in principal of the final 
draft of The Canadian Sport Policy. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, in August of 2001 our government 
launched A Physically Active Saskatchewan, a strategy to get 
Saskatchewan people in motion. The Saskatchewan target is to 
reduce . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order. I would just like to advise the minister that I was 
not able to hear the last two or three sentences, she might want 
to repeat them. And I ask people just to tone it down a little. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As you know, Mr. Speaker, last 
summer we set the target in Saskatchewan to reduce physical 
inactivity by 10 per cent by the year 2005 because we think it 
would be a great legacy of the centennial to move into our next 
hundred years as physically fit as possible. 
 
Culture, Youth and Recreation is committed to providing the 
leadership necessary to move this initiative forward. The 
collective understanding and spirit of co-operation that was 

evident in Nunavut lays the foundation for collaboration. 
 
And as it is in our many collaborations and partnerships, both 
individually and collectively, that will give Saskatchewan 
people and all the young children for whom this is such an 
important developmental activity, more opportunities to be 
active and in better health throughout our province. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
think we all appreciate the effect of improved health on the 
well-being of Saskatchewan residents. I would just like to make 
a couple of comments with regard to the member’s . . . the 
minister’s statement. 
 
I think recognition . . . I think we all recognize the essential 
contribution of physical activity, sport, and recreation to the 
health of all Canadians, although I had a hard time convincing 
Jim Fixx’s friends on that one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister had mentioned measuring physical 
inactivity or reducing physical inactivity by 10 per cent by the 
year 2005. I’m wondering — and we’ll maybe find out a little 
bit later in estimates — what the yardstick is or the measuring 
stick is going to be for measuring the reduction of the physical 
inactivity over the next three years. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about the ministry as 
being committed to providing the leadership necessary to 
motivate this initiative forward. Again we’ll find out in 
estimates what this leadership really is and how it’s going to be 
accomplished. 
 
We hear continuously from the other side of the House: we 
have a plan. And unfortunately we never see the plan; all we do 
is hear that we have a plan and that’s came from about four or 
five different departments. So I’m going to be very interested in 
finding out what this, this leadership plan is going to be to 
initiate this physical activity in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk . . . the minister talked about giving more 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people to be active. And yet at 
the same time, we look at facilities, recreation facilities 
throughout the province that are basically bankrupt. 
 
We see the huge increases in energy and power. We see rec 
facilities within rural areas — I know in my area — that are 
having to close because of such humungous increases in energy 
rates. And yet at the same time, we’re talking about how we’re 
going to promote and improve health in our young people in 
this province. 
 
So it’s a bit of a dichotomy there. We can stand up and talk 
rhetorically about, boy, we’re really providing leadership to 
help our young people and help the people of this province — 
and yet at the same time we’re driving some of our rec facilities 
into closure. 
 
And I know the infrastructure of a lot of our recreational 
facilities right now are getting pretty rundown. And I’m sure, 
from all constituencies in the province, they’re basically 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

 

begging to have some infrastructure dollars put into recreation 
facilities and yet they can’t get any. I know in my constituency 
there’s been several letters that have been sent to the minister 
— in fact, probably a lot of the ministers on the government 
side — asking for help for the recreational facilities and they’re 
basically flatly turned down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with an emphasis on youth, it’s another time for 
myself as a strong proponent of the cadet program which really 
emphasizes physical fitness. It may be a good time for the 
Government of Saskatchewan to work with the cadet program 
of Saskatchewan to try and get our youth more involved in the 
cadet program. There’s not a better youth facility and a youth 
organization than there is in the cadet world which really would 
promote exactly what the minister is trying to do in her 
ministerial statement. 
 
It’s a shame, Mr. Minister . . . or, Mr. Speaker, that we see 
thousands and thousands of people that are leaving the province 
over the last 10 years. And it’s a shame that that’s their 
recreation level is running out of the province. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Enforcement of Canadian 
Judgments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des 

jugements canadiens 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 26, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 
2002 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I stand today 
to respond to written questions number 99, 100, and 101. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 99, 100, and 101 have been 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation to introduce her officials, and make a brief statement 
if she wishes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
We’re happy to be here today to answers questions relating to 
the estimates of the Department of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 

I have with me today the officials from the department. Deputy 
minister, on my left here, Angie Gélinas; behind her, Jill 
McKeen, executive director of policy and planning; on my 
right, Emile St. Amand, director of sport and recreation; and 
immediately behind me, Melinda Gorrill, director of corporate 
services; and behind Jill, Bruce Medhurst, senior policy analyst; 
and Peggy Brunsdon to my right, manager of provincial 
heritage resources. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
the officials for Culture, Youth and Recreation. And, Mr. Chair, 
to the minister: before getting into specifics I would like to ask 
the minister to briefly outline what changes, if any, she’s made 
within her department in the past year and in what area those 
changes occurred. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, probably the best thing to 
say is that a lot of the responsibilities in the cultural, heritage, 
youth, and recreation area were scattered in a number of places 
and because of that they were starting to lack attention and lack 
momentum. And I think people in those communities felt they 
had lost a focus for the policy discussions that they needed to 
have with government — both from the point of view of what 
provincial policy would be in those areas, what program 
expenditures would be in those areas; and on initiatives of a 
province-wide nature, who would provide some leadership on 
those initiatives. 
 
So during the past year, responsibility for heritage, heritage and 
cultural tourism facilities, now resides with Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. So that includes heritage assessment, Heritage 
Foundation, the Western Development Museum, Saskatchewan 
Science Centre, Wanuskewin, the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum. 
 
In addition, the responsibility for the Saskatchewan Archives 
Board has been transferred to CYR (Culture, Youth and 
Recreation). The Saskatchewan Communications Network and 
responsibility for further development and implementation of 
the centennial celebrations was just recently transferred as well. 
 
And we see these changes as a real opportunity to pull together 
some momentum around all of this rich cultural and heritage 
resource that we have in the province. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. For the 
next year, in what direction do you intend to take your 
department; what sort of vision do you have for it; and what 
forthcoming changes do you see happening within your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If I was to answer that in the most 
general kind of way — and then if there’s specifics that interest 
you we could certainly get into them — but in the most general 
kind of way, we really see the department having three main 
purposes. 
 
One is developmental activities — all the culture, sport, and 
recreation activities that are part of developmental activities for 
people in the province. And we see that very link to community 
building in the province because many people organize sporting 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

events and cultural events as a way of bringing their community 
together and building community relationships and raising 
funds, etc. 
 
But there’s another element of cultural industries and even sport 
industry from the point of view that these are increasingly 
becoming areas as well that people are quite prepared to use 
their recreation dollars, their leisure time activities, in attending 
cultural and sporting events. So these are also becoming a more 
mainstream part of the economy. 
 
And certainly tour operators and whatnot who are now 
operating in the province think that these are very important 
events from the point of view of activities that make it attractive 
to take their visitors around to. 
 
And the other part is to help with the feel-good project in 
Saskatchewan because many of the people who are involved in 
culture, tourism, and recreation are award-winning people. And 
we like to acknowledge the excellence that people have 
achieved and to help celebrate those achievements in the 
province, as we will be, culminating in our centennial year. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll 
probably have some more questions related to your answer later 
on in my notes someplace about community building and 
maybe some more direct questions, but I’ll just try and stay 
consistent with my notes right at the moment. 
 
And I note in this year’s budget estimates your department 
spending was cut by $2.6 million. Would you confirm that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The largest impact on the funds would 
be the re-estimation of the funds that’ll be flowing from 
casinos. Because we had an arrangement with the First Nations 
that if the casinos were off-reserve, a certain percentage of the 
funds flowed into the CIF (Community Initiatives Fund) fund 
and a certain amount flowed into the FNF, the First Nations 
Fund. 
 
And with the movement of those casinos onto reserve, the 
relationship flips essentially to where the First Nations Fund 
would get the larger proportion of the funding and the CIF fund 
would get a smaller proportion. And the other part, where there 
was some decrease, was about 1.3 million, I think, out of the 10 
million in the centennial summer student employment program 
. . . 5 million in a year — sorry — 10 over two years, in the 
centennial summer student program that provides job subsidies 
in the province. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. I have a question about that 
following but I just want to continue with this one. So I gather 
that the answer is yes, that there was a $2.6 million reduction in 
expenditures . . . or in estimates from 2001-2002 to 2002-2003. 
And yet going through the, going through the figures from the 
budget is . . . there’s a $2.6 million reduction in funding and yet 
there’s no decrease in staff levels. Could you expand on that for 
us today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In actual fact, Mr. Chair, when we 
assumed responsibility for the department, I would actually 
have to say that we were understaffed in some very critical 
areas. 

Our sport area was reasonably well developed. The cultural area 
had very little representation in terms of staff that could 
effectively work with the industry out there. And certainly 
things like a rapidly developing film sector and whatnot has put 
a lot of pressure on the staff capacity in there. The other area is 
the youth area where we had no staffing capacity either. 
 
And the centennial summer student program is actually a very 
large program to manage because we have several different 
sectors involved in it; they all have to be engaged with 
separately; the student applications need to be managed; and the 
fund grants out to those organizations need to be managed. 
 
So it wasn’t possible to find those kinds of monies through 
staffing attrition. There was one position given up in the 
department to assist with the budget reduction process. But we 
still, I would say, are not quite as developed as we need to be 
for the wide range of responsibilities that we have. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. It’s 
interesting using the understaffing from before as the . . . as the 
answer. I guess a follow-on question immediately to that: if 
you’re understaffed before and you’ve taken a decrease in 
budget of $2.6 million with no reduction of staff, are you at the 
staffing levels now that . . . you’re at the top level staffing that 
you will require to run your department? Or a follow-on to that: 
if not, how many more will be required? I’d like to find out 
where we’re going to or if we’re there for staffing levels. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the next year we’ll be hiring a 
director of culture, as well as some youth to work in the youth 
projects area, so there’ll really only be one more senior staff. 
And most of the areas where the attrition occurred in the budget 
really do affect some of our third parties. But I guess, 
fortunately, the money going out to third parties is fairly 
substantial, so although it will mean they can’t expand in some 
areas as rapidly as they would like, I would say that certainly 
people were pretty satisfied with the budget levels this year that 
they were able to get. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I don’t 
know if you answered my question about . . . have you reached 
the level of staffing that you see as a top goal? You said well 
next year you might have to hire some more other than the two, 
the director of culture and one for youth, but at what point are 
we going to reach the maximum level, or are we going to just 
every year say well we’re going to hire a few more in this area? 
Or do we see a plateau of hiring within your department? 
Unless of course there’s more additions in the portfolio. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I would say that the general principle 
across government is to keep the size of the public service about 
the same, or with some attrition from what it is now, in keeping 
with the budget targets that were set this year. 
 
But as priorities change, and perhaps as things are moved from 
one department to another, if it seems more appropriate, then 
those staff would move — and dollars would move — with that 
program. 
 
So we don’t see much additional staff at the moment, just the 
ones that we mentioned. And we think that we can make do 
with that because we have a close working relationship with the 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

 

community organizations, and they provide a lot of the 
understanding of what’s going on; they provide a lot of the 
hands-on work that needs to be done. 
 
But we do need to be strong enough to be responsible for 
relating to the federal government in the area of policy, as well 
as making sure that what we’re doing on a province-wide basis 
is fair. 
 
But right now we think we have close to about the right mix of 
staff to be able to reasonably carry out the responsibilities that 
we have. And I have to give our deputy — who I didn’t really 
know before she was hired as deputy — some credit for 
reorganizing the staff into working teams so that there can be 
greater skill sharing and resource sharing across the teams, and 
can be done with an individual . . . individualized approach to 
using your staff complement. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You talked 
about the $2.6 million in the budget that’s being reduced. And 
I’m not sure if I heard you say, but my notes tell me that $1 
million of that was in the culture and recreation area alone. If 
that’s correct, could you provide some details for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just confirm, Mr. Chair, what I said 
to the member previously, as it’s really in two areas: the CIF 
Fund, which I explained as the flip in funding with the First 
Nations Fund when their casinos moved on-reserve; and the 
other part was the summer student employment program. Those 
were the two areas where it came from. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister, but I 
understand that there was 1 million that was in culture and 
recreation by itself and an additional 1.2 million in the youth 
sector. And if that’s not correct, I will stand corrected. I would 
like to . . . I would like your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m looking at the first page of the 
Estimates book here — 37. And what I’ve got is under culture 
and recreation for 2001-2, it was 13 million 68 and in 2002-3, 
it’s 14 million 136. So it’s actually increased, not decreased. 
Largely because of the McKenzie Art Gallery being included as 
part of our responsibility. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I guess, Madam Minister, I was 
concentrating on the youth which goes from 5.334 million 
estimated in 2001-2002 to 4.138 million in 2002-2003, which 
by my calculation is about a $1.2 million reduction in the youth 
sector. 
 
I think for all of us in this province that are committed to youth, 
I think this probably sends a . . . quite a disappointing message 
to the youth of the province, although we talk about how much 
we’re promoting our youth and trying to keep our youth here. 
And I would like to know just where specifically that $1.2 
million in the funding cuts will be felt. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Let me put it this way. There’ll be a 
few less jobs this summer but there are still 1,300 more jobs 
than there were two summers ago. 
 

Last year when the program was brand new, it added 1,600 
jobs. This year, with the cutting of the 1.2 that you identified 
here, between 1.2 and 1.3, there’ll now be 1,300 jobs. So there 
will be 300 less jobs but there’ll be 1,300 more than there were 
before the program started last year. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you. That’s small 
consolation. Probably we could go back a number of years and I 
don’t really think our . . . the message to our youth, I think it 
gives us a little bit of a wrong statement for somebody that’s 
really promoting the youth in this province. And I know budget 
constraints are tight but it’s . . . to me, it sends a very poor 
message to our youth that we are making cuts there. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I noticed between administration and 
accommodation and central services, there have been a 
combined spending increase of nearly $60,000. What 
specifically will this increase be used for and, more importantly, 
I’m wondering why this increase wasn’t targeted toward the 
youth sector where it certainly could have been better spent? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well first of all, I guess I’d have to say 
that those amounts would reflect the staff that provide all the 
services in the department, so that would not be a separate 
category. 
 
When you’re accommodating people, you’re accommodating 
the people who do the work. So the people who are running the 
student employment program would be part of that 
accommodation figure. The people who are administering the 
youth employment program would be part of that figure. We 
now administer the CIF fund and so that would be part of that 
administrative figure. So that administrative and 
accommodation and central services figure is spread across all 
of the activities. It’s not a separate category. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I’m a 
little unsure of that. It is an increase in administrative services 
and if it’s created by the flip-flop of the CIF into your 
department or something . . . My understanding is that if there’s 
something from the other department, I believe you had said 
that they will put the money back into it also. And there just 
seems to be a disconnect if it’s going to cost $60,000 more for 
administration services even though you’ve taken on more in 
your portfolio. 
 
But you’d explained that it is coming from another . . . When 
it’s transferred from one portfolio to another portfolio, the 
funding is also transferred. Is this not correct? And if it is 
correct, then the $60,000 seems to be a figure that is still up in 
the air as to why there’s the increase. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Forty-four did reflect the increased rent 
of moving to the new accommodations because there was 
renovation costs and whatnot in getting the new office up and 
running. And then there was an additional 13 associated with 
the communications activities related to all the programs. So 
those would be the two figures that make up the 60. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I just have 
a couple of questions or so on the Community Initiatives Fund. 
I note that your estimates are down considerably from the 
previous year. Last year’s budget estimates were at 8.2 million 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

and this year the estimated expenditure is to be 5.9. This is a 
substantial difference of 2.3 million. 
 
Since this amount is based on estimated net profits from 
gaming, I’m wondering if you could explain why on one hand 
— and based on your own numbers — your department is 
anticipating a drop in gaming profits yet on the other hand the 
government itself has predicted a significant increase in the 
gaming revenue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This speaks to a particular part of the 
gaming revenue funds and this was the part that was set up 
under the Community Initiatives Fund and the First Nations 
Fund. And all that’s changed is the relationship of who gets the 
money in that fund. The actual amount of money isn’t the issue 
it’s the relationship of who gets the money. 
 
There’s two users of that fund, the First Nations Fund and the 
Community Initiatives Fund. And if the casino was off-reserve 
50 per cent of that went to the Community Initiatives Fund 
which is the off-reserve fund and 25 per cent went to the First 
Nations Fund. When those casinos move on-reserve that 
relationship flips and that’s why it’s called the flip clause, and 
50 per cent of it then stays on-reserve and 25 per cent then goes 
to the Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
And if there’s growth in gaming it closes that gap even though 
there’s a change in the relationship. But you would need a 
sufficient increase in profits to make the difference of the 50 per 
cent relationship having moved from off-reserve to on-reserve. 
So it still means that children and families at risk are getting 
this money. What changes is the location of where those 
children and families may be. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, if I’m reading this 
correct does that give us a signal that there’s more gaming 
revenue either in one area or the other that constitutes this two 
point . . . or 5.9 . . . $2.3 million difference? 
 
I understand your explanation of how the system works but it 
doesn’t explain how the $2.3 million . . . you say the money is 
still there. Is there more gaming in one jurisdiction, whether it’s 
on-reserve or more gaming off-reserve that would cause this 
difference? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s not a matter of whether there’s 
more gaming; it’s a matter of how the revenue-sharing formula 
works. It’s no different than for schools or municipalities. 
There’s a revenue-sharing formula. And so what changes is 
who gets what percentage of the funds. We’ve got, we’ve got 
that one nailed down, okay. 
 
And then if total gaming revenues in the province go up, then 
the amount that’s in that total pool to be revenue shared would 
go up. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. But I 
understand . . . And you gave me that 50 per cent . . . if it’s an 
on-reserve, 50 per cent goes to the First Nations and 25 per cent 
CIF. It’s off-reserve, 50 per cent . . . or the other way around, 
but it’s 50 per cent and 25 per cent. But that doesn’t explain the 
differential of the $2.3 million. You indicated it’s still all going 
to the youth of the province, but it’s a $2.3 million differential 

that you haven’t really explained why that differential. 
 
And I understand the formula, but has the formula changed 
from last year is a question in itself? It’s changed that much that 
the $2.3 million differential? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The formula haven’t changed. What’s 
changed is who’s benefiting from it. The people off-reserve 
used to benefit and now that the casinos are on-reserve, the 
people on-reserve benefit more. So that’s what’s changed. 
 
And that would probably be the biggest change; it’s just the 
switch in which fund the money is going into. Instead of it 
going into the off-reserve fund, it’s now going into the 
on-reserve fund. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I think, I think I have it now, Madam 
Minister. So that would suggest to me that this difference of 
$2.3 million would now be going into the First Nations vis-à-vis 
the CIF. May not be a fair question for your department, but is 
this part of the ongoing negotiations with SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) because it deals with youth, and I’m 
wondering if you are involved in the ongoing negotiations with 
SIGA or if this in fact is one of the negotiating items within 
SIGA? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The flip clause is a negotiable item. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
are you involved in the negotiations with that then? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, you would have to talk to the 
minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming for that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s looking like the 
SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) agreement is a 
25-year agreement, so I think this is very, very important for the 
Minister of Youth, Culture and Recreation, if it’s throwing 
money into the youth programs on reserves. 
 
So I would think that the minister would be very, very keen on 
being involved in the negotiations if, in fact, this extra money is 
going into the youth program within the reserves. 
 
I’m wondering if the minister could explain what her portfolio 
is doing to ensure that . . . where the money is going and how 
it’s going? Or again, I would like to ask the minister if she is 
involved in these negotiations? Because it’s very, very critical 
for the youth programs on- and off-reserve, and it’s a fair bit of 
money if we’re looking at a $2.3 million differential right now, 
that is part of the ongoing SIGA negotiations. If the minister 
could deal with that one. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well let me put it this way, I don’t see 
that it’s a question of right or wrong whether non-Aboriginal 
people or Aboriginal people are the stewards of the resources, 
as long as they’re undertaking good stewardship of the 
resources. 
 
So in this instance we would certainly work with the First 
Nations, both at the governance level — their government, the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations — but also at the 
community level with their zone 9 sport council, with their 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

 

northern recreation coordinating committee, with all the people 
involved in the South doing recreation for Aboriginal youth. 
 
And we would adopt a co-operative model where we sit down 
with their fund people and say, look these are the projects that 
the community’s sending in to the CIF that they’re looking for 
funding for, let’s sit down and take a look at what people are 
applying to you for funding for, and let’s make sure that 
between our two funds we’re covering off the needs of children 
in the community, including the Aboriginal children. 
 
And I have to say that it gives me no particular pride to say that 
I think this community has been very under-resourced in terms 
of recreation. And if they’re able to provide some good 
facilities, and good programs — both on reserve and for their 
urban First Nations people — my concern would be more that 
the fund is well and thoughtfully used, rather than who 
necessarily has control of the purse strings. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I support the concept of having it 
for the youth, there’s no doubt. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the minister. The minister was just addressing 
about the communities that benefit from the fund or how that’s 
negotiated. Could the minister tell us how many communities 
benefited from the CIF in the last fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have it right here. Now this 
particular component of funding is used for relief of nutrition, 
hunger, for disabled services, sport, culture, and recreation, 
crisis intervention, health and well-being, school-based 
programs such as parenting, and others. 
 
And in 2001-2, 336 separate community projects received 
funding totalling 2.3 million. And since the program became 
operational in June of 1996, 1,616 projects have received 
funding totalling $9,729,220. And these funds are determined 
by the regional intersectoral committees which is made up of 
government and community volunteers. 
 
And I usually hear about who actually got funding after all the 
decisions have been made and they submit to me the list of 
people who they’ve decided are representative of the needs in 
each particular community. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I missed 
the number that you gave. I don’t know if I just couldn’t hear 
your voice. The number of communities — could you just give 
me that number again please? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — A very quick count — although if you 
gave us some time to do it for you, we could give you a more 
substantial follow-up — 29 communities and 1,616 projects in 
29 communities. Because again, keeping in mind that the fund 
is targeted at at-risk communities and sometimes that tends to 
be some inner-city areas and other places like that as well. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
could we have the minister get a copy of the communities and 
the programs? 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’ll send a complete list of the 
communities and the projects that were funded to you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now I 
guess a natural follow-on question would be, we just talked 
about the CIF and with your explanation that the $2.3 million 
that’s being dropped from the CIF, as I know we already 
discussed it’s going into the other fund, but based on this $2.3 
million loss I would suggest that’s going to have quite an effect 
on the communities that will receive funding for this year. 
 
How many communities do we anticipate will lose, or how 
many will get funding for this year based on the $2.3 million 
loss? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re not expecting anyone to lose 
funding because once the Moose Jaw casino opens there’ll be a 
sufficient increase to compensate for the casinos that moved 
on-reserve. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. But we 
still are projecting a $2.3 million loss, are we not? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We are expecting Moose Jaw, again as 
I say, to pick up the slack as it comes on stream and in the 
interim there was sufficient unallocated surplus to keep those 
other organizations. 
 
It depends on their projects. Some of them have one-time 
projects, they’re not all sustained funding. For example there is 
a cultural facilities component of the CIF fund and those 
people, once they’ve done their project it would be done. So it 
might slow down if you were short who could come on stream. 
But nobody who already had a project approved and in process 
would find themselves not able to do it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, but in 
the estimates it clearly has an 8.2 million to a $5.2 million 
reduction which is a two point . . . there’s $2.3 million 
differential in estimates. It says nothing about increased gaming 
from a casino in Moose Jaw. It’s in the estimates that there is a 
$2.3 million reduction. It does not stipulate that yes we’ve got 
$2.3 million reduction but it might come back on if in fact the 
casino comes up and if in fact there’s more profits at the Moose 
Jaw casino. That’s not included in the estimates. 
 
So I’d just like again for you to confirm that in fact the CIF will 
see a $2.3 million reduction in this fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Until that kind of an allocation is 
actually determined, there is a surplus in the fund and that will 
be used to keep the fund whole until such time as there may be 
new revenues in the fund. It’s not unlike the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund which you enjoy so much. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, I don’t think we wish 
to go there. But in fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well the 
reason I’m insisting is because in your estimates it says $2.3 
million reduction. And where I’m coming from on this is if we 
have a $2.3 million reduction in the CIF there’s going to be 
communities that are affected. So I think we have to clearly 
establish first if in fact there’s a $2.3 million reduction as 
indicated in the estimates. And I would like you to confirm or 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

deny that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I’m having a hard time deciding 
which is the best analogy to use but what I’ll just say is that we 
allocate the money to the fund. The fund has a board of trustees. 
Now they manage the fund and they have enough surplus in the 
fund to keep paying at the same level even though they don’t 
have new revenues coming in at the moment. 
 
So the fund trustees do manage the fund. And the fund doesn’t 
have to spend all of its money in every year. It can acquire a 
surplus and it can carry that surplus forward. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, again to the minister. So what 
you’re saying is that there’s $2.3 million less that’s going into 
the management of the fund. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There would be 2.3 less that’s going in 
as new dollars into the fund, yes. That’s right — for now. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Can the minister show me for now 
where the money is coming from and how many dollars are 
coming in before the end of the fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. I’ll just refer you back to page 
37 again, to our summary page, and it shows the estimate in 
2001-02 at 8.197 thousand, and then in 2002-03, down to 5.901 
thousand so that’s the 2.3 you talk about. That shows you the 
reduction right there. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, thank you, Madam Minister, that 
confirms I can read. But you were talking about the $2.3 million 
is not going to be a cut in the program because we’re getting 
more money put into it later on. And that’s where I can’t find in 
there — is where this more money coming later on in the 
program is coming from. Can you explain? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the simplest way I can explain 
this to the member is because there is a fund and the fund has a 
board of trustees, they issue an annual report every year. So 
they will have 2.3 million less flowing into the fund in this 
budget year, because you make those decisions on a 
year-by-year basis. 
 
So you’re right. On this budget year, 2.3 less, but the actual 
amount of the fund is what they get every year and what they 
have minus what they’ve allocated. So they have some amount 
of surplus that they would have allocated a portion of but not 
necessarily 100 per cent of it. And they publish a separate 
audited report on how they manage the fund. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the minister if 
in fact she sits on this board or sits as a representative of the 
board. Because something that . . . it’s kind of puzzling as yet is 
we’re putting 2.3 million less into the CIF but there’s a surplus 
from last year. Well if there’s a surplus from last year, then the 
communities that ask for money from the CIF last year, why did 
they not get money? 
 
It’s again playing with, playing with dollars and saying; we 
won’t give it out this year so we have a surplus for next year. 
I’m wondering if that’s what the minister is doing — playing, 
playing a little give and take. Or how in fact that there can be a 

surplus in the CIF from last year and yet $2.3 million less this 
year and state that it’s going to be balanced off, I believe, is 
what the minister is saying. 
 
So that would indicate to me that there’s $2.3 million surplus 
there last year. If that’s the case, why didn’t we use it for some 
of the community initiatives rather than just the number that 
you gave me — 29 communities that received funding? Why 
didn’t we have more funding last year? Was this in a program 
plan to say, let’s not spend last year’s so we can have a surplus 
this year? I’d like the minister’s comments on that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, I’d have two comments on that, as 
money doesn’t always burn a hole in your pocket. It doesn’t 
hurt sometimes to leave some aside for other priorities. And 
even whether there is money or not, there are still criteria. And 
some communities who are not happy about not getting funds 
did not meet the criteria established by the board of directors. 
 
Now there certainly are many municipalities in the province 
have surpluses who have decided not to spend them on stuff 
that their communities would probably rather see them spend it 
on. This is not uncommon for people to not decide to spend 100 
per cent of their money. 
 
Now certainly if that surplus was to seem to be excessive . . . 
and we were being cautious even in our dealings with them 
because we didn’t know totally how much money there would 
be from casino revenues, and rather than get a very high 
expectation built up of monies flowing and flowing, I think the 
intention was to be more cautious and to not assume a profit 
level would be there until they were sure it was there. 
 
So I think until we see the impact fully of the movement of the 
other casinos onto reserve, they’ll bring their surplus down a bit 
in this next year. And then as Moose Jaw comes on stream, 
we’ll have a more realistic estimate of what amounts they could 
depend on, year over year. 
 
However if it does seem that there’s a more than a prudent 
surplus there, there certainly would be the ability to look at 
whether there’s more communities that qualify for cultural 
facilities or other things. And again, this would be a discussion 
that we would sit down with the board of directors . . . or the 
trustees and say, have you considered. Because they do have 
some independent authority from government. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess I 
would . . . I don’t believe I have a copy of the annual report, if 
that also could be tabled. Because from your previous answer 
that suggested that the $2.3 million that will not be paid into the 
fund, yet they can . . . they’re not going to experience any loss. 
That would indicate to me that there’s a $2.3 million surplus in 
the CIF. Could you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m just going to . . . I’m sorry. I 
missed your question because we were discussing whether it 
was okay to take the copy that we have here and send it across 
because it’s . . . then I won’t have it to refer to; it’s our only 
copy. But I could send this copy across to the member, of the 
Associated Entities Fund annual report. 
 
And if the member will indulge me to repeat the end of the last 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

 

question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Yes, Madam Minister, to the Chair. 
From your previous remarks that this $2.3 million is . . . will not 
be put into the CIF this year as monies put in, but I think you 
explained that none of the programs would really be affected 
because you’re going to use surpluses. 
 
Would you confirm that the CIF then had $2.3 million surplus 
in its fund from last year because that’s the balance that you’re 
not putting in this year? And yet you’re suggesting that the 
programs are going to be identical or exactly the same or the 
funding level is the same. So that would indicate to me there’s 
$2.3 million surplus from last year in the CIF. Could you 
confirm that please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They did have enough surplus funds to 
cover that, yes. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Again 
from a community perspective, knowing that there is this 
surplus in the CIF . . . and I know there’s an awful lot of 
communities that applied and whether it was by reason of not 
qualifying under the regulations . . . I don’t think any of us have 
access to all of those . . . or some of your staff may have access 
to the communities that did not receive funding and for what 
reason. 
 
Madam Minister, I would ask if you have a list of those 
communities that applied for funding but will not receive 
funding? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I do have a list from the cultural 
facilities, but not for the . . . just the general grants because, I 
mean, I think there . . . they get lots and lots and lots of 
applications. 
 
So I do know on the facilities ones which were deferred, I think, 
for different criteria to be met before their application could be 
finalized and then there’s a list here of ones that were rejected 
because they didn’t meet the criteria. Now it doesn’t mean that, 
over time, it wouldn’t be possible for communities too to 
suggest that the criteria need changing. But I could read to you 
the current criteria if you’re interested. 
 
Well we’ll send . . . Mr. Chair, we’ll send over the criteria to the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think 
there’s a lot of communities out there and I know some that 
have applied for funding and did not receive. And I’m 
wondering if your department actually answers all of the 
applications and to suggest as to why they do not receive the 
funding or are they left in the lurch? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I just wanted to make sure I was 
explaining to you properly the process. The regional 
intersectoral committees are made up of people from the 
communities of between 6 and 12 people who make 
recommendations, based on their knowledge of the community 
and the offerings, to the board of trustees who has six people. 

And they make their decisions based on what the regional 
intersectoral committees recommend. 
 
So there’s quite a thorough community process, but I’m not 
involved in it. And our staff sometimes are represented on the 
RICs (regional intersectoral committees), but are not part of the 
final decision-making process at all. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister, and 
Mr. Chair. I’m wondering if there is a . . . if there’s somewhere 
within the process where if somebody applies for funding 
through the CIF and if there’s a process where they, whether 
it’s through your immediate staff or through one of the other 
boards, that they will be . . . they will get indication as to why 
they did not receive the funding? 
 
I know from being involved with some of the communities that 
ask for funding, and if they’re just left completely in the dark, 
what do they do, they feel that they are totally ignored. So I’m 
wondering if there’s a process that’s available whereby if 
somebody applies for funding and the group that sit down and 
suggest that no, they don’t qualify, if there’s return 
correspondence that suggests you don’t qualify for reasons A, 
B, or C, so when they wish to reapply in another year that they 
can actually reapply and conform to the guidelines? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I know, because we’ve had some 
instances where an unhappy community will call my office, I 
know that every applicant receives a letter explaining the 
particular reasons why they didn’t qualify and what they would 
need to do to qualify. And if they’re still not sure, people will 
work with them to help them develop their application and see 
if there’s any way they can meet the criteria. 
 
And like I say, if we were to see a sufficient number of 
examples coming forward where the criteria seemed in some 
way to be unfair or unduly limiting a community’s opportunity 
to do something that was deemed important under the purposes 
of the fund, then certainly there would be a thoughtful 
discussion of the criteria. But I know that quite a bit of effort is 
put into not only making sure they know why they didn’t 
qualify, but what they would need to do in order to qualify. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That 
answers that for me, because I like to see the loop complete so 
they do understand it. And, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair, I’m 
going to turn this over to my colleague for the next few 
questions so I can get a little break. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I’d like to turn my attention . . . 
your attention to the Saskatchewan Communications Network. I 
see this year that there’s a slight decrease in funding to that 
organization. In your Estimate books . . . book, it tells us that 
basically this SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) 
has two purposes: one to provide the infrastructure for 
education and distance learning and those sorts of thing and the 
other one is to . . . supports Saskatchewan regional film and 
video industry. 
 
Could you give us a breakdown as to approximately how many 
dollars are spent in those two areas of activity? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well you’ve managed to ask me a 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

question I can’t answer. I do know that they have a very 
substantial role in each. But having just recently been given 
responsibility for this . . . And we should have had someone 
here representing SCN today — we don’t. We certainly could 
bring them back on another occasion, but in the meantime we’ll 
undertake to provide you that answer in writing. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And certainly a 
written answer would be adequate in this case. 
 
I suppose another question that deals with SCN but not in 
perhaps that detail, but your sense of where that organization is 
going. Are you looking at perhaps having it involved more so in 
the support of the film and video industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
I know I have a number of taxpayers and citizens of this 
province ask me why does Saskatchewan need to have its own 
television network. And Madam Minister, frankly, I can’t 
answer that question. I do provide a partial answer saying that I 
believe there is . . . As I indicated in my earlier question, that 
one of its functions is to support that distance education. 
 
But I guess where the citizens and the taxpayers are coming 
from when they look at the number of channels available to the 
average person, particularly those people subscribing to some of 
the satellite services that are out there, of course then they ask 
the question why are we spending over $7 million just to have 
another TV station out there. Could you please comment on 
that, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As much as I appreciate the broadcast 
side of SCN and the role they play in the film industry, I’m 
going to talk about the three areas that they really have a strong 
role. 
 
Now I don’t know if you know, but in order for people to get 
film funding from Telefilm Canada or anything, they need to 
have a first-in broadcaster. And people in Toronto aren’t that 
interested in being a first-in broadcaster for a Saskatchewan 
story. So if Saskatchewan people want their stories told, it’s 
very important to have a first-in broadcaster, and so it becomes 
then important that you have someone in Saskatchewan, or at 
minimum in the Prairie provinces, who will place a priority on 
Saskatchewan film and video products. 
 
The second area . . . And according to SCN’s data here, they’ve 
triggered 70 million in other funding on local production over 
the past 10 years. So certainly, just on that front alone, they’ve 
paid their way in terms of any taxpayers’ dollars they get. 
 
But a more important role that SCN has had, and I think they 
could have an even more expanded role as a Prairie region 
organization, is the e-learning division. And those operate 
distance learning networks that link the provinces — 
universities, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology), regional colleges, high schools, and 
government departments — using a variety of technologies 
including video over satellite, media streaming, and Web-based 
learning systems. 
 
Now if you’re a student in Hudson Bay, if you’re a student in 
Kindersley, if you’re a student in La Loche, it’s very possible 
that some of the educational broadcast you’re getting is coming 

through the technology supported by SCN. 
 
There’s agricultural students taking classes at the agricultural 
college who don’t actually live in Saskatoon. There’s a huge 
amount of work going on in the secondary school system with 
things like calculus classes where they can’t get a calculus 
teacher so it’s delivered through an SCN site to other high 
schools in the province. And there’s just a wide range of things 
like that going on. 
 
And again some of the other provinces don’t have this capacity 
because they don’t have a television station and they’re looking 
at whether they might want to link into the surplus capacity in 
our network. 
 
And the third very important thing they do is they enhance the 
CommunityNet to provide high-speed Internet in places that 
don’t have actual on-the-ground cable. We can use our satellite 
system that we use for SCN to provide the uplink for cable, or 
for pardon me — high-speed Internet. 
 
So as well, make sure that we have a much wider and more 
comprehensive coverage of the broadcast from the Legislative 
Assembly than we would get with commercial television 
stations who don’t have the same reach that SCN does at the 
provincial level. 
 
So I think we actually have quite a little gem here. And I think 
it’s incumbent on all of us to think about how we can get even 
more value out of something that’s very rare in Canada — a 
television licence that enables you to do a great deal of 
important educational, cultural, and industry development by 
virtue of having that tool. And certainly I would say the value 
far outreaches any tax expenditures on it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think I heard you 
say in response to my first question that perhaps next time we 
do the estimates, your estimates, you will have someone here 
for SCN so that we can perhaps delve further into the operation 
of SCN. And I will look forward to that opportunity. 
 
I just have one or two other questions in another area, Madam 
Minister, and that is under the area of heritage and tourism 
facilities. I noticed that the funding to Wanuskewin this year, 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park, remains the same as it was last 
year, yet the Saskatchewan Science Centre is receiving 
$450,000 increase in funding. 
 
We keep hearing from the people who operate the Wanuskewin 
Heritage Park that they are in desperate need for additional 
financing. And I wonder if you could just explain why the 
science centre is receiving an increase of some $450,000, and 
yet Wanuskewin receives no increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The funding is fairly similar for 
Wanuskewin and the science centre. I think there’s a difference 
of about $100,000 because Wanuskewin also has some other 
federal funds and whatnot, I believe, that the science centre 
doesn’t have. But I think, on par, the funding is pretty similar. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, though, according to the 
Estimate book though, there has been a . . . this year there has 
been a $450,000 increase to the science centre, yet the . . . 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

 

there’s been no increase to Wanuskewin. So I’m wondering 
from your department why the difference in . . . why the 
increase to the science centre and no increase to Wanuskewin? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Wanuskewin was already getting 
funding, so there wasn’t the same need for an increase. The 
science centre didn’t receive provincial funding other than we 
had given them a one-time funding on an emergency basis 
before when they were unable to meet their payroll, etc. And 
we’ve attached fairly stringent conditions to the funding that’s 
going to the science centre in terms of a business plan and 
management plan. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Hart: — So I take it from your answer that you just more 
or less decided that the science centre should have some money 
this year whereas Wanuskewin, perhaps there . . . they have a 
greater need but their funding is going to remain at the same 
level. I mean, I . . . somehow just . . . things don’t seem to be 
very clear in your answer, Madam Minister. 
 
If there’s a real need in a particular project that’s happening at 
the science centre, I think we would all agree that it’s a worthy 
project and deserves funding. But if it’s just the matter of okay, 
well, you’ve never had funding so this year we’re going to give 
you a pot full of money and do with it . . . do some good things 
and so on, it seems to me that doesn’t seem to be a very 
substantive reason for the increase in funding. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just mention that last year, 
Wanuskewin’s funding went from 250 to 500,000. 
 
And this year, all of the regional economic development 
authorities, the mayor, the local councillors, the board of 
directors of the science centre were all very adamant that unless 
they received an anchor, funding from the government, that 
they could not continue to operate. And because the centre is so 
important to youth becoming aware of careers in science and 
technology, being able to have the kind of experiences that the 
science centre provides — we got letters from hundreds of 
teachers and school boards, school districts around the province 
— it appears that the science centre is considered a very 
valuable asset for both educational and tourism purposes. 
 
And both facilities — Wanuskewin, when they got their large 
increase last year and the science centre when they got their 
increase this year — are both required to have a business plan. 
And Wanuskewin has verified to us, since their increase last 
year, that that business plan is now in place and that they feel 
that their operations have stabilized, and they feel that they’re 
okay at the moment. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, it’s not something that we’re 
hearing in the . . . from Wanuskewin, the folks associated with 
Wanuskewin. They seem to tell . . . they tell us that they need 
additional funds. 
 
And it seems somewhat curious that, you know, the increase 
last year, you mentioned Wanuskewin got $250,000 increase in 
funds. This year, the science centre gets 450. And don’t get me 
wrong. I agree that probably the science centre needs to . . . it 
does a lot of good work and should be adequately funded. But it 

just seems somewhat curious that the level of increase to the 
science centre this year from 150,000 to 600,000 seems a bit 
large, and I was wondering if perhaps some of that increase 
could have been funnelled to Wanuskewin. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just point out that the member 
seems to be discounting the 250,000 that Wanuskewin was 
already getting before they got their $250,000 increase. So that 
brought them up to a total . . . and they had been getting that 
250,000 the science centre had not been getting before; 250. It 
had been getting 150, I believe. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Madam Minister, as I said earlier . . . I 
mean, I certainly feel that both of these parks . . . or the heritage 
park and the science centre’s a worthy project and need to be 
funded by your government. It’s just, I guess what I’m 
questioning is the size of the increase of . . . that Wanuskewin 
saw last year and the size of the increase in funding that the 
Science Centre is seeing this year. 
 
And I guess when one stands back for a moment and looks at 
that and the disparities in the size of increase in funding, would 
it have anything to do that the science centre is located in 
Regina and Wanuskewin is located in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Both projects are adjudicated based on 
their own needs and merits. 
 
And certainly it would be true that Wanuskewin has more 
access to both federal and First Nations funding. There’s 
absolutely nothing to prevent the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations to direct some of the gaming funds towards 
Wanuskewin. And there’s certainly nothing to prevent the 
federal government for being an active partner in Wanuskewin. 
And so I would say that they have several sources of funding 
that perhaps are not open to the science centre. 
 
But each continues to be evaluated based on their management 
plans and their level of need. And fair isn’t always a dollar for a 
dollar. Fair is sometimes depending on what the actual needs at 
a given time is. At some point, somebody might need to do 
exhibit redevelopment, which is more expensive than 
maintenance. It really depends on what the specific projects 
going on in the two locations are at any given time. 
 
If a person just builds a new hotel it doesn’t necessarily need 
the same expenditures as an old hotel. It depends very much on 
the circumstance at the time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, and 
your officials. I listened with interest to your comments and it 
sounded to me more like a squeaky wheel gets the grease is 
what you were saying. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like to talk to you for a few minutes about 
the heritage department. It looks like there hasn’t been any real 
increase in the heritage operations grant. I’m not sure if you 
have the officials here to answer the questions on it, but if you 
can give me an idea of how many projects were approved last 
year and if the mandate of that actual department has changed at 
all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Chair, I’ll just mention to . . . Or, 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ll mention to the member that we just have 
assumed responsibility, and at this point, there’s been no 
changes at all in their mandate. 
 
I couldn’t tell you without somebody actually doing a bit of 
research specifically what projects were approved last year, but 
if you’d like us to get you that information, we certainly could. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Our province is really a young province but we 
have a lot of heritage facilities that are falling down. And we 
see that many times the local communities just do not have the 
funds to enable them to keep this in repair. 
 
Is there going to be a change in mandate? Is there something 
where you’re going to be looking at specific areas of the 
province to maintain the historical value of some of the 
buildings and places in this province, so that we have something 
to hand down to our children? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I appreciate the member opposite’s 
view on this matter. I certainly do think we have many things 
that are worth preserving. And I guess the discussion we’d have 
to have is what would that cost and how much is it worth. 
Because certainly there are literally thousands of heritage sites 
in the province, particularly if we look at things like old 
homesteads and whatnot, which are a particular interest of 
mine. 
 
So I would just have to say that one of the reasons we’re very 
glad that heritage has come into the Department of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation is so that we can take a good look at the 
policy and see whether in fact we do need to change any of our 
policy in the heritage area. We may have just the right policy or 
we may not, but this’ll give us a chance to, I guess, have a 
closer look at it. 
 
And any comments or suggestions that the member opposite 
could provide are certainly welcome, because I think . . . I agree 
with you that it is very important and we need to be thoughtful 
about what we do to protect things that once they’re gone, 
won’t come back again. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, your department is one of 
diversity of interests. And it’s kind of interesting that we have 
SCN, which is looking to tomorrow and the heritage part of our 
province, which is looking to yesterday. 
 
And I’m wondering if there’s any kind of overall vision or plan 
within your department to actually give some kind of lead to the 
people saying this is what we’re doing here. The actual heritage 
operation support, the same amount of money has been spent 
for the last number of years, I believe, and I’m wondering how 
you’re balancing these two areas of interest for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I think the strongest statement 
that’s been made by this government is incorporating all of 
these into one department where we can get some momentum 
going with all of the huge assets and resources. We have, both 
from the point of view of community-building, but again as I 
mentioned from a tourism perspective, when I talk to tour 
operators, they say to me, you know there’s a lot of good 
resources and assets out there, but people don’t understand what 

tour operators need when it comes to making the best use of a 
heritage facility or a museum or a science centre or a 
Wanuskewin. 
 
So I think one of the things the department is going to be able to 
bring to it, is bring a cultural industries, a heritage industries 
perspective, where not only are these things important assets, 
but there’s a value added for those communities that have these 
assets, if we are thoughtful about how we hook into both our 
local enjoyment of these things, but the tourism and economic 
development aspects of these things as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I believe that when people 
around the province who aren’t as deeply involved in what 
happens in the workings of the government as perhaps the 
people in this room are, they look at this department and 
wonder where . . . really what the mandate is. And it’s youth, 
culture, recreation, and lots of other things that you can’t find in 
another department. 
 
I think some of the interest . . . some of the important aspects of 
what you have are sometimes lost and I’m waiting to hear if 
you have an overall mandate of your department that’s going to 
give people an idea that there is a . . . that you have . . . that it 
really does have some influence in the province and some 
impact on its economic future. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The member might have been out of 
the room when I articulated this for my critic earlier, but there’s 
basically three functions that the department serves. 
 
One of them is . . . I would call both individual and community 
development because the areas of culture, sport, and recreation 
are certainly areas where many of us received our 
developmental activities when we were young and growing up, 
unless we went to cadets. 
 
The next thing I would mention is that there is an economic 
development component. More and more people in all of these 
sectors are working on economic development, tourism, those 
kinds of things. And I think we have underplayed the strong 
role that all of these provide a number of either sometimes 
secondary jobs for people, sometimes primary jobs for people 
in the many festivals, fairs, etc., that take place around the 
province — and certainly sporting activities, as Humboldt 
recently found out and the member opposite from Humboldt 
found out during the winter games there. 
 
The next one that I would mention would be the aspect of 
celebrating who we are. Because I don’t know, when I watch 
TV, read a book, go for a drive, I like to know that I’m going to 
see Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan towns, Saskatchewan 
celebrities, and Saskatchewan heroes — not necessarily 
Chicago or Los Angeles or New York, as lovely as all those 
places are. I think we want people to see who we are and say, 
that sounds pretty interesting; I think I want to go check out that 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, directly dealing with the 
heritage operation support and the board, can you tell me if the 
board structure has changed at all and actually how many 
projects this board had to look at last year in order to approve 
grants for them. 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The structure hasn’t changed. There are 
some board appointments coming up, I understand, and they do 
have an annual report that’s tabled. I think we would have 
received a copy last summer. But certainly we can get that 
information over to you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Good afternoon, Madam Minister, and good 
afternoon to your officials. Madam Minister, just as a follow-up 
to a comment that you just made to the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena in reference to your mandate. Part of your 
mandate is individual and community development, and of 
course that includes the development of children. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m deeply distressed and concerned about an 
advertising that’s on television right now, put on television I 
believe by SaskTel, promoting SaskTel’s service, Internet-wise, 
as well as, you know, Web sites that can be accessed. 
 
That commercial, Madam Minister, shows a very young boy 
obviously tapping into something on the Internet that he should 
not be . . . should not be looking at because part of the 
commercial shows him looking into it but his parents coming 
into a room and him immediately, and kind of in a sneaky 
fashion, shutting — shutting this Web site off. And it’s 
portrayed as though it’s kind of a cute little thing. 
 
Madam Minister, for some years there have been a number of 
people in our province concerned about problems, you know, 
associated with youth, and youth being subject and having 
access to things that really are detrimental to them. 
 
I’m wondering if in fact you, as the Minister of Youth, Culture, 
and Recreation, have corresponded or discussed this 
commercial and whether or not it’s a very wise thing to do, with 
the minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan)? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I hadn’t seen the commercial myself, 
but one of my colleagues here has and he says apparently it’s 
about a kid playing a game on his computer instead of doing his 
homework, which I think probably kids have been doing since 
time immemorial. 
 
But what I will mention is that through our CommunityNet, one 
of the things we’re able to do for schools province-wide is 
block sites that the children shouldn’t be on. So children in 
schools under CommunityNet will not accidentally get material 
that the teachers don’t intend them to have. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Now sometimes it’s very difficult because of the way sites are 
labelled, but certainly we have probably one of the more 
sophisticated blocking systems in place. And again because we 
operate a province-wide system on CommunityNet, we’re able 
to do that blocking province-wide and each individual school 
doesn’t need to do it. 
 
As to the game the child is playing on the ad, I would have to 
see the ad before I wrote any letters about it. But certainly other 
people here who have seen it didn’t read anything into it other 
than a child caught fooling around when they’re supposed to be 
doing their homework. 

Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Well I guess 
it’s a matter of what each person may understand about that 
commercial. It has been brought to my attention by significant 
community leaders that are really concerned that it may be 
something that should be taken off the air. 
 
Madam Minister, I just want to bring to your attention another 
situation happening in Saskatchewan that involves youth and 
that is totally unregulated; and that’s the increased incidence of 
raves in our provinces. 
 
We have raves where young people are attending, and certainly 
within themselves I guess, raves may not pose a great danger; 
however as unregulated as they are in the province, there are 
numerous dangers associated with them and problems arising 
from them. In fact I believe it was about a year ago that we saw 
in the paper in Saskatoon, or at least it came to our attention, 
that a young woman had died at a rave. 
 
I’m wondering whether or not your government, Madam 
Minister, has looked into the kinds of legislations in other parts 
of the country that have been put in place in order to regulate 
raves? At the present time, Madam Minister, anyone basically 
can be hiring . . . or not hiring, but getting a place for a rave to 
take place; promoters that may be or may not be drug dealers 
that are seeming to have all kinds of permission to just go ahead 
and end up having these things without any regulatory 
conditions put on them. In fact they don’t even have to have a 
licence at this time so there’s no one monitoring who these 
people are, there’s no one monitoring what kind of activity is 
going on there. And, Madam Minister, there’s no knowledge by 
the police of these things even happening until after the fact. 
 
So I would like to know, Madam Minister, in your role, if you 
have had the concern about this issue brought to your attention 
and whether or not you intend to do anything about it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well the only rave I personally 
attended, well I’ve been to two or three, but the only ones I’ve 
personally attended had security guards. And the security 
guards were retired police personnel, they were retired teachers. 
And I think it really is up to the people who rent facilities to 
people wanting these to have requirements about how their 
facility can be used. And certainly in the case of the ones I 
attended, one of them at the Caledonian Curling Club and 
another one at the Cultural Exchange Society, they have their 
own rules regarding security. 
 
And I don’t think personally that you can regulate an event any 
more than . . . Certainly in schools, they’ve had situations where 
they’ve had to take police dogs in and find drugs in lockers and 
whatnot. Well we don’t stop people from having the school. But 
what you have to do is make sure that the regulatory 
environment that regulates where young people can drink . . . 
People who own halls certainly have a responsibility to know 
who they’re renting them to and how they’re used when they’re 
rented. 
 
I certainly wouldn’t contemplate myself going beyond that. 
Because to select out one particular type of recreational activity 
and condemn everyone involved in it as being some kind of a 
junkie would not really be a legitimate thing to do. 
 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, it’s not a matter of 
condemnation. It’s a matter of making sure that other . . . that 
things are put in place. For instance, you know . . . Maybe I 
should be talking to the Minister of Justice about this. But other 
jurisdictions have seen the need to put in provincial regulations 
— regulations pertaining to the age of admission. 
 
Right now in Saskatchewan, from what I understand, there’s no 
regulations that refer to the age of young people that may be 
able to come to the raves. A lot of youth that maybe were not 
involved in drugs before are now subject to having drug pushers 
push them. There’s a great number of drugs that are causing . . . 
that are very dangerous in their combinations to a young 
person’s or anybody’s body, for that matter. 
 
There is, for instance, Madam Minister, there are at these raves 
because of the environment and the effect of the drugs on young 
people, their body temperatures can be raised to a very 
dangerous degree. The people that are promoters are selling 
water at these things at an exorbitant price. Youth do need 
water in order to cool their bodies down in this event. 
 
I mean, there’s so many things that have to be looked at. And 
we have in this province a need to take this issue quite 
seriously. And I would request that, Madam Minister, that you 
maybe look into it. I’m not too sure what the situation in Regina 
is but I know that it’s becoming very worrisome and a great 
concern to many people in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess I’ll just say that I think a lot of 
the most extreme stories we’ve heard about this come out of 
Britain, which is a different cultural milieu there. And certainly 
what I’ve witnessed at these events is that they have a lot of 
multicultural activity. They have a lot of inter-arts activity. 
They have dance demonstrations and different things that are 
really quite often involving young arts students from the 
university. 
 
So I think the culture of raves is a little different here. I don’t 
want to become a big defender of it because, of course, people 
are up all night, I think, for the most part. 
 
But to get into regulating something where we already have an 
environment that regulates drinking ages, attendance ages — 
and certainly, I would think that parents still have a role to play 
in this. I mean, you should know where your children are. One 
of the biggest complaints people have about governments is that 
we’re too invasive in people’s lives in a regulatory way. 
 
And I do believe in a modern, global society with Internet and 
all the other things that people have to learn how to be 
self-regulating and to make good, healthy choices for 
themselves. And I don’t necessarily assume that that involves 
an ever-increasing number of regulations. I think that it really is 
more on the educational front that we need to make sure people 
understand the choices they’re making. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Madam Minister, there is a reason that other 
provinces have brought in provincial legislation. I think we 
can’t underestimate how these things can get out of control. 
 
And, Madam Minister, the fact is we do have regulations in this 
province about youth using alcohol — underage youth. And I 

think we need to make sure that those same kind of laws pertain 
all throughout the province, no matter what the scenario, no 
matter what the function going on. 
 
And in this case, at raves, we do have a very serious concern 
with a number of different drugs there. And the congestion that 
happens at raves, the numbers of people there, you know, lend 
to it being very easy for drug dealers to pass on drugs or for an 
exchange to be made. And so I think we need to look into this 
and take it quite seriously. 
 
But I thank you, Madam Minister, for your comments. I wanted 
to bring this to your attention because it’s a matter that’s 
becoming increasingly and more obvious in need of attention. 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I want to emphasize the words that were spoken by 
the member from Humboldt. I had an opportunity to go on a 
ride-along with the city police in Saskatoon last winter and they 
were discussing the kind of functions that the member was 
talking about and underlining their concern that the drugs and 
the parties that go on at that time are difficult for them. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I don’t think that the member is alone 
when she comes to her concern. 
 
Madam Minister, I would like to talk to you about another area 
and that’s involved with the film, SaskFILM, and the tax credit. 
This is something that your government brought in a number of 
years ago, and I’m wondering if you can tell me last year how 
much money was spent on film credit for SaskFILM? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Oh, here you go. I’ll give you the total 
bi-fiscal year. April 1999 to March 2000, which was the first 
time period where the film tax credit could be accessed, it was 
990,033; in 2000 to 2001, it was 4,212,809; and in 2001 to 
March 20 — which is all the year that we have again — 
3,719,558 is the total on expenditures. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, how many different 
companies took advantage of having the tax credit for film? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Just this year it’s 20 different 
companies. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, the way the tax credit is set 
up, it’s not the companies as much as the project, I believe. So 
you can have . . . one individual can be given a tax credit for 
working on a project with one company, and then two months 
later be working for another company, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The tax credit is based on employing 
Saskatchewan personnel, so you can’t get a tax credit unless 
you’ve actually employed Saskatchewan personnel. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Yes, Madam Minister, I understand that, but 
that personnel could be employed by one company and then be 
on another film and be employed again. So when we talk about 
the number of people that would be employed in the . . . We 
wouldn’t be able to talk about the number of people who would 
be employed on this tax credit because they could be employed 
under two or three different company names. Is that correct? 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think the important thing to know is 
that no dollar is issued without there being a person attached to 
that. So whether it’s the same person or different people is 
largely irrelevant. What is important is that it’s Saskatchewan 
people who are maintaining employment in an industry that is 
growing by millions every year and creating even more 
opportunities for people from Saskatchewan to be employed. 
 
We know approximately what level of production creates how 
many jobs as a ballpark. But this is an industry much like IT 
(information technology) where people work a bit of time here, 
a bit of time there. So if you took the total tax credit and . . . or 
the total production value and divided it by the number of jobs 
created by certain levels of production value, that gives you a 
pretty good estimate in the industry for the number of jobs 
created. Otherwise we’d have to have every company’s payroll 
to know the details. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress on the Department of Culture, Youth 
and Recreation and move to Industry and Resources. 
 
(16:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is the deputy minister of Industry and 
Resources, Larry Spannier. To his right is Debbie Wilkie, who 
is the executive director of corporate resources. To my left is 
Dan McFadyen, assistant deputy minister of resource 
development. Immediately behind me is Donald Koop, the 
assistant deputy minister of mineral, revenue, and investment 
services. And to his right is Bruce Wilson, executive director of 
petroleum and natural gas. As well, behind the rail, Bryon 
Burnett, the assistant deputy minister of industry development; 
and Jim Marshall, who is the assistant deputy minister of 
economic policy. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to welcome the department officials. We really do 
appreciate the work that they do and how they help us out in 
this exercise that we go through in the Assembly and how they 
are a great help in disseminating information from the 
department to the Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan. 
We do appreciate them. Mr. Minister, if I can start with some 
general mining questions. What was the total value of mineral 
sales, all mining sectors, in the year 2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, the total of oil, gas, 
and mineral sales are 7.374 — that would be . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s billion — $7.374 billion. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, would 
you have the information handy as to what portion of that was 
oil and gas? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, oil and gas was 
3.657. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how 
much, approximately, would the industry have spent in the year 
2001 on wages, goods, and services in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 
officials that there are 8,500 people employed in the 
development of the oil and gas sector. There is in the 
neighbourhood of $1.4 billion spent on that activity. We don’t 
have a breakdown in terms of the specific payment to 
individuals or by companies, as you would know. That would 
be not information that would be filed with the department. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 
year 2001, do you know how much the mining industry paid in 
taxes and royalties to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have 
the finals but I would assume these would be very close for the 
2001-2000 year, fiscal year. Oil would be 496,700; the natural 
gas would be 127,400. These are all in thousands, by the way. 
Potash would be 161,000; uranium and coal . . . And I am told 
these are confidential here now. Okay, potash would be, as I 
said, 161,000; and other would be 39,600 — that includes coal, 
uranium, and other royalties. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, how 
does Saskatchewan rank among the Canadian provinces in, oh, 
in mineral production? I’m referring to mining production here, 
not oil and gas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I guess this would 
be a very opportune time to speak to the success that our 
province has had. We have surpassed British Columbia and are 
now third in terms of mineral activity in the country. 
 
Now that’s not to say that we couldn’t do better. We are 
attempting to, as you will know following the Energy 
department as the critic from the opposition side, we have 
revamped base metals and gold royalties; we have introduced 
some incentives; we have revamped the potash royalties and 
taxation regime. Uranium — I believe that’s completed now. As 
well we’ve been very diligent in terms of our oil and gas 
revenues to ensure that we’re competitive in that regard. 
 
So I think when we’re speaking to some of the successes that 
Saskatchewan has had, the fact that we have now surpassed 
British Columbia in minerals is a very good sign and it speaks 
very much to the confidence that the mining sector has in our 
province. And we’re looking forward to bigger and better things 
in the coming years. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, approximately how many people are employed 
directly and indirectly in the mining industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — In the mining sector there are 
17,000 direct and indirect jobs. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, where 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

does Saskatchewan rank in the world in terms of potash and 
uranium production, and what percentage of world production 
are we in each of those minerals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, we are the largest producer with respect of uranium; 
we are nip and tuck . . . we’re just about on balance with 
Russia, who has increased their production as things have 
turned around in their country. 
 
But we are still very strong in terms of the potash markets. I 
think the trust factor for Canadian product — not only the 
quality of product, but the availability of supply — is still very 
strong. And as you will know, China is a very large market for 
us in terms of potash. And the United States, of course, 
continues to be a big consumer of Saskatchewan potash. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
speaking of potash and China, have there been or are we 
expecting large sales of potash to China this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think it’s fair to say that until a 
year is completed, it’s very difficult to know exactly what the 
Chinese market is going to be. 
 
I would want to say that our industry works very closely with 
its marketing arm, Canpotex, who have a presence in China on 
an ongoing basis. They’ve worked for many years to develop a 
relationship with those are responsible for purchasing potash in 
China. And our markets continue to be strong because I think 
the trust factor is there. 
 
We’re having some competition certainly from the Russians, 
who’ve been flooding the markets over the past years in an 
attempt to gain market share. But in spite of that, our position 
remains strong. 
 
It’s been historical as I recall — having spent a few years in the 
Energy portfolio — that it’s really difficult to tell until . . . right 
up until the end of the year, at which time they make, they make 
some pretty substantive purchases on occasion. But I think it’s 
fair to say our industry feels confident that we will be 
maintaining our market share; that we will be maintaining 
China as a large offshore customer. And history has shown that 
in fact, the industry’s analysis — and the department’s analysis 
is it relates to quantity and the percentage market — has been 
fairly accurate over the years. 
 
So I think we can expect a pretty good year this year as well. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what 
percentage of the electrical power that’s consumed in 
Saskatchewan is produced from coal mined in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I . . . the question is, 
as I understand it . . . and I was listening to a comment by my 
official but around 65 per cent is the amount of electricity that 
we produce from coal in a year. That varies very much, 
dependent upon how much hydro is available to us, both in the 
northern circumstances and as it relates to Lake Diefenbaker 
and the water level there. 
 
As you will know, we use natural gas as . . . historically we’ve 

used it as peaking power. It’s now becoming part of our 
baseload as our economy grows and our economy expands, and 
we diversify our source of electrical energy. 
 
But coal remains a very strong component of our production, 
and I would see that into the future. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Continuing on that theme, Mr. Minister, I 
understand that around the year 2008 that some of our 
coal-fired plants will be decommissioned. I’m wondering if 
they’ll be replaced with more modern coal-fired plants or will 
we be using more natural gas. Are there any plans for that 
eventuality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes. I think, you know, with 
limited knowledge that I do have about generation as it relates 
to coal — which would probably be a more appropriate 
question directed to SaskPower officials at Crown corporation 
estimates — but I think it’s fair to say that the corporation has 
been maintaining on a very regular basis upgrades and the 
health of those fired plants are in pretty good shape. 
 
As you will know, they’ve also made some headway in terms of 
reducing emissions, fly ash emissions from those plants. So I 
think it’s fair to say that they’re fairly healthy; they’re upkept 
quite well. 
 
In terms of decommissioning, I couldn’t give you a date on that. 
I think that would be best addressed to the SaskPower 
Corporation itself. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
interested in the Saskatchewan mining industry’s environmental 
record, and how do we stack up among other provinces in 
Canada and other jurisdictions in North America 
environmentally? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I could 
make an argument on behalf of the mining industry that in two 
fronts they have been very much leaders; that’s one, in terms of 
workers’ safety and the health of our workers in their workplace 
environment. But secondly, with respect to a good 
environmental stewardship. 
 
I think there’s no doubt that the uranium industry has been 
under some very close scrutiny both by the federal government 
who’s taking responsibility for uranium mining. We’ve made 
some success in terms of being able to consolidate the 
environmental assessment in those operations that hopefully 
favours the bottom line for the uranium industry. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that our mining industry — whether 
it’s potash or whether it’s uranium or whether it’s base metal 
mining — have been very proactive and they work very closely 
with the regulatory regimes that have been put in place in the 
province. 
 
So I think they have a good track record, a good, solid track 
record that they are very proud of. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

 

is the mining industry’s record on Aboriginal employment and 
what is their policy in that field? I know that most of the . . . or 
a good percentage of the mining industry is located in the 
northern part of the province, and we’re certainly interested in 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think one industry 
that I would probably point to as an example of what can be 
done working co-operatively with industry is the uranium 
industry. We have around 50 per cent of the people who work 
within uranium mining in Saskatchewan are northerners and 
northern Aboriginals. 
 
And you know I found it interesting, as I would discuss the 
operations of the uranium industry and the impact, the cost of 
impact on Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan, other 
jurisdictions who have looked to Saskatchewan as a lead and as 
an example. 
 
I recall an industry meeting at which the deputy minister 
responsible for mining from Quebec heard a presentation from 
one of our First Nations leaders as he spoke about the 
employment opportunities that had been created in uranium 
mining for his people. 
 
The deputy made a comment to me that we could only wish that 
we had this kind of relationship with our First Nations and that 
we had taken the opportunities that you have taken here in 
Saskatchewan to ensure northern employment for people 
working in northern mines. 
 
So the uranium industry has been very much on the lead on this 
file, working with the government, and should be commended 
for the very positive position that they have taken with respect 
to Aboriginal employment. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
someone who has been involved in the mining industry, safety 
was always a concern and always is a concern in mining, 
particularly underground mining. I’m wondering how the 
industry in Saskatchewan stacks up nationally and 
internationally as far as our safety record goes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was 
just having my memory refreshed by the officials and you know 
I think you will recognize, sir, the progress and the successes 
that our industry has had. They stack up very well across our 
nation. 
 
They’ve won national awards — The John T. Ryan Award on 
more than one occasion, in terms of safety and employment 
safety. I think that’s as well reflected in the very competitive 
workers’ compensation rates that we enjoy here in 
Saskatchewan, as it relates to the mining industry. 
 
Which is I think one of the reasons that we are very optimistic 
and certainly very hopeful as it relates to the further 
development and expansion of our base metal mining 
operations here in the province. We’ve been promoting at 
PDAC (Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada) 
international mining conferences, Saskatchewan is a good place 
to do business along with Saskatoon REDA (Regional 
Economic Development Authority), the industry itself — 

Saskatchewan Mining Association. 
 
And I think that we’re starting to gain a reputation as a 
jurisdiction where mining investment is welcome. And I think 
you will recognize as well the difficulty that the mining 
industry has had attracting private sector capital to develop 
opportunities and to develop mines. That partly as a result of 
some unfortunate circumstances that took place — none of our 
doing here in the province or none of industry from the 
province’s doing — as it relates to Bre-X. 
 
And I think there is some carry-on from that. But I think the 
fact that we’ve been looking very closely at what we’ve done, 
in terms of making sure our royalties, our taxation, are 
competitive, our workers’ compensation rates are competitive 
across our nation. 
 
The promotion that’s taking place, both from the private sector, 
from local communities like Saskatoon, are very much a leader 
in mining across our nation and known as a mining city. Those 
are all very positive things that will help us to attract and grow 
and build on what I think are some great opportunities in the 
North. 
 
If you look at our geology — and I’m no geologist — but what 
industry is telling me is that it must be host, and it should be 
host, to some good opportunities as it relates to base metals and 
other opportunities. 
 
I think we have a good climate for investment. I think industry 
is starting to recognize it. And safety, competitiveness, these are 
all things that I think will help us to grow and build that 
industry. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, Mr. 
Minister, exploration and development are, in the mining 
industry, are by nature very time-consuming processes. And it 
takes from 10 to 20 years from the start of that process until you 
have a productive mine. 
 
And one fairly substantial component of that time period is the 
time spent on permitting and so on, environmental studies 
which are, of course, necessary. But I’m wondering from the 
permitting and environmental side, what can be done to shorten 
the time period spent on those activities and make the process 
as efficient as possible and to get these mines into production, 
as long as they are environmentally sound ventures, as soon as 
possible? And has anything been done in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think there are a number of things 
that need to be done and should be done. 
 
Firstly if I would echo some of the comments that industry 
shares with me, is that good environmental stewardship is a 
prerequisite, it’s a component, it’s a part of good business. And 
I think that industry wants to see environmental due diligence 
done that will satisfy environmental activists and people in the 
environmental community who are concerned with fresh, good 
water, watersheds, clean air. Those are all very important parts, 
I think, of doing business. 
 
What we need to do as a government is to ensure that there is 
adequate due diligence done on behalf of all of us. Important to 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

do that as quickly and as expediently and without duplication 
inasmuch as we can. I think it’s a prerequisite of a good 
investment climate to ensure that our regulatory environment is 
not over onerous but it is adequate in terms of ensuring that 
there is a reasoned and a fair and a well-thought-through 
process for decision making as it relates to the registration and 
the licensing of mining and mining activity. And I think 
industry agrees with that. 
 
What I think industry also agrees with is that if we have an 
overly onerous regulatory environment, we stand the risk of 
having that investment capital look for another home in another 
place. And I think it’s also fair to say, though, that we don’t 
want to compete with the worst environmental records around 
the world. We know those. We understand those. And I think 
what we want to do is ensure that Saskatchewan remains a good 
place for not only mining, but for tourism and for ecotourism 
and outfitting, all of the things that happen in similar places 
where the mining activity takes place. 
 
So it’s a balance. We need to ensure that we’re monitoring to 
ensure that we have a good system, and a fair system, and a 
reasoned process. And part of the way we learn that is the 
dialogue that we have with industry. This government has a 
close working relationship with uranium developers, uranium 
miners, with our small base-metal mines, gold mines in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s what we need to do because if we’re not hearing 
their comments, we can’t reflect the kinds of changes that may 
from time to time need to take place within government 
administration and government organization. 
 
I can say that our Department of Environment in the province 
worked very hard over the last few years, as the former 
department of Energy and Mines worked with them, to impress 
upon our federal counterparts that the environmental processes 
that were taking place as it relates to uranium development were 
cumbersome, they were onerous, there was the duplication. And 
we had a responsibility both from a provincial government 
perspective but as well a federal government perspective 
because the image that was created by that duplication as it 
related to uranium mining was not a positive one. 
 
So we were able to bring the two jurisdictions together. I think 
we’ve made some progress. I don’t think we’ve gone as far as 
we need to be or as far as we can be, but all of that has taken 
place because we had a good and a positive working 
relationship with the industry from a provincial perspective. 
And it has allowed us to make some success. 
 
There’s always more we can do and I think, you know, it’s 
always criticism of government that there’s too much 
government, that there are too many bureaucrats out there doing 
too many things that impact negatively on too many businesses, 
and that government should get out of the way of business and 
let business do what business does. 
 
Well I buy that theory to a degree, but I also respect industry 
when they say that good environmental stewardship is good 
business. So what we try and do is find that balance where we 
have a reasonable system to ensure that the mining operations 
are ensuring a good, long-term environment. And I think that’s 

what they want to leave. I don’t think they want to leave a 
legacy of destruction. 
 
We’ve seen that in the forestry industry and the forestry 
practices in the year 2002 are much different than they were 
perhaps in the 1960s. And if I look at the forestry development 
here in Saskatchewan and the opportunities that we have not to 
do the kinds of things that took place in British Columbia, 
where now everything that industry does has a very microscopic 
scrutiny. And in a lot of cases I think unfair scrutiny; but in a lot 
of cases it’s fair. 
 
But I think industry, the resource sector — both renewable and 
non-renewable — know that they need to leave a small imprint 
on our environment, as small as they can. And I have to say 
from my experience they’ve been very co-operative and I really 
do appreciate their support as we attempt to move projects 
forward in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, further 
on that same theme, is there any effort being made by Energy 
and Mines or other provincial departments to coordinate the 
activities of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), the federal environment people, and now 
Fisheries and Oceans, along those lines, to facilitate 
environmental process and permitting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to say that, and I should maybe at this time, 
say a few short words about restructuring of government as it 
relates to the Department of Industry and Resources — which 
now encompasses the former department of Energy and Mines, 
the department of Economic Development, some components 
of SERM, some components of Sask Agriculture. And from one 
perspective we were attempting and are attempting to create a 
single window entry point for industry to government. 
 
And the comments I’ve had in the past little while in terms of 
the restructuring from industry have been very, very positive. 
The relationship between this department and SERM, as it’s 
now structured, I think will be very positive. We’ve had some 
good, positive relationships with those who were responsible 
for monitoring environmental concerns from that department. 
I’m hopeful that this new structure will allow us to take the best 
of both departments — take the best corporate culture from 
Energy and Mines and Department of Economic Development, 
and the components that we took from SERM as it relates to 
forestry development, and tie those and meld those with those 
people who are working on the environmental side within 
SERM. 
 
You mentioned the 30-some new people that are here from 
oceans and fisheries and I’d be remiss if I were to tell you that 
I’m wondering what they’re going to do here in this province as 
it relates to our Saskatchewan circumstance. And I’m sure that 
the federal government will find a good, positive role for those 
new federal officials that say join our province and us here in 
the province. 
 
I’m not understanding totally what that might be at this point. I 
can only say that our goal is to ensure that we have a reason 
process from the provincial perspective and that we have some 
understanding from the federal government that we, here in this 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

 

province, have a good relationship with industry and a good 
relationship with the environmental community and we can sort 
things out pretty well here in the province. 
 
We’ve been at this for considerably . . . period of time. We’ll be 
here for a lot longer doing the kinds of things we do in terms of 
growing this economy as it relates to the mining sector. And 
hopefully our federal counterparts can help to facilitate that as 
opposed to being an impediment to creating jobs and wealth 
here in this province because it is such a critical part of what we 
do with resource dollars that we generate as it relates to 
royalties and taxation. As you will know, it will go a long way 
to creating an infrastructure as it relates to roads and schools, 
hospitals. And I think it fair to say that we would be on 
common ground in the belief that we here in Saskatchewan can 
manage our resources just very well, thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I certainly agree 
with that. I also commend the new department on your efforts 
to create a single window approach. It’s certainly something 
that we’ve been advocating on this side of the floor and I do 
commend that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell this Assembly how the 
corporate capital tax is calculated as it pertains to the mining 
industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — None of us here are accountants 
and this is administered by the Department of Finance. But the 
mining industry would pay the normal corporate capital tax and 
there is a 3.6 per cent surcharge on sales of the resource. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In 2002-2003 — 
and my budget documents are here someplace — but do we 
have the projected revenue from the corporate capital tax and 
resource surcharge at our fingertips, I wonder? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can give you the total estimate. 
We don’t have a breakdown of it. You would probably have to 
get that through Department of Finance estimates. But the total 
would be 340,200,000. And that’s the total aggregate. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, last information I was able to obtain on the Fort a la 
Corne diamond venture is that it would be still some time 
before the final decision was made as to whether or not that will 
be a go. 
 
I’m wondering, first of all, if the department has any up-to-date 
information. It’s been something like a year since I was in touch 
with those people and any up-to-date intelligence that you can 
share with this Assembly on how that assay is turning out and 
what the prospects are for Fort a la Corne. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. And I guess 
I would want to say to the member opposite, I’m probably as 
interested in the future of that as anyone. You know, you 
indicated a little earlier that bringing a mine on stream takes a 
lot of investment and a lot of patience. And you’re right. 
 
And I think when . . . I’m told that they’re going to be looking 
at another group of core samples, and there should be 
something reported the end of April. I wouldn’t want to suggest 

to you that there’s a mine tomorrow or the day after. I just think 
every time they invest a few more millions of dollars in 
sampling those kimberlite bodies in that area, gives, and should 
give us all more encouragement that in fact they’re moving 
perhaps another step closer to a producing mine. 
 
You know, if I look at the diamond mines that have been 
brought on stream, and if in fact our kimberlite is host to a 
commercially viable sample of diamonds, which I hope it is, 
and I certainly want to encourage them to continue to explore, 
but if this would become a mine, it would be a very competitive 
mine in that there’s water, transportation, a workforce, 
electricity, I think all of the things that would create the ability 
to attract people like De Beers and Kensington and those who 
may make this a working mine. I think we’re very well 
positioned. 
 
So as they keep drilling, taking more and more core samples — 
some of them becoming larger and larger — many, many tons 
they’re analyzing now. And when they keep going back every 
season and spending more money, we can only continue to be 
more and more encouraged that in fact there is something there 
that’s workable. And hopefully we’ll end up producing jobs for 
hundreds and hundreds of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. Has it . . . I’m 
wondering, has the department been doing any work with the 
mining industry . . . or with the diamond industry on 
establishing a tax and royalty regime in case that that does 
become a producing mine? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, I think, Mr. Chairman, the 
department has been doing its work. They’ve been working at 
royalty taxation regimes around the world — in places where 
they do mine diamonds. And we want to be prepared. 
 
If, in fact, the decision to put a mine on stream is there, we want 
to understand what our competitors are doing and what will 
make us competitive, not only with respect to the infrastructure 
that I spoke of, but with respect to the royalties and the taxation 
system that we would put in place. 
 
So we’re putting all of that information together. I think it 
would be a little premature to be directly discussing royalty and 
taxation until we know that there is some rice in this pot that 
we’re boiling here. If we’re going to have dinner and if we’re 
going to design a table, we’d probably all want to know that we 
really do have something there. 
 
But I think it’s encouraging. Our department is being proactive 
in putting together the kinds of information and the things that it 
would take to put a good royalty and taxation regime in place. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was really my 
question. I just . . . I wanted to be assured that the department is 
on top of that and I’m happy to hear that they are. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much revenue is generated from the 
15-cent-a-litre road tax charged on fuel, mostly diesel fuel used 
in the mining industry in off-road applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, we wouldn’t have a 
breakdown as it relates to industry, either renewable or 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

non-renewable. I think that detail, that level of detail would 
have to come from the Department of Finance who may have a 
breakdown. But certainly, our department doesn’t keep a record 
of that on an ongoing basis. 
 
So I think the Department of Finance would probably be better 
to answer that for you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With the corporate 
capital tax and resource surcharge and the road tax charged on 
fuel used off road, I know those are three things that, if I can 
use the expression, sort of bug the mining industry in this 
province. And I’m wondering if any work is underway to 
mitigate that somewhat or soften the blow of these three taxes 
on the mining industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, you know, the taxation 
system is something that we’re looking at and we do look at on 
an ongoing basis. You know, I look at the history of 
Saskatchewan, just the recent history, and in 1991 when we 
formed government, I think one of the biggest concerns we had 
from industry was not taxation level. It was the future of this 
province as it relates to our ability to manage our debt. 
 
And one of the things that the business community as a whole 
were saying to us, get your fiscal house in order and don’t put 
us in a position where you’re increasing the level of debt. 
You’re spending more to service that debt every year, which 
means there is either going to be higher taxes or there is going 
to be less in terms of services that relates to employing people 
to work in our jurisdictions — in our mines, in our businesses. 
 
And so they were asking us to put our fiscal house in order, 
which we did. Then it turned, and the focus sort of turned to, 
we’ve got a reasonable, or a high tax level, here in this province 
and we’d like you to work on reducing that. Which we have. 
 
We have reduced the small business tax substantially. We 
reduced and eliminated the surcharges on income tax. Our 
personal income tax structure has been revamped and it’ll be 
completed — the package that we put together — by 2003. And 
we think all of these things have helped to make us competitive. 
 
Now as it relates to fuel tax and as it relates to corporate capital 
tax, resource tax, it’s something that we would like to see 
eliminated as well. I would be, I think along with the rest of my 
colleagues, happier than all get-out if we could stand in this 
House and announce that we’re going to eliminate the small 
business tax, that we’re going to reduce corporate capital tax by 
50 per cent in the next two years, as some have. 
 
But I tell you, I don’t believe that industry would ask us to 
remove those irritants until they know we can afford them. And 
if we were to move on say the corporate capital tax, and make a 
decision to reduce it by 50 per cent in the next two years, I think 
they’d be asking us, how are you going to do it, as they did with 
corporate . . . like with personal income tax and as they did with 
the small business tax. 
 
So certainly the goal has to ensure that we’re competitive, to 
remove the irritants. And from this side, we’re going to 
continue to do that as the province can afford and as our 
revenue flows can take us there. 

And I think we’re getting there. If you look at the activity, you 
look at the GDP (gross domestic product) growth in our 
province in the last decade, we have been very much leaders in 
this country. If you look at the amount of tax reduction that we 
have put in place, I think the people of Saskatchewan and the 
business community should be very proud of what they’ve been 
able to achieve by building a stronger economy, by balancing 
our budget, so that we can put less towards interest and more 
towards tax reduction and more towards programs. 
 
But I think that they wouldn’t be asking us to do that without 
the ability to show them how we could do it in affordable and a 
sustainable way. But I do agree with you as it relates to these 
taxes, we would be far better off if they weren’t around. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand 
from the potash mining industry that with higher potash prices 
that their marginal tax rate is . . . gets up as high as the 
neighbourhood of 71 per cent and the uranium industry is even 
worse. When uranium prices are high, that they can be in the 
neighbourhood of 85 per cent marginal tax rate. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I understand the fiscal constraints that you 
and your department work under. But don’t you, don’t you 
believe that if we could create some incentive for the industry to 
invest more money in this province, that we might very well get 
that lost revenue back in actually increased revenue down the 
road? And I understand the immediate fiscal problem, but 
what’s your view on that theory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had 
again my mind refreshed, and we had talked a little bit earlier 
about some of the tax changes that have taken place as it relates 
to the marginal tax regarding uranium. That was at somewhere 
around 80 per cent. We’ve brought that down to 50 per cent, 
which is a fairly substantive change. The potash marginal tax 
rate has been reduced by 10 per cent, which is a benefit to 
industry of — over a five-year period — about $250 million. 
 
Now, have we gone as far as we’d like to go? Well, we have a 
working committee with my department, with the Department 
of Finance, and with the Saskatchewan Mining Association 
looking at the competitiveness issues which include the 
corporate capital tax, corporate capital tax surcharge, and 
off-road fuel tax. 
 
Now, you have identified quite clearly in your earlier remarks 
that these are some of the irritants. And I think your question to 
me was, simply put, do I believe in the philosophy of build it 
and they will come? Meaning, cut the taxes like crazy and the 
investment will follow and the activity will backfill what your 
reduction in your tax level is. And I think that’s your question. 
 
Now if you’re asking me if I believe in that, and I’ll say to the 
member from Swift Current, the answer is no. And I want to tell 
you why. Because your friends, your friends — he chirps from 
his seat — your friends in British Columbia where you wanted 
to model your economic development game plan did that and it 
resulted in a $4.4 billion deficit this year. And so if you’re 
asking me if we’ll follow your recommendation as it relates to 
British Columbia the answer is no. 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

 

But if you’re asking me if we will continue on a sustained 
tax-reduction package, as this province and as this economy can 
afford it to ensure that we are competitive, as we’ve done with 
the reduction in uranium taxes and as it relates to the reduction 
in potash taxes, the answer is yes we’re going to continue to do 
that. But a leap of faith — the member from Swift Current, not 
on your life because it doesn’t work in the jurisdictions that he 
uses as examples in which to put forward tax changes in this 
province — that is not. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Cut taxes like crazy 
might not be the description I would use of our policy. But in 
terms of the budget and what is estimated for government take 
in . . . from the potash industry, last year the number was 
around 161 million, I believe, and this year you’re projecting to 
take in around 202 million. 
 
The question I have is, what is this number based on? And this 
is quite a lofty increase when you see other numbers decreasing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, there are two 
components to this. And one was that last year they were 
forecasting $160 million. That was based on the abnormally 
high cost of natural gas which very much reduced the 
profitability of the potash sector, the potash industry. 
 
The other component of this is changes as it relates to capital 
tax credits that were in place over a 20-year period which are 
now disappearing, which will allow then the estimate of $202 
million this year as opposed to the 160 from last year. So those 
are the two components. That’s why the difference. 
 
And I know there are those who would try and make you an 
argument that we’re overforecasting revenue to put a 
balanced-book package together. That’s not the case. We rely 
on the information that comes from our officials based on their 
knowledge of the industry. 
 
We’ve had this discussion with the media and here in the 
legislature. And my guess would be that at the end of the year, 
when you look at the final revenue that came in as a result of 
potash revenues, the $202 million figure will be pretty close to 
bang on, unless abnormal circumstances that can’t be forecasted 
now would take place. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So your government 
is truly counting on an increase in over $40 million in potash 
revenue to help pull you through this deficit budget that you’re 
now involved with. 
 
What happens next budget if potash revenues don’t come 
anywhere near that 202 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say to 
the member opposite, I sort of want to correct his terminology 
and I want to say to him that yes, on a cash flow basis, we are in 
a deficit position this year. The Minister of Finance articulated 
that I think in some detail. But as it relates to this year’s budget, 
we’ve been able to draw on our reserves that we put aside when 
we did have extraordinarily high oil and gas revenues, which 
allowed us to bridge what’s been a pretty difficult year. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Chairman, this budget is comprised of 

more than natural gas revenues. It’s comprised of more than oil 
and gas revenues or potash revenues. There are a whole host of 
revenue initiatives that were put before this legislature in the 
budget. 
 
And I want to say that the track record of this Minister of 
Finance and this administration has been one that we are very 
proud of. And I think there’s a reason for that. Even though we 
have been delivering razor-thin budget surpluses, we’ve been 
able to, in the good times, put a little money aside for years that 
we’ve had . . . such as this year where we had a drought. And I 
know members don’t want to hear about that, but I mean they 
live it as we do. 
 
The events of September 11 have had some impact on our 
economy; there’s been a downturn in the global economy which 
hasn’t . . . we’re not immune from that, which meant we had a 
downturn in some revenues. 
 
But in spite of that, this year using our Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
we’ve been able to balance our budgets. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that this Finance 
minister and this Premier, unlike the Leader of the Opposition, 
understands the fragile nature of Saskatchewan’s economy as it 
relates to our revenues and our expenditures which is why 
we’ve taken very much a small “c”, fiscal, conservative 
approach to putting our budgets together. And I want to say as it 
relates to putting budgets, economic development plans 
together, we have been very fiscally responsible. 
 
I heard with some interest last fall as your leader, the Leader of 
the Opposition, indicated to the business community in 
Saskatoon that he was going to cut the corporate capital tax by 
50 per cent in two years. And that’s laudable. I think, I think 
that’s an honourable thing for him to attempt to want to 
achieve. And he said he’s going to remove the small-business 
tax completely. 
 
So I sit back and I say to my Finance minister, Mr. Finance 
Minister, what does that mean to the province of 
Saskatchewan? And he says to me, well, he says, corporate 
capital tax, that would mean that we’d have to find $180 
million. And I said, oh. And then he says to me . . . Well, I said, 
what about the small-business tax? And he says, oh we’d have 
to find another 60 million for that. And I said, oh! So it’s 240 
million we’re going to find. And I say to him, well how would 
we go about doing that? 
 
And I read the document that came from the speech of the 
member, the Leader of the Opposition, and you know how he’s 
going to do it? He’s going to go to British Columbia and he’s 
going to learn how they cut the cost of operating government. 
 
So I then say to my friend, the Finance minister, well what did 
the people in British Columbia do? What did they do? How did 
they cut their costs of government? And they took a third of 
their civil service and they fired them out the door. And they’ve 
now got a provincial auditor who’s worried about the morale 
and the health of their government because of the impact on the 
civil service who no longer feel confident in the leadership in 
that province or in the management of that province. 
 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 2002 

 

And so I say, well how . . . okay, so you’re going to fire a third 
of your civil service, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, to finance 
his $240 million tax reduction. Oh, but there’s more. He’s going 
to cut the Crowns to the core. Well that says to me, liquidate 
assets to pay for non-sustainable taxes and tax cuts. 
 
And I think, Mr. Member, that’s what I heard from you today. 
In a very soft-spoken and quiet and elegant way, you described 
what you’d like to do. But I tell you it’s not affordable, it’s not 
sustainable, and we have no intentions of moving on tax 
reductions, promises for political purposes, when we know the 
province can’t afford them and it either means selling assets to 
afford them or firing people who provide good public services 
to the people of this province, or a combination of both, or 
big-time deficit budgeting which many of your folks supported 
in the 1980s as you supported the Grant Devine government in 
1982 and in 1986 and in 1991 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well you may not have been born there, Madam, but I tell you, 
the member from Swift Current was born then. He was working 
in the associate minister of Economic Development’s office at 
the time — that’s where he was. 
 
And he got some bad habits, I say to the member opposite, 
when he was there in the 1980s, and he’s brought them forward 
and they’ve been expounded upon by the Leader of the 
Opposition. And that’s why he’s out promising slashing of 
government, liquidation of assets, firing people, or deficit 
budgets. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, read the history books. 
They’re not that long ago when we had that kind of an 
administration. 
 
You ask if we’re going there? The answer is never. You’re 
going to see small “c”, fiscal conservative management from 
this administration and a management that cares about people 
and we’re going to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan still have faith in their government. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, the hour being close to 5 
o’clock, I move the committee recess until 7 o’clock tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 



April 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 316 of Hansard No. 10A Wednesday, March 27, 2002, 
references to “Lawrence” Osachoff in the second paragraph of 
the Hon. Mr. Cline’s speech should read “Laurence” Osachoff. 
 
We apologize for this error. 


