















































Hansard: May 27, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1575 
 May 27, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan 
concerned about the condition of Highway No. 23 west from 
Junction 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed entirely by citizens of 
Weekes. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 
of people who are concerned about tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
The people who have signed the petition are from Wadena, 
Margo, and Watson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the 
severe weather conditions and the crop insurance program. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Tisdale and from Pontrilas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition from concerned citizens to do with the 
overfishing at the Lake of the Prairies with nets. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 

and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Saltcoats, Bredenbury, and Churchbridge. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
condition and capacity of the Avonlea dam. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconstruct and expand the Avonlea dam to meet current 
water supply demands, allow for sufficient water supply to 
accommodate proposed economic developments, and 
reduce flooding that has caused significant hardship in 
previous years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
the tobacco legislation. And the prayers reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Stoughton, 
and Colfax. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life, and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Tugaske, Central Butte, Moose 
Jaw, Davidson, Eyebrow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition today 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

regards the legislation surrounding tobacco products in the 
province. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the good people of 
Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increased crop insurance 
premiums. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of North Battleford, Edam, 
Battleford, Saskatoon, and Dalmas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today of citizens concerned about Highway No. 
15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the citizens are all from the good community 
of Simpson. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following 
petitions have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning the reconstruction and expansion of 
the Avonlea dam; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 18, 23, 24, 31, 132, and 134. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 53 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Social Services minister: how many communities 
under the housing authority program have vacancies on its 
waiting list; and further to that, what are these 
communities? 
 
And also I have another question to the Social Services 
minister: how many communities under the housing 
authority program have waiting lists; and further to that, 
what are these communities and how many people in each 
community are on these waiting lists? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to the members of this legislature 
somebody who really needs very little introduction. The person 
I’m referring to is seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
an individual by the name of Dwain Lingenfelter. Please rise 
and give us a wave. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — As the current member for Regina 
Elphinstone, it’s a real pleasure and honour to introduce Dwain 
today and, again, if you could give him another round and 
maybe he’ll come back another time to visit us again soon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know when 
you’re in an airplane and you’re flying over Saskatoon and you 
see a big school with a big, beautiful, blue roof, you know 
you’re in the riding of Saskatoon Southeast. And in that school, 
Mr. Speaker, are 54 of the smartest, greatest, coolest students 
you will ever want to meet. And they are seated right now in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’m referring to the students of St. 
Luke School in the constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. 
 
Now I hope I’ve got all the adjectives right here. But I really 
want to add one adjective myself, and that is that they are also 
the most polite students that I have had the pleasure of meeting 
this session. And they are here to watch everyone behave 
equally politely during question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Muzzolini and Mr. Holowachuk, as well as the vice-principal 
— the new vice-principal — of St. Luke School, Mrs. Prytula. 
And they have with them chaperones, Mrs. Hebig and Mr. 
Meyers. 
 
As I said, they really probably don’t need chaperones because 
they are incredibly well behaved and good mannered. I would 
ask everyone to welcome these cool, smart, polite, bright 
students from St. Luke School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a number of officials representing 
the Saskatchewan Mining Association. This is, as members will 
know, Mining Week, a week in which we recognize the 
importance of the mining industry to our province, to the people 
who are directly and indirectly associated with the benefits it 
brings to Saskatchewan. 
 
In your gallery, and I’ll ask them to stand and be recognized, is 
Mr. Phil Reeves, the executive director; Mr. Al Shpyth, the 
chairman of the uranium section; Mr. Josef Spross, the past 
president; Mr. Moe Daveyduke, member at large; and Mr. 
Michael Hogan, who is the second vice-president. 
 
I ask all members to give these gentlemen who do so much for 
our province a very warm welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I also would like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly the mining people 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that all members of 
this Assembly will show them how much we appreciate the 
contribution they make to our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And in your gallery this afternoon there’s a gentlemen 
accompanied by a member of my staff, Marv Schultz. And this 
gentleman was raised on the family farm in the Last 
Mountain-Touchwood constituency, then went to the University 
of Regina where he completed bachelor’s and master’s degrees 
in engineering. 
 
He then moved to Manitoba with his family to take up a 
position with Unisystems and then Nortel. He has since 
returned to Regina and is the current vice-president of 
engineering for Access Communications. I’d ask Joe Toth to 
stand up. 
 
And more important to me, it is my cousin and I would ask all 
members to welcome him to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 15 students from the English as a second language 
class at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) in Regina. There are members seated in your 
gallery on the east side and a few of the students seated on the 
floor of the Assembly. They’re accompanied today by teacher, 
Ron Mang. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to meet with them and 
answer some of their questions — very good questions — 
before the bells rang to call us to the Assembly. And I know 
they are looking forward with interest to watch the proceedings 
on the floor this afternoon. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome the English as a second 

language students from SIAST. Please join me in giving them a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the member from Regina Wascana Plains in 
welcoming the students from SIAST. I hope that they have an 
interesting and informative visit here this afternoon. And I 
would once again ask members to join with me in welcoming 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Well-known Saskatoon Man Passes Away 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 
like to acknowledge the death of a very special person from 
Saskatoon and a personal friend of many of us in this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Hugh Arscott died Saturday evening of pancreatic 
cancer. A well-known storyteller, writer, political activist and 
business person, Hugh will be sadly missed by his family, 
friends, and the entire Saskatoon community. Hugh will be 
remembered for his humour and wit best exemplified by his 
affiliation with the Rhinoceros Party. Hugh used humour to 
make political points, and he always managed to find the lighter 
side of things when dealing with difficulty or tragedy. 
 
He authored Hugh’s Views which ran in The StarPhoenix for 
many years. We who knew him were amazed at his ability to 
keep one eye focused on so much. 
 
An active member within the Saskatoon community, Hugh 
volunteered in many organizations including the Saskatoon 
Foundation, the Kinsmen board, and the Salvation Army. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, Saskatchewan 
Party, and all members of the Legislative Assembly, I would 
like to express our sincerest condolences to Hugh Arscott’s 
family and friends. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Child Hunger Program Volunteers Honoured 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Today I want to recognize a very 
special group of volunteers. This past Saturday, the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Saskatoon Idylwyld 
and myself attended the Child Hunger and Education Program’s 
annual volunteer appreciation breakfast in Saskatoon. 
Saskatchewan people know the importance of volunteers to our 
communities. And the group of volunteers honoured at 
Saturday’s breakfast is no different. 
 
The Child Hunger and Education Program works with the 
Saskatoon community to achieve solutions to hunger and to 
improve access to nutritious food for all. CHEP (Child Hunger 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

and Education Program) programs emphasize nutritious food, 
promote nutrition education, encourage self-reliance, offer 
respect, and work collaboratively to address food security. 
 
(13:45) 
 
This year’s volunteers for CHEP will have donated almost 
42,000 hours of their time in providing one quarter of a million 
nutritious meals to children, coordinating and packing good 
food boxes, leading collective kitchen groups, and helping out 
at community garden sites. 
 
The hard work and selfless dedication of this group of 
volunteers continues to help make Saskatoon a strong and 
healthy community, as well as a great place to live. 
 
I invite all members of our House to join me in congratulating 
the Child Hunger and Education Program volunteers in 
Saskatoon for the commitment to their community and their 
endless efforts to help Saskatoon grow and prosper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mining Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
Mining Week in Saskatchewan. Mining is an industry that’s 
very important to our province and will also play an important 
role in our future. 
 
This industry contributes more than $2 billion to the province in 
terms of goods and services and wages. It paid out over $200 
million to the provincial government in taxes and royalties last 
year. And it also employs close to 20,000 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Mining Association reports that 
our province ranks fourth in Canada in terms of total value of 
mineral production. We are the world’s largest producer and 
exporter of both uranium and potash. We also have the largest 
reserves in the world of both of these commodities. 
 
The Saskatchewan Mining Association has numerous events 
planned for this week, one of which is the meeting this 
afternoon between the SMA (Saskatchewan Mining 
Association) and our caucus to discuss many issues of 
importance within the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House fully 
understand and appreciate what the mining industry does for 
this province and how much more it will be able to do under a 
Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to the statement by the 
member from Thunder Creek, a statement was made also by the 
member of Lloydminster announcing the beginning of Mining 
Week two weeks ago. 
 
Of course, Mining Week started yesterday, but that’s okay, Mr. 
Speaker, because jumping the gun on this case is perfectly 
understandable because mining is the most impressive record in 
this province. 

I want to echo the earlier remarks of the Minister of Industry 
and Resources, who in introducing our guests reminded us of 
how important mining is to us. And in particular, Mr. Speaker, 
how important mining is to the constituencies of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Over 17,000 people work directly and indirectly in the mining 
industry, and many of these workers are northern Aboriginal 
people. Take away mining and you take away a lot of what is 
significant for people in the North. The industry is to be 
commended for working directly with the government and our 
institutions to train and employ northerners. 
 
And as the minister said, overall the mining industry is clearly 
of great benefit to those in the provincial economy. But I want 
to emphasize a special relationship with the mining industry in 
the North. 
 
Approximately 80 per cent of the 900 northerners are First 
Nations and Métis people. There have been about $200 million 
worth of contracts and wages held by northern businesses. 
There are also three environmental quality committees. Mr. 
Speaker, the mining industry is tremendous for this province 
and is especially great for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just like to remind members 
that during members statements they are not to refer at all to 
any other member’s statements that have been made. 
 

Camp Wekando Held in Saskatoon 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
1996 my daughter Krystal was diagnosed with juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis. I am also aware that there are other 
members of the Legislative Assembly with family members 
who have rheumatic disease. 
 
To assist families of children with rheumatic disease, The 
Arthritis Society sponsored Camp Wekando on May 10 to 12 in 
Saskatoon. Parents were given an opportunity to network and 
meet with internationally recognized experts in the area of 
rheumatic disease. 
 
Some of these experts included Dr. Taunton Southwood, 
Department of Rheumatology, Birmingham University, United 
Kingdom; Dr. Ross Petty, British Columbia Children’s 
Hospital; Dr. Kiem Oen, University of Manitoba, and Dr. Ron 
Laxer, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario. 
 
A very inspirational speech was given on the Friday evening by 
Nicole Watt who herself, Mr. Speaker, was diagnosed with 
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. And after her speech she was 
promptly surrounded by autograph seekers. 
 
For the weekend events, a very special thank you should go to 
Joy Tappin, the Chair of the organizing committee. 
 
The camp activities over the weekend were enjoyed by children 
from all across Saskatchewan and pediatric rheumatologist Dr. 
Alan Rosenberg of Saskatchewan was the centre of attention for 
much of the weekend. Respected and revered by his colleagues, 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

 

valued and appreciated by his patients, Dr. Rosenberg was a 
key and integral part of the conference as he is in each one of 
his patients lives. 
 
I would ask everyone to join with me in thanking The Arthritis 
Society for their good, hard work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to take a moment to congratulate all those that were 
involved in yet another highly successful week, the week 
ending on Saturday, which is the 55th annual Yorkton Short 
Film and Video Festival. 
 
As you know our festival is the oldest continuous festival in 
North America and last year was given the outstanding cultural 
event award by Attractions Canada. 
 
Screening of the many films began late Monday in order to 
allow for the largest possible audience to view what is new, 
innovative, and exciting in short film. What is once a weekend 
festival is now a week-long affair. 
 
The focus of this year was on education and on new 
filmmakers; and there were workshops on directing, producing, 
scriptwriting, and animation all directed by a beginning artist. 
 
On the main three days of the weekend there were nine 
workshops as well as continuous screening, especially this year, 
of Saskatchewan made films. The prized Golden Sheaf Award 
ceremony was held on Saturday night with special guest Jeff 
Hutchenson from Canada AM. 
 
Among the winners was the film Christmas at Wapos Bay, 
which won the best Saskatchewan film and the best children’s 
production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the film festival president, Janet 
Hill, and all of her staff and volunteers, and urge all members 
next year to take some time out of their schedule to attend the 
56th edition of the Yorkton Short Film Video Festival. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Mrs. Cora Hansen 
on her 103rd Birthday 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize Mrs. Cora Hansen, a constituent of mine who 
recently turned 103 years old. 
 
Until this past December, Mrs. Hansen lived with her daughter, 
Eleanor, and her son-in-law, Alistair MacArthur, on a ranch 
near Sceptre. She now resides at the Western Senior Citizens 
Home in Leader. 
 
Mrs. Hansen was the proud recipient of a certificate recognizing 
her as a member of the Three Century Club having been born in 
1899, living through the entire 20th century, and now two years 

into the 21st century. 
 
I had the distinct pleasure to present Mrs. Hansen with her 
certificate in the summer of 2000, and at that time was very 
impressed with her excellent well-being, both physically and 
mentally. 
 
We all know the Three Century Club was initiated as a way to 
acknowledge a unique group of pioneer citizens, and Mrs. 
Hansen was one of 179 residents of this province to be so 
recognized. 
 
Her name has also been engraved on a bronze commemorative 
plaque unveiled on June 27 last year here at the Legislative 
Building. 
 
The future of our province has been built on the character and 
accomplishments of people like Mrs. Hansen, and I ask that 
members join me in recognizing her contributions to this 
province. 
 
Please join me in wishing her good health and happiness in the 
coming years. Congratulations, Cora Hansen, and happy 103rd 
birthday. We wish you more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Response to United States Farm Subsidies 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday 
Prairie leaders met with federal cabinet ministers in Saskatoon 
to discuss the federal government’s response to the US (United 
States) farm Bill. 
 
The meeting was encouraging as Ottawa is now acknowledging 
the need for new dollars. But it was discouraging to hear Lyle 
Vanclief continue to talk about a 60/40 cost share with the 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have mentioned before, North Dakota 
taxpayers are not picking up 40 per cent of the cost of the new 
US farm Bill, and Saskatchewan taxpayers should not be asked 
to pick up 40 per cent of any trade injury compensation here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of Ottawa’s responsibility for international trade, 
it is clear, the Saskatchewan Party has stated, that this latest 
attack on Canadian farmers is an international trade issue. It is a 
federal responsibility. 
 
I would ask the Premier: what further steps is the provincial 
government taking to make this point with the federal 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to echo the comments of the member opposite and the 
Leader of the Opposition who — I was pleased — at the 
meetings reiterated what he said here today, and that’s the 
importance that Saskatchewan and Canadian producers and 
Canadian provinces not participate in any of the share as it 



1580 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

relates to trade injury. 
 
And the message was loud and clear, Mr. Speaker, not only 
from the farm organizations and farm leaders, but also from the 
premiers, Mr. Speaker, who’ve also said that the responsibility 
of managing and handling trade injury needs to be that of the 
federal government. 
 
And our Premier, as you know, is on record now on several 
occasions indicating that this issue should be dealt with at the 
national level financially. Our Premier has had discussions now 
— and is having discussions now — with his colleagues across 
Canada to ensure that when this matter becomes part of the 
national debate with all premiers that the message will be 
conciliatory and solid, where all of the premiers across Canada 
will be calling for full participation by the national government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, of course there’s no disagreement between the 
opposition and the government as to the responsibility the 
federal government must entertain. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the part of the message that I don’t 
think that they wanted to hear on Friday, and they continue to 
treat this matter as though it was strictly a farm issue, perhaps 
even rolling it into the new ag framework which would mean 
the province could pick up as much as 40 per cent of the cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. Saskatchewan’s share of a 
$1.3 billion trade injury package would be about $500 million; 
so using Lyle Vanclief’s cost-sharing formula, Saskatchewan 
could . . . would perhaps have to pick up as much as $200 
million of that cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers should not be asked to 
pick up $200 million in injury payments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government’s responsibility is for 
international trade so what we want to know, and what 
Saskatchewan people want to know, is what is our provincial 
government doing to ensure that this cost is picked up solely by 
the federal government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what this government and 
this Premier and this Minister of Agriculture have been doing 
and saying now for the better part of 18 months or 20 months 
since we’ve been managing the agricultural file, is saying 
exactly what the member opposite, what the Leader of the 
Opposition is saying — that Canadians should be . . . that 
provinces should not be picking up any of the trade injury. 
 
We provided, Mr. Speaker, to the national government through 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture, a document, last 
February — not this past February, but a year ago February — 
which said to them this issue should be fully funded by the 
national government. 
 
Our Premier submitted a document in October of last year that 
said exactly the same thing, Mr. Speaker, that we should be 

seeing that the national government pick this up fully. 
 
I am absolutely delighted, Mr. Speaker, today to hear the 
Leader of the Opposition say again that he is on record and his 
party’s on record in supporting the national government’s 
picking up the full amount of the cost of the trade injury by the 
provinces. And I know that he’s supporting the work of the 
Premier, and I appreciate that a whole lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care for Children 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s to the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, Today’s 
Parent is a national magazine dealing with the issues 
surrounding parenting of children and their families in Canada. 
It’s a national magazine that deals with many topics of interest 
to young families. 
 
And in the June of this year’s issue, the current issue, they have 
a headline exclusive, “Health Care in Canada, How does your 
province rank?” And the article asks a very simple, fundamental 
question. It said, which province delivers the best health care to 
kids and their families? 
 
Simple question, Mr. Speaker, and guess how they ranked our 
province? You think we finished first? No. Do you thing we 
finished second? No. Third? Fourth? Fifth? Or even in the 
middle of the pack? No. Mr. Speaker, again by another national 
rating mechanism, Saskatchewan is dead last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health answer the question of 
isn’t he embarrassed that we continue to rank dead last on so 
many indicators? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this province we’re 
working together with the people of the province to make sure 
that our health system provides the services that we need across 
the country. One of the challenges that we face is the fact that 
now and again, institutes like the Fraser Institute use some 
anecdotal evidence to try to analyze what’s happening in our 
system. Unfortunately Today’s Parent used the Fraser Institute 
information to build some of what they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what we need to do here in Saskatchewan 
and together with our Prairie provinces and our Western 
provinces, we need to work together around how we provide the 
services because the people of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Western Canada want to know that we’re working together to 
provide the best services possible for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Chair, the Minister of Health should be 
apologizing to the people of Saskatchewan rather than 
ridiculing the Today’s Parent magazine and the work that 
they’ve done. 
 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

 

Mr. Speaker, the journalists who researched this article looked 
at several factors to determine how the province ranks in terms 
of health care delivery for children and their families. The 
article states, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan, the birthplace of medicare, hit the bottom of 
our comparative barrel with the highest infant mortality and 
the worst treatment referral waiting lists. 

 
Mr. Speaker, other factors were considered by the authors were 
the number of general practitioners working in the population, 
child mortality, asthma rates, and the percentage of the public 
sector spent on health spending. Mr. Speaker, they conducted 
that Saskatchewan spends the second highest per capita amount 
on health and yet we finished dead last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why he’s getting so little 
value for the money Saskatchewan taxpayers are spending to 
end up always last? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the reporter in 
this particular article used the infant mortality rates from 1997, 
which were 8.9 infant deaths per 1,000. If he would have used 
the figures for 1999, which is, I think is one of the more recent 
reports, it would have shown it was 6.3 per 1,000. And basically 
what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to work with all 
of the people in this province to make sure that we have a good 
health system. 
 
What I say, Mr. Speaker, where is that party on health issues? 
What are they going to do? In their ’99 plan, it was to do an 
audit, freeze the costs, and try to figure out what they were 
going to do from there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will work with the people in our province to 
make sure that we have the best health system possible and we 
will continue to do that along with the people who know what 
our system is like, not some others who are taking potshots 
from the side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this magazine looks at 
comparative analysis across this country. And in any analysis 
that happens, time after time and time after again, by different 
analysis systems, Saskatchewan always finishes dead last. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be a bit of a contradiction that 
we’re always last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it makes sense that we start dealing with the 
fundamental issues of our province — the economic, the health 
issues, opportunities for people in our province — so that the 
article’s point is saying that we’ve got to turn around the 
fundamentals of this province if we’re going to get it out of this 
mess that we’re constantly in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, instead of the government 
always questioning valid articles and organizations that 
question the government, why don’t they do something about 

fixing the fundamental indicators that are ending up with us 
being dead last time and time again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of ways 
of looking at some of these issues. 
 
We know, on a national basis, Saskatchewan is the only 
province where child poverty has decreased in the last number 
of years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that when 
Maclean’s magazine did a review of the health systems across 
the country by looking at various cities, that both Saskatoon and 
Regina did very well, but Saskatoon did very, very well in that 
kind of a review. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work 
with all of the people involved in the health care system and 
make sure that they get the kinds of support that they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask those members opposite to be part of the 
positive, building party that we’re . . . we are part of on this 
side, not the negative, tear down and throw away 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We believe in Saskatchewan. We want Saskatchewan to grow. 
We want Saskatchewan to be a place for all of our 
grandchildren. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Processing of Claims for No-fault Insurance 
and Workers’ Compensation 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
No-fault insurance is another example, Mr. Speaker, of the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government making bad public 
policy. Now, in what appears to be yet another problem, many 
people who file no-fault insurance claims are complaining that 
the NDP government is conducting criminal background checks 
without their knowledge or permission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it true that the NDP government routinely 
conducts criminal background checks on people who file 
no-fault insurance claims with SGI without their permission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
am aware, certainly, that SGI does investigations. It’s part of 
ensuring that insurance fraud doesn’t take place. They also look 
to recover stolen vehicles in a number of instances, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m aware that SGI does do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Short answer but it 
wasn’t to the question — a very simple question. The question 
is this, Mr. Speaker: does SGI conduct criminal background 
checks on no-fault insurance victims without their permission? 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I have been advised as 
well that certainly when there’s issues . . . instances of fraud, 
that they believe fraud is taking place, I would believe that the 
individual may not be aware the checks are being done. But 
certainly this is nothing different than any other public or 
private insurance company would conduct and it’s done under 
very strict regulations and very tight controls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the answer to 
people who file with no-fault insurance is that they have a 
check done without their permission no matter how the weasel 
words came out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people don’t have a choice when it 
comes to vehicle insurance; they have to deal with SGI. And 
when they deal with SGI they get no-fault insurance. Now we 
found out the NDP routinely conducts criminal background 
checks on SGI no-fault insurance claimants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the NDP carry out these criminal 
background checks, and who is doing these investigations? Are 
the NDP’s no-fault insurance investigations being conducted by 
SGI staff or are the criminal background checks in the no-fault 
investigations contracted out to private investigators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I would be advised as well 
that these checks are not routine as the member opposite would 
describe. These checks would be done in situations where it is 
believed that there has been insurance fraud, Mr. Speaker, 
where stolen property or stolen vehicles would be involved, Mr. 
Speaker, but it would not be as a matter of routine course, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The story gets more 
interesting all the time. First we find out that the NDP routinely 
conducts criminal background checks on no-fault insurance 
claimants, then we find out that these criminal background . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Used to be a story told in this place, Mr. 
Speaker, about a stone being thrown and a lot of yipping going 
on. I think it applies. 
 
Then we find out that these background checks are done 
without the permission of the no-fault claimant. And now we 
find out that the NDP contracts out the no-fault investigations to 
private investigators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of running undercover investigations 
and performing criminal background checks on Saskatchewan 
citizens who make no-fault claims, do private investigators gain 
access to CPIC (Canadian Police Information Centre) or any 
other personal or confidential information held by the 
government on people who make no-fault insurance claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks do . . . 
does SGI have the opportunity to access CPIC in order to 
conduct investigations of insurance fraud and the recovery of 

stolen vehicles, which is what they would use it for. The answer 
is yes, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
checked with every single insurance company in the country, he 
would see that their investigators have exactly the same powers. 
 
And would the member have it any differently, Mr. Speaker? 
Would he want SGI to be paying out in the event of fraud by 
claimants? Or would he want it to be handled in a businesslike 
way which is what takes place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, short 
question: has the NDP government hired Robinson 
Investigations to run surveillance or otherwise investigate 
Saskatchewan residents who make SGI no-fault insurance 
claims? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I have been advised that 
they have been . . . that Robinson has been employed by SGI. 
But in response to the specific question I would have to take 
that question under advisement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I am sure they’re not fixing 
fenders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my next question is for the minister responsible 
for Workers’ Compensation Board: if SGI is running 
background checks and hiring private investigators to spy on 
Saskatchewan residents who make no-fault insurance claims, it 
makes you wonder what other NDP organizations routinely run 
criminal background checks and hire private investigators to 
spy on Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister responsible for the WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) assure the legislature and the 
people of Saskatchewan that the Workers’ Compensation Board 
does not access personal information such as CPIC records or 
conduct criminal background checks without notifying and then 
getting the permission of the WCB claimants that they are 
investigating? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the question that the 
member opposite asks is fairly in depth and in detail so I will 
take it under advisement and get him an answer when I can. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, does the WCB hire 
private investigators to run surveillance or otherwise investigate 
on WCB claimants? And if so, is Robinson Investigations one 
of the private investigation firms the WCB contracts with to 
perform these investigations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as I said just two minutes 
ago, it is a fairly in-depth and detailed question. And I will take 
it under advisement and I will take notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We found out from SGI that they’re spying 
on Saskatchewan citizens. We got a good clue from WCB that 
they’re spying on Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. To the boss, the 
Premier: how many other government organizations are spying 
on the citizens of Saskatchewan? 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
should be careful about what he’s saying. First of all, he’s 
misrepresenting what the member, what the minister for SGI 
said. There is no wholesale, willy-nilly investigation of people 
in this province. 
 
If fraud is suspected, Mr. Speaker, if crimes are suspected, then 
surely it’s proper that this government take every steps it can, 
on behalf of the people of the province, to make sure that 
money is invested and paid out in an appropriate way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If the member were to have it any other way, Mr. Speaker, let 
him suggest that we should not expose those people who are 
committing crimes against SGI, against Workers’ 
Compensation Board, against any other, against any other 
organization, Mr. Speaker. Because it is not, Mr. Speaker, the 
member’s money, it is not our money, it is the money of the 
people of Saskatchewan at stake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assistance to Municipalities for Firefighting 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Municipal Government. The 
extremely dry conditions across the province have increased the 
concerns about forest and grass fires in most Saskatchewan 
rural municipalities, towns, and villages. 
 
The dry conditions combined with the high winds carried 
several grass fires great distances last week. The town of 
Archerwill, Mr. Speaker, was directly affected by fire, as were 
surrounding municipalities. Without lots of wet weather in the 
near future, these conditions and the devastation caused by fire 
will not change. RMs (rural municipality) and towns incur 
considerable expense to fight fires like the one that affected 
Archerwill last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what funding might be 
available from the government to help rural municipalities and 
their residents fight fires? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that 
the fire situation in the province of Saskatchewan is drastic. 
There are many villages, there are many RMs, there are many 
forests that are under threat. And as we speak we have many 
firefighters and many pieces of equipment working on trying to 
contain some of these fires. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would assure that member that we are 
working with many RMs. As many people know, The Prairie 
and Forest Fires Act does not mandate SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) to fight fires in the 
RM areas. 
 
What we do, Mr. Speaker, is on a case by case basis we work 

with the RMs. We sit down with them. We discuss how we’re 
able to assist them to make sure we’re able to fight the battles 
and fight the blazes that are out there, alongside of many RMs. 
And I can point out, Mr. Speaker, that that co-operation 
between the RMs and certainly the SERM firefighting staff is 
very good. 
 
We’re facing some tinder dry conditions and strong winds, so 
there is no question it is a very tough place to be now. But we’ll 
work with the RMs. We’ll stand beside them and, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll do all that we can. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, my next question is for the Premier or his designate. 
 
The Premier visited Nipawin just over a week ago and 
personally witnessed the damage caused by fire in the 
community and one neighbouring RM. At the time the Premier 
told the media a financial contribution from the province is 
appropriate and that the government would be very flexible. 
 
The damage the community of Archerwill and its surrounding 
area experienced was no less devastating, yet the Premier has 
not offered to visit that community. And he certainly hasn’t 
offered any financial help to help with the costs incurred by the 
fires they had to fight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was the Premier making policy on the fly during 
his Nipawin visit? How much is the government planning on 
contributing to the costs in fighting the Nipawin fire? And will 
other communities and RMs be eligible to receive provincial 
assistance to help with the cost of firefighting during this 
excessively dry season? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, as I pointed 
out, the Premier has made many visits to many sites in this 
province. And certainly as his visit to Nipawin, if he were to 
visit some of the forest fire areas, Mr. Speaker, he’d be in the 
air steady. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned, there are fires 
throughout the province raging as we speak now. 
 
And I would point out to that member when their . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier 
went to visit Nipawin, he understood and he assessed at that 
time, Mr. Speaker, that there was a devastating loss to the 
community. There was a huge employment industry that was 
burned to the ground. He understood that he had to go there and 
he had to go and help the people as much as he can, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what he does not do, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t fly around, 
make policy as he flies around viewing some of the challenges 
that this province has. 
 
When he went to Nipawin as a case, Mr. Speaker, on a case by 
case basis, we look at how we’re able to assist. And that goes 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

with firefighting and certainly that goes with trying to respond 
to some of the community’s needs in the event that they’ve 
gone through a devastating loss. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, shame on that member trying to play 
politics with the fact that the Premier went out, toured, and 
offered to help Nipawin. I say good for Nipawin, good for the 
Premier, and good for this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think we all understand on this side of the House 
why the Premier ended up in Nipawin. It was going to be as hot 
in here for him at that time as the fire was in Nipawin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — We know full well, Mr. Speaker, that that’s 
why that Premier headed out there and that’s why he was 
making policy on the fly and he offered to pay Nipawin some 
money. Now that’s fine, Mr. Speaker, but what about other 
communities, other RMs in this province, that also need help 
from that wee Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fire at Archerwill I understand is burning 
again today. It’s relit and it’s burning. The water bombers are 
fighting. Archerwill will need financial help also. Will the 
Premier go to Archerwill now and take a look at their fire? 
 
And does he promise to go around the province to where there’s 
been other fires? And does he promise to go to other 
communities where new fires are going to pop up and will they 
be receiving government help, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister 
responsible for the provincial disaster assistance program, I’m 
pleased to take this question today. I think all members are 
aware that we do in fact have funding in place in certain 
circumstances. We have made sure that we’ve got a coordinated 
response from the government. 
 
But what I want to say to that member opposite who politicks 
on the floor of this House about the fire situation is be very 
careful because you don’t want to find yourself in the same 
position . . . the member does not want to find himself in the 
same position as the member who represents Archerwill and 
found herself apologizing for misinformation put forward in 
that community. 
 
We should take a circumspect response. We should make sure 
we provide the information to the communities. We should 
make sure we work it through the disaster program and not to 
confuse the issue and play politics like the members opposite 
want to. 
 
Let’s stick with what we know and that is how to go and work 
with these communities, coordinate the response, and respond 
appropriately, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New School Facility Planned for Ile-a-la-Crosse 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. This morning I had the opportunity to participate 
in a very exciting event for northern Saskatchewan. I joined 
with special guests Dr. Bill Duffee, director of education; the 
secretary-treasurer of the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division, 
Kamal Fichtali; William Caisse, the Deputy Chair of 
Ile-a-la-Cross School Board; principal Barb Morin; Mayor Max 
Morin; and my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Northern Affairs 
and MLA for Athabasca, to deliver some very exciting news to 
the students of Rossignal School. 
 
I was very pleased to announce that the approval for a new high 
school in Ile-a-la-Crosse and 100,000 in funding for the 
planning and design of the new school in Ile-a-la-Crosse. The 
results will be plans for a top quality learning environment for 
students in that community, Mr. Speaker. Construction costs for 
the new school will be determined during the planning phase 
and the costs will be shared by the department and the 
Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Rossignal High School has served that 
community well for close to 50 years. However, the time has 
come to provide senior students with a more modern education 
facility, a facility that has the potential to include space for a 
community school program and initiatives such as a nutrition 
program and day care. 
 
The Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division shares with us a common 
determination to ensure safe and functional learning 
environments for students and teachers throughout 
Saskatchewan. Above all else, we are focused on meeting the 
needs of all young people in Ile-a-la-Crosse and across 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There has been discussion among various interested parties 
regarding the high school being incorporated into a joint use 
facility. Sharing resources is an excellent way to benefit 
everyone in the community and is part of the overall vision of 
SchoolPLUS. 
 
Capital projects are a priority for the government. With the 45 
million in the Department of Learning capital budget, including 
the 5 million from the Centenary Fund, Mr. Speaker, 
approximately 140 school construction, renovation, or 
upgrading projects will be funded in communities around the 
province this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The new Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation makes 
it possible for communities such as Ile-a-la-Crosse to benefit 
from the building of new facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are investing in schools, in students, and in the 
future of Saskatchewan. Together we are building a school 
system that future generations that will thank us for. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
today to respond to the ministerial statement, and I thank the 
minister for sending it over. 
 
On behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, we congratulate the 
people of Ile-a-la-Crosse for their commitment to learning for 
the children in their community. I had the opportunity to visit 
Ile-a-la-Crosse school when the now Minister of Northern 
Affairs, the Hon. Buckley Belanger, was in opposition to this 
government. 
 
Role of the School and SchoolPLUS speak . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to caution the member about using 
names while she’s in debate. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Role of the School and SchoolPLUS speak adamantly about 
the importance of community schools and the concept of 
interdepartmental co-operation. I’m pleased to hear that the 
facility is being considered as a potential place for making this 
facility a community school. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party also congratulates the citizens of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse for considering the prospect of being a joint use 
facility. Making the best use of taxpayers’ dollars is a must as 
we juggle the money the taxpayers put forward into billing the 
infrastructure we need to grow the whole province. 
 
Saskatchewan Party recognizes the need for educated skilled 
workforces to grow the province. Our northern communities 
will play an important part in growing Saskatchewan and 
building educational facilities is good news for the whole 
province. 
 
The 140 communities that the minister discusses as being part 
of the capital project fund this year will be interested in hearing 
who’s next on the list and I’m sure we’re all waiting with bated 
breath to see where the minister will go next. Congratulations to 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
on his feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and members. I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to the rest of this House a long-time friend of mine, John 
Barber. 
 
John is a Winnipeg lawyer. He’s a farmer. John’s father was a 
minister at Wesley United Church in Prince Albert for many 
years. 
 
And he’s seated up in your gallery beside the Minister of 

Education’s cousin. And so I’d like to express our welcome to 
John to our legislature. He’s here in the city on business and I 
would ask all members to join me in welcoming him here to 
this legislature. 
 
One other . . . thank you. One other thing, Mr. Speaker, is that 
he did appear in this legislature once before. He too is a 
member of the youth parliament in his background. So welcome 
to John. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand on behalf of the 
government today to table written responses . . . response to 
written questions 205, 206, 207, 209, and 2010 . . . or 209, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 205, 206, 208 . . . 
Pardon me — 205, 206, 207, and 209 have been tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will convert for 
debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 208 converted to a motion for return 
debatable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Agriculture to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I have with me today the 
assistant deputy minister, Mr. Hal Cushon. And seated behind 
Hal is the director of financial services . . . financial services 
branch, is Dave Boehm. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I welcome the 
minister and his officials as well today. 
 
The first question that I have on this Bill is that I was 
wondering if the minister could tell us if there are any specific 
incidents that prompted this amendment to the Bill as far as 
cattle being seized because of an individual’s debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the answer 
would be that, no, that there were not. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is it then or 
which interest group requested that this amendment be made if 
there was indeed not any particular incident that had created this 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

difficulty? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the groups that 
have asked for these changes were the Cattle Feeders 
Association, the producers advisory committee, and the lenders, 
of whom we’ve been meeting with on a regular basis. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is the reason why 
they’re asking for this is the concern of what may happen in the 
case that a particular member in a cattle feeders association had 
a debt and the cattle in the association could be seized? Or, like, 
were they concerned about a possibility of it happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I just want to 
read a section out of the second reading speech which I think 
would be helpful in terms of identifying why it is that we are 
introducing the amendments. And by and large, the largest 
piece here is to allow the corporations that operate feedlots to 
be eligible for membership within the association. That would 
be really the key piece here. 
 
Which Bill are we on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’re on 
The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act (No. 2). That’s 
the piece of legislation that we’re working on here. 
 
Maybe we could have Mr. Chair just clarify the piece of 
legislation that we’re working on. 
 
The Chair: — I have Bill No. 12, An Act to amend The Farm 
Financial Stability Act — item 12, Bill No. 12. The committee 
will take a brief pause while we double-check something. 
 
Order. After consultations it’s reaffirmed that we are on item 
no. 12, Bill No. 12, An Act to amend The Farm Financial 
Stability Act. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Okay, now that there no longer seems to be 
any confusion, I hope, could the minister please tell us if there 
are any specific incidents that prompted this amendment as far 
as cattle being seized because of individual debts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I can understand now, Mr. Chair, why the 
member was concerned about my later answer because we’re 
now on the same Act, I can see. And the answer to the member, 
Mr. Chair, is yes. My answer to the last question was no, my 
answer to this question is yes. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for now giving the 
correct answer. How many producer associations are in place 
that will be affected by this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — There are, Mr. Chair, 128 producer 
associations in the province and it would impact them all. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Now you had mentioned earlier a number of 
organizations that had asked for this Bill, except that it wasn’t 
necessarily this Bill. So can you describe the discussions that 
the government has had on these changes, over what period of 
time, and with what special interests are the ones that came 
forward and requested that these changes be made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, it would 
be the same groups of individuals whom we had spoken with. 

And the producer advisory committee would be really the lead 
on this, who would be asking us to make some changes to this 
piece of legislation. Also, cattle feeders would also be the other 
group. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. If I’m understanding 
the Bill correctly, what the amendments will do, it will protect 
feeder associations from individual member’s creditors so that 
the producer or the feeder association is not liable for any one 
particular member’s bad debt. 
 
But then the producers in the feeder association will no longer 
have legal ownership of the cattle that’s in the association. Am I 
understanding the Bill correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the member is correct in 
assuming that it clarifies that the association is in fact now the 
owner. And the liability then would be to the association. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. What is the implication then of 
the . . . What is the tax implications of this type of arrangement? 
Because a lot of producers get involved with feeder 
associations. They buy the cattle and they use the cattle as a tax 
write off or a tax expense in their income tax for income tax 
purposes. 
 
So in changing this legislation where the association is the 
owner of the cattle, what implication does that have on the 
producer’s income tax with Revenue Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that this doesn’t 
change the tax implications at all. We were of the impression or 
the opinion, I think all the time, that the association was the 
owner of the livestock and the, of course, the couple of court 
cases which the member’s aware of has raised the issue as to 
why . . . and this is why we’re bringing the legislation forward 
today. So there should be, as I’m advised, no implications to the 
tax. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. A question to the 
minister concerning the tax implication. The way the Act read 
before, the association was the trustee of the cattle and the 
individual owned the cattle. Now the association owns the 
cattle. So if the individual does not own the cattle, the minister 
is saying that it still does not affect the tax implication. 
 
But I’d like to know if the minister has got a ruling from 
Revenue Canada concerning that change in the Act and how it 
will affect the Act concerning the individual’s tax position by 
buying cattle and using that cattle purchase as an expense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member. The 
member raises the question and clearly there was identified by 
the producer advisory committee that there is risk in making 
this kind of a change. There’s no question about that. But what 
the cattle . . . or what the producer advisory committee was 
more concerned about here is that the cattle can’t be seized out 
from under them. And this is why they were really seeking to 
make the change. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that and 
there was definitely a concern about the concerns of producers 
having the cattle seized and it’s very important that we make 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

 

the change. 
 
But my question again goes to the tax implication. Because it’s 
very serious for a producer who goes on the understanding that 
they can purchase cattle through the feeder association loan 
guarantee program and using it as an expense and find out a 
number of years later, maybe five years later, that the Revenue 
Canada has come back and said they . . . that was a . . . not an 
appropriate expenditure, and then be in the position of having to 
pay a tremendous amount of taxation because of that concern. 
 
I was just wondering again if the minister has asked the 
provincial revenue Finance department about . . . if they’ve had 
a . . . their opinion on that and also if they’ve spoken to 
Revenue Canada about that concern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, the member raises a 
very important question. And I might say to the member that 
we’ve had some very generic conversations of course with the 
producer advisory committee and with the departments that are 
responsible that the minister identifies as it relates to the 
taxation issue. And the producer advisory committee raised this 
issue as well with us, or we raised it with them, in terms of it 
being a risk. 
 
It was their view that the risk was . . . was needed to be taken 
because of the seizures around the livestock. And so what 
we’ve decided, Mr. Speaker, is to bring the legislation forward 
in the way in which we have if the . . . with the intention here 
that we’re leading with making sure that we provide the 
securities first and then the financial implications that the 
member raises were of the view . . . will be . . . will remain as 
they are currently under the current status. 
 
We recognize however that there may be implications down the 
road. But Revenue Canada, we’re somewhat hesitant if I might 
say to draw this immediately to their attention today. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I appreciate 
what you said. My concern is that the producers in the province 
really won’t know what to do this fall when they’re buying 
livestock or making their tax decisions. 
 
And I understand what the minister is saying about that, but it’s 
just another area that’s left wide open for interpretation. And I 
know in these matters someone will have to fight the battle all 
the way to the Supreme Court in order to get a ruling or a 
decision. 
 
But it certainly leaves the industry at a disadvantage having this 
uncertainty about the tax implications of this change in the Bill. 
And as we all know we agree on both sides, it’s very important 
that the feeder loan guarantee is an important part of the process 
of the need to grow the livestock industry in the province. 
 
So I hesitate to just leave it, you know, at the . . . leave it up to 
future rulings even though we know there is a definite need to 
look after the ownership concern as far as being . . . as far as 
other losses in an individual’s operation or debts. 
 
And so once again I’d just like to ask the minister if there’s a 

clarification of that, or is there any future thought to really 
closing that loophole, I guess you might say, and leaving the 
producer in the full knowledge of where he stands as far as the 
tax implication and his decisions that the producer will be 
making this fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, 
that there’s no question, as I’ve said already in my comments, 
that the producer advisory group saw that this was going to be a 
issue and could very well be an issue and that there may be 
greater risk here. There was never, ever a challenge, as I 
understand it, and the term trustee . . . under the term trustee, 
there was in our view still a grey area although it was never, 
ever tested, as we understand it. 
 
And so when we went to the producer advisory group to 
provide us with the kinds of recommendation that we wanted on 
this piece, they remained convinced that we would be in a better 
position to change the language in the way in which we’ve 
changed the language, and then remove the need for the 
registration under the Properties Securities Act and then ensure 
that we don’t get ourselves into the kind of situations that we’ve 
been in the past where we’ve actually had losses to the 
individual producers. 
 
And that was the advice that they provided to us and it’s on that 
basis from which we bring forward the recommendations or the 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair. To the minister, did 
your department, did the minister’s department look at any 
other alternatives as far as changes to the Act that would look 
after the concerns about cattle being seized from the feeder 
association while still leaving the feeder association cattle in a 
position to be used as an expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, 
that when we looked at the changes to this piece of legislation 
with the producer organizations, it’s my view and my 
understanding today that there just were not other, any other 
areas of which we might be able to have found the solution to 
the question that the member raises in terms of ownership 
versus liability. 
 
And the reality there is, is that they’re both sort of mutual 
exclusive to one another. And when we go to proceed with the 
amendments, clearly the lesser risk — if I might put it that way 
— was the recommendation to proceed down this particular 
path. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, did the 
minister or your officials speak to the Alberta government 
concerning the feeder association loan guarantee that is run in 
Alberta? They’ve had a plan in place much longer than we have 
in Saskatchewan. Have they made similar changes to the 
ownership aspect of the cattle to ward off any seizures of cattle? 
And did you ask their opinion of . . . or how are they handling 
the taxation concerns and issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I should say to the member opposite that 
in Alberta’s case, they have not done anything with their current 
legislation. It remains as ours was. And so the issue here is the 
cost of registering — remains the expense in Alberta with the 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

Alberta farmer. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan, what the producer advisory committee 
said to us is that we should fix it and this is the way in which 
they recommended that we should fix it. And I know if the 
member asked the question further about what happens as it 
relates to claiming the expenditures with Revenue Canada, the 
recommendation that’s come to us from the producer advisory 
committee is that we should then take it up with Revenue 
Canada at that particular time or make the amendments that 
might be necessary if there are any to address the kinds of issue 
that the member raises with me. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: are 
there any other changes in this legislation that has, in effect, a 
lot of changes of ownership of the cattle? Is there any other 
effects that this change will have on ownership rights of the 
association or the individual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials tell me that it only 
does . . . this Act does really two things: that it confirms 
ownership by the association; and secondly, it exempts under 
The Personal Property Security Act. And that’s really the only 
two issues that remain that this legislation touches. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Just one more follow-up question, Mr. Chair, 
to the minister. I believe you are also adding provisions that 
will allow other commodities to come under the auspices of 
these producer associations. Can you tell us what these 
commodities will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, this issue really is a 
housekeeping issue which allows us to define other 
commodities, which would be not only cattle but certainly bison 
and sheep and other livestock that we might want to include in 
the future under this particular program. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, were some of these changes brought about with the 
situation that happened on the east side of the province? I can’t 
remember the exact name of that co-op but I think you’re well 
aware of what I’m talking about. Were some of these changes 
brought about with that situation that happened out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I’m told that it’s other 
associations of which, not the one that I think the member is 
thinking about — I think we’re thinking about the same one on 
our side of the province. It’s not that one, there was another 
situation where that was the case. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to 
the minister again then. The changes that have been made or 
that you’re proposing and we’ll pass today probably, would that 
have made a difference to that co-op out there? 
 
Because I think we all understand the situation that many local 
cattlemen out in that area were caught in and, I mean, I know 
the minister is well aware that many farmers out there lost a pile 
of money when that co-op went under. Would some of these 
changes have actually made the situation better for those 
farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m told that this wouldn’t have 

necessarily assisted with the situation we’re talking about 
because what we had there was a situation or case of fraud, and 
this piece of legislation would not address that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I see here and I know that the government guarantees 
25 per cent of the association’s loan. In the case in my area 
then, did the government lose dollars when that association 
went down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer would be that we did, yes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I 
wonder how many dollars would we have lost as a government 
at that point? Do we have those figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, we don’t have 
the exact number with us here today, but what we’ll do is 
provide that for them because there was a number of 
associations, a number of feeders that were affected here, and 
we could provide that for the member. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, once again. 
And I don’t know how strongly I can put . . . And I’m sure 
you’re well aware, I think you’ve talked to many of the farmers 
out in that area, I know some of them very well that were burnt 
very badly with what happened out there. 
 
Are we thinking or have they even asked of the associations — 
because I like this program, it’s a very good program that’s 
helped a lot of farmers — have any of the associations asked to 
fill some of the loopholes that caused the problem that 
happened out there? And I think we understand some probably 
was human error in some parts, but there still have to be 
loopholes to let this situation grow like it did on my side of the 
province. 
 
Many farmers that are in this situation buying cattle certainly 
can’t afford to lose the equity that they’ve built up in here. In a 
way it’s somewhat of a pension for them, to the point when they 
retire that that money would probably be sitting there. And 
many of those farmers, Mr. Minister, as you’re well aware, 
have lost that money. 
 
So I’m wondering if the association themselves have asked to 
have some changes brought in that would guarantee that when 
an association is caught in this situation or maybe would 
prevent an association from being caught in this position, have 
any of those suggestions been brought forward to you, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The 
member raises a very important point and we’ve now had two 
different kinds of conversations — one with the producer 
associations and clearly, within our own department. 
 
We think that issues like the one we’re talking about — you and 
I are familiar with — could have been prevented maybe if we 
would have had a bit stronger due diligence on both fronts 
where you might have had a little stronger due diligence on the 
part of the association. 
 
And clearly what we have done is we’ve upped our inspection 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

 

processes as well because we think that, you know, by 
increasing the amount of inspection that we do, that would . . . 
could prevent the kinds of situations that we’ve recognized on 
our part of the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I would hope . . . I mean we all don’t want regulations 
just for the sake of regulations. But I saw the hurt, and I believe 
you understand in a number of areas where it may have put 
farmers right under and others, I know it put them up against 
the wall what happened out there. So I sympathize with those 
families, those farm families out there, as I’m sure you do. So 
thank you for your answers. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I have one other 
question. My understanding in Manitoba with feeder 
associations, that it’s mandatory that they register a PPSA 
(personal property security agreement). And that’s sort of how 
they’ve dealt with this problem. 
 
Was that something that was discussed when you were meeting 
with the groups that are interested in this particular piece of 
legislation as an option that could be considered, that that 
became mandatory for the members of a feeder association? 
Maybe that could help solve both of the problems of the 
Revenue Canada situation and also the creditor situation for 
each individual member. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, the answer to the 
question is that we did pursue that, of course, and did have that 
conversation with them. They didn’t want to go there. The 
Advisory Committee didn’t want to go there because, as I said 
earlier, this is an expense to the associations and they just didn’t 
want to go through that process. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I have no further 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under it’s title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 

Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — Would the minister please introduce his officials 
to the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The 
officials that are with me: to my immediate right is Mr. Hal 
Cushon, who is the assistant deputy minister; seated right 
behind me is Ms. Louise Greenberg, who is the assistant deputy 
minister, programs and services division; I think Mr. Jack Zepp 
is directly behind Mr. Cushon; and off to my right is Mr. Ross 
Johnson, who is the budget officer of administrative services 
branch. Seated in the back area is Greg Haase, who is the 
director of lands branch; and Mr. Dave Boehm, who is the 
acting director of financial programs branch. And those are my 
officials that are with me at the current time, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, I want to start some 
questioning on budget estimates by referring you to page 30 of 
the budget document. 
 
And I had asked you earlier on in the Assembly through a 
written question whether or not the waterfowl damage 
compensation program would be administered this year and 
there would be funding for it, as well as the big game damage 
compensation program, and you did answer me to the 
affirmative that, yes, it would. I find it a bit puzzling because in 
looking at page 30 of the document, I see that estimated for 
2002-2003 are zero dollars for these programs. 
 
So in regards to your answer to me in the affirmative that this 
program . . . these programs would still be in place and funding 
would be there for them, I have to ask you, if there is no money 
estimated through the crop insurance portion of Agriculture and 
Food for this, where will the money be coming from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, we answered 
affirmative, as you’ve said, to both of the funds because they 
remain intact. In both of the reserves we have substantive 
money to look after the fund, and that’s why in this year when 
we were budgeting we didn’t add any additional dollars to 
either one of the funds because we can manage those funds 
nicely with the reserves that are in place. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, I thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that it just 
would have provided some clarity not only to members on this 
side of the House, but to people throughout the province, in 
fact, that are concerned about this if in fact you would have had 
an estimate of what kind of money is going to be utilized for 
this year or what’s going to be needed. 
 
Is this a practice, Mr. Minister, of your government that if you 
have extra reserve funds from the previous year that you do not 
enter into the budget estimates for the current year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — If we are of the view that we have a 
program that would be actuarially sound in terms of managing 
it through a course of the given year that we’re going into, then 
we wouldn’t . . . we would not identify any new dollars going to 
it. If the member’s suggesting that in the reporting process we 
should be showing somewhere what the level of the reserves 
might be, I certainly would take that under advisement. 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d just 
like to move over to the situation that we have in the province 
right now, the situation of drought that we have been speaking 
about in this Assembly and certainly citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan are very, very concerned about it this time. 
 
It doesn’t matter, it seems, that . . . there’s many, many issues 
actually that are confronting farmers right now and it’s very 
worrisome. But over a great part of our landscape in the 
province there is a major drought going on. The grass is yet 
very, very brown and the topsoil is blowing. Many farmers are 
reseeding or thinking of having to reseed, and they’re concerned 
about their ability and their viability to keep on in the future. 
 
But in respect to that, Mr. Minister, there have been a couple of 
programs, I know, that have been put in place. And one of them 
is the Canada-Saskatchewan livestock farm water program last 
year. Could you advise me, Mr. Minister, whether or not this 
program is going to be extended into this current year and give 
me some sort of prognosis about how long the monies for this 
program will be available to farmers in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The monies that the member is talking 
about is funds that we were able to extract last year from the 
federal government through the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) program. As the member is 
likely familiar, what we tried to do last fall is encourage the . . . 
and summer of last year, to try to encourage the federal 
government in the same way that we are today to put additional 
money into the PFRA program. 
 
They put in about $2.2 million annually into the Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation program of which, again this year, the $2.2 
million has gone in and the . . . I think by about the middle of 
April all the funds are gone. And we had far more applications 
again this year than we had money last year. 
 
So what we did last year is that we said to the federal 
government that the 2.2 wasn’t sufficient, that they should be 
putting additional money into the pool. And it took us the better 
part of eight months in order to get the federal government to 
make a commitment . . . or six months to make a commitment 
to put new money in. And they put in about 1.1 billion . . . 
million and we put in the 1.5 and that gave us the new program. 
 
What you should know is that there were about, I think, 16 or 
1,700 applications that weren’t actually met. We had a larger 
need than we had money. The federal government has just 
recently announced that they would make up the shortfall and 
added yet another 1.1 million, I think, to look after the 
applications of last year. 
 
This year what we’re doing of course is asking the federal 
government to put in not 2.2 million, but we asked them to put 
in 5 million this year to try and address the kinds of needs that 
Saskatchewan producers are facing. And you identify 
appropriately and correctly, particularly for the livestock people 
and water, this would be a huge, huge, of huge benefit. 
 
As of Friday I’ve not had any response from the Minister of 
Agriculture federally. I had yet an occasion to speak with Mr. 
Vanclief on Friday when we were in Saskatoon. He understands 
the seriousness of the drought in Saskatchewan, parts of 

Alberta, and even parts of Manitoba, and he gave me the 
undertaking that they are looking at trying to find additional 
resources to address the water piece. 
 
And so at this point in time, by way of a long explanation, we 
have not received any commitment from the federal government 
to add new dollars yet. My hope is that within the next short 
while we’re going to get an affirmative response. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
recognize that Saskatchewan has a program manager for this 
program. And I’m wondering whether or not it is up to 
Saskatchewan to . . . it’s up to Saskatchewan also to determine 
what the eligibility criteria are in order to access money or a 
grant from this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, what we did last 
year with the . . . with this program is we simply made available 
only some clerical support to assist and to administer the 
program. It was our decision that we should not duplicate the 
program. We already have a PFRA program in Saskatchewan. 
 
What we would simply do is make our funds available to the 
PFRA and have them administered on our behalf. And so they 
did that for us and we provided them with some clerical support 
— I think part of a position — to help them administer the 
program. 
 
Often there is criticism about duplicating programs. This is an 
example of where we felt that the money would be better served 
and always is, if you can make the money available for 
programs. So we put the entire amount of dollars that we had 
available into the program; and the PFRA folks, through their 
administration system, looked after it for us with the aid of one 
of our clerical support people. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could you 
give me the name of the clerical support person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the name of the individual, Mr. 
Chair, is Diana Berita and I think the last name is spelt 
B-e-r-i-t-a. I may not have pronounced it right but I think I’ve 
got all the letters in the right place. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, could you 
tell me then, is there an office in Saskatchewan that people can 
put their application through or would it go to . . . is there a 
provincial, joint provincial/federal office, or where do people in 
fact send in their applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, they have the PFRA offices are 
. . . the regional offices are scattered about the province and the 
central office of the PFRA is right here in Regina. And so this is 
where the application forms would have been sent to. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, then it 
is the PFRA person, through the federal government, that would 
review the applications and either grant or deny them. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, Mr. Chair, that’s exactly right. 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess I 
had a lot of preamble questions to come to the specific case that 
I want to bring to your attention. And I have a constituent out at 
Bruno, in Saskatchewan, that is a farmer. It’s a family farm. 
And they have been experiencing water problems to no end on 
their farm. 
 
Over the years, they have dug six wells in their yard but all of 
these wells have gone dry and I guess, considering what’s 
happened with the drought, that’s probably why that’s 
happened. 
 
But they were told about this program and decided that they 
would hook up to the Humboldt-Wakaw water pipeline in order 
to access some water. They have livestock. I mean, they have 
absolutely no water in their yard of any kind. And once they 
hooked up to that pipeline, they put in their application and they 
were refused. 
 
Now I looked at the criteria — they were refused actually 
because they didn’t meet the criteria — and as I looked at the 
criteria I had to question who, in goodness’ name, came up with 
some of this criteria because some of it seems to be very 
nonsensical and irrational. 
 
It is important that people are able to access water, and one of 
the criteria that is in place is that you have . . . How does it read 
here? Just a minute now. It says pipelines within a farmstead 
are considered distribution and are not an eligible project. 
 
So I have to ask the minister if he knows anything about that 
specific criteria and whether that makes any sense to him. I 
mean these people . . . naturally the pipeline is going to be used 
for . . . or the pipeline water would be used for distribution 
because you’re distributing it through your yard and to your 
livestock. So that particular wording seems to me to be — well 
irrational to say the least. 
 
And I’m wondering if the minister has looked at that and 
whether or not there’s possibly some argument that you could 
make in order for this family to be able to access that grant. I 
mean the existing pipeline, the Wakaw-Humboldt one, is 
already in place. And when that was put in place a few years 
back, farmers were told that they could hook up to that pipeline 
and get a grant for it. Now that happened, and many of them 
did. 
 
Now these people can hook up to the same pipeline and find out 
that under this sort of irrational criteria, they are not receiving 
or are not eligible for a grant. Could you please explain this, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The 
member asks a, in my view, a very important question here in 
terms of how we address the future of supplying water to rural 
Saskatchewan irrespective of whether you’re a farmer, or 
whether you’re a small community, or whether you’re a 
small-business person or a business person or an industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline I think is — not I think — 
but is established as a water transportation system for a whole 
host of people and businesses and communities who live along 

that line. In the same way that in the part of the world that I 
come from we now have a pipeline and a waterline that serves 
the eastern side of the province by the city of Melville because 
they have a huge water source. And just to the . . . further north 
of that, in the town of Canora, they’ve just established now with 
a series of communities, a water system that supplies about five 
or six or seven different communities and a whole bunch of 
farm families. 
 
And in my view, that’s really where we need to get to, over 
time. And it’s unfortunate that we haven’t been able to get two 
things to happen. 
 
One is that, even in those situations that you’ve described, we 
have communities today where the water and pipeline run right 
by it and they haven’t hooked up, or you have farmers who are 
able to attach themselves to these particular waterlines and have 
not either. And because they have their own water system and 
their own water supply, when they get into some difficulty, of 
course, what happens is that they come back to the system. 
 
I’m not suggesting for a minute that’s the case with your file or 
your family. But when you’re building these kinds of 
infrastructures and systems, you need to have communities and 
farmers and small business and industry working together for it 
to happen. And that’s why you have the kind of success in some 
parts of the province. 
 
This particular project was never intended to address the huge 
infrastructure needs that you’ve described where you have the 
Humboldt/Wakaw pipeline, or for that matter, the Melville one. 
It was very much for wells or dugouts or shallow-buried 
pipelines where water could simply be moved quickly and 
easily from one source to where the livestock producers needed 
it and was specifically for livestock producers. And as you can 
appreciate, the pool of money was very small. We have here 
about $3 million that we try to accommodate the, you know, the 
drought area for livestock producers. 
 
I would like to get to a situation in this province that you 
described, which we could have communities and farm families 
connected in the way in which Humboldt/Wakaw does. We 
have some tremendous water sources in the province that could 
serve communities in a very significant way but we need, as I 
said earlier, we need the buy in from municipalities in many 
cases and then it needs to be funded in a joint participatory 
ownership fashion which on some occasions becomes a difficult 
task as well. 
 
So I know that the member yesterday — or sorry, not yesterday, 
but on Thursday — asked me the question, the member from 
Watrous, about whether or not we’re prepared to take and put 
$10 million into this kind of a project. It’s exactly what we’re 
talking about here today. And my response to that was that, you 
know, this is where our federal/national government should be 
participating when we’re trying to address emergency crisis 
issues. 
 
When we’re talking about long-term sustainability of ensuring 
that we have good water sources in the province, we should be 
taking the model that’s in your area, in my view, and we should 
be applying that model interprovincially — or not 
interprovincially — or provincially I mean, and have 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

communities and municipalities and consumers participating in 
a far broader way. Because you just can’t, in my view, you 
can’t find enough money to do this on a regular basis in a 
province as big as ours with as big as the agricultural industry 
is. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Why is the member from 
Lloydminster on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — With leave, Deputy Chair, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In the east 
gallery this afternoon we’ve just been recently joined by grade 
8 students from the Turtleford School. These students have 
come a long way. I know how long it is. They now understand 
how long the drive is from Turtleford to Regina to attend the 
capital. And we certainly welcome you here. 
 
I’d like to introduce, as well as the students, the teachers. 
There’s Colleen Nelson and Val McNinch. And also a very 
important part of the delegation will be the chaperones. I’d like 
to introduce them. There’s Rick Hartley, Gord Spencer, Barb 
Angus, Diane Pruden, and Dawn Simkins. 
 
What we’re doing this afternoon, as you may have noticed as 
you’ve come in, we are in a . . . something called the 
Committee of the Whole where it’s . . . the Deputy Chair is 
allowing the opposition members to question the minister in 
particular areas and he is able to consult with his officials. And 
this will go on for some time. And I know we’re going to meet 
shortly, so I would ask all people here to welcome the grade 8 
class from Turtleford. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have to 
make a few other points about this particular situation because 
it is very, very disconcerting and unnerving and disappointing 
to the people that are needing the water on their farm. 
 
Mr. Minister, these people have no water source within eight 
and a half miles of their farm but the nearest water source is 
eight and a half miles away. Now as far as digging new wells 
here, they could dig until you-know-what freezes over and it 
wouldn’t help because the water is just simply not there. 
 
Their dugout is dry and so it does not pay to reconstruct another 
dugout. And those things, like reconstructing a dugout, is 

another criteria whereby someone may be eligible for a grant 
under the program. So those things are just out of the question. 
They’re not working. 
 
These people wrote to a Mr. Harvey Filson, I believe his name 
is, on Hamilton Street — and I take it that that’s the PFRA 
office according to what you’ve told me. And for one thing the 
answer that people got from . . . these people got from Mr. 
Filson was a rather off the cuff and not very thoughtful way of 
giving them an answer. He was told . . . These people were told 
that they didn’t receive eligibility for this grant because they 
didn’t . . . they wouldn’t own the pipeline that they had 
constructed to join up to the Wakaw/Humboldt pipeline. We 
don’t own the pipeline so we don’t qualify. 
 
This just does not make any sense to me at all, Mr. Minister, 
and I, granted, I’m not going to be calling you on this if in fact 
your government has no say in the criteria or the, or the 
acceptance or denial of these applications. But I am asking you 
if you do have provincial people that are sitting in on this 
decision-making process, that maybe we should be thinking a 
little bit harder about the kind of criteria that are outlined, as 
well as determining whether or not a grant is given to certain 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there going to be an opportunity for you and 
your department to have some communication or conversation 
with the federal people. And if you are going to have that 
opportunity in the very near future, especially with the new 
funds that in place, I would ask that you sit in with them and 
make sure that people that are in such dire need of water are 
granted some of this money without giving them the runaround 
on silly things that they must be doing in order to make sure 
that they can have a process where they can access water from 
somewhere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what I want to say, Mr. Chair, to 
the member is that . . . Deputy Chair, to the member that I think 
that we need to look at approaches. And I appreciate your 
comments. 
 
We need to look at approaches about how we can transport 
water in our province because there’s no question that from . . . 
on any given year you’ll find in Saskatchewan one part of the 
province or not that is dry. Because we have such a large, vast 
land area and such a diverse agricultural community that we 
need to find new and different ways of doing what we’re doing 
today. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I think one of the ways of doing it, as I’ve already said, is 
that we use the pipeline system that you talk about and what 
you have in your own area. I think that if we’re now thinking 
about whether or not we might be able to use some of the RM 
community wells, which we have in many of the RMs across 
the province, or most all of them, an RM well and can we 
supply water to farmers, particularly for livestock, by using a 
different kind of pumping system, maybe an overground 
pipeline, can that work. And again that’s only seasonal because 
what happens in the winter is that we’ll have freeze. 
 
Or maybe we need to look at, like they do in parts of Alberta 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

 

where they have actually ditching or your . . . or a 
ditching/trenching systems where you actually flow water, you 
know, through the course of the province and then have people 
connect to it or attach themselves through it to make sure that 
you have the kinds of things that we’ve talked about here today 
covered off. 
 
Now will we be at the table in our conversations in the future? 
Absolutely we’ll be in some very serious conversations as we 
continue to dialogue with the federal government about 
additional money. My officials are speaking with the federal 
people on a regular basis. 
 
In some cases they think it’s too much because — the federal 
government — because we’re always lobbying them, talking to 
them about the need for additional dollars. And every occasion 
that I meet with Mr. Vanclief or see Mr. Vanclief . . . and just 
corresponded just last week again about the importance of 
additional drought assistance money. And our hope is that 
we’re going to see at least a bit more than the 2.2 that they put 
into the program this year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have to ask 
you whether or not, once you hear this part of the criteria that 
are outlined here, whether you think it is a, it was a rational 
refusal that were . . . that was given to these people? 
 
It says project eligibility requirements. Pipelines are considered 
an eligible project when they are constructed as an alternative to 
a new source development; example, a new well or a dugout, 
okay. 
 
In the case of the people that I’m mentioning to you today, the 
new well, the new dugout would not pay because they’re just 
having no success with those wells. And therefore, according to 
these eligibility requirements it does say that pipelines are 
considered as an alternative to that other source. 
 
So the refusal of the grant application by these farmers from my 
area leads them to further questions. They’re saying is there just 
no money left and they don’t want to tell us, or why are we 
being refused when the eligibility requirements seems to be 
there on our part? We will be sourcing water from a pipeline 
according to this . . . these eligibility requirements. Everything 
should be in place, everything should be a go. 
 
So I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, today if I bring this file to 
you, I’m wondering if you could possibly see to it that this 
whole thing is reconsidered again so that these people may have 
water because it’s disastrous out in rural Saskatchewan right 
now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, the member 
might be happy to take the . . . take a look at the file of which 
you’re working from and take a look at the criteria and examine 
whether the criteria is really the one that was established for the 
winter program or the one that’s been there for the permanent 
operation of the pipeline. So if you could make that available to 
us, we’d be happy to take a look at it through the department. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And Mr. Minister, I 
have just one more specific issue here that was brought to my 
attention and it has to do with an application for C-SAP 

(Canada-Saskatchewan Assistance Program) that was mailed 
last June 5. And the deadline for application was July 18. 
 
When my constituent did not hear back from Crop Insurance 
about his application he called the Prince Albert office and he 
was told to be patient. He then contacted the Melville office and 
he was told that the application had not been received. So he 
faxed the application, a copy of it, to the . . . to Melville. But he 
was told that they could not accept the application. He appealed 
the decision and the appeal was denied. This gentleman was 
denied more than . . . or close to $6,000. 
 
So the contention was, I guess, as the conversation went back 
and forth, was that he . . . that Melville did not receive the 
application. This particular gentleman faxed a copy of that 
application, as he had it filled out by his accountant, to Melville 
and they would not accept that. That application, that faxed 
application, was dated and it was dated before the deadline. It 
was dated June 5. 
 
So it seems to me that if this gentleman was eligible for $6,000 
. . . If it were me, for instance, Mr. Minister, I’d make sure that 
that was . . . that application was mailed in. 
 
Now how do you dispute . . . How do you settle a dispute when 
the applicant says he mailed that in and the crop insurance 
office says they did not receive it? It seems to me and actually I 
do believe that we put forward after this case that was really 
very troubling, we put forward the suggestion that possibly the 
crop insurance offices should ask for registered letters when 
people are mailing in applications. 
 
So from here on in, Mr. Minister, if this is going to be a 
problem . . . And people again have no recourse. I mean all they 
can do is accept . . . they must accept the word from Crop 
Insurance that their application was not in on time. The 
applicant claims it was. 
 
So when people have no recourse, then there has to be some 
other mechanism in place to make sure that this dispute does 
not happen in the future. And I would suggest to you today that 
maybe your office should ask people to register the mail when 
they send in their applications. 
 
Is there any mechanism for dispute besides the appeal right 
now? I mean there is an appeal process and he went through 
that. But the question remains: who is to say whether or not that 
application was mailed or not? The applicant says he mailed it. 
The crop insurance office says they didn’t receive it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to say to the member and, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, that this is . . . Mr. Chair, that this is an issue that 
is always troublesome when people make a submission and then 
are of the opinion that they should have received the application 
. . . they should have received their funding. And there’s some 
dispute here about why it is that they didn’t submit their 
application on time. 
 
As you’ve identified, we do have the third party appeal process 
today, of which people can submit their concerns and then 
receive a decision from the appeal committee. We also had in 
this program . . . We had an interim program and then we had a 
. . . we had an interim payment — sorry, an interim payment — 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

and then we had a final payment. 
 
And so when somebody, in the case of this family or others, 
didn’t get their interim payment, one would have thought that 
they would have sort of recognized that they hadn’t submitted 
their application form. Because the interim and the final 
payments were at some distance apart from each other. 
 
Now we should be of the mind that appeal committees, and 
appeal boards, and appeal structures are set up for the very 
purpose of trying to determine whether or not somebody in fact 
does have a legitimate claim, or in fact there have been some 
extenuating circumstances that have caused somebody not to 
get their application form approved in time. And I just had my 
colleagues . . . my colleague advise me that the advisory 
committee . . . or the appeal committee has in fact taken into 
account circumstances in the course of examining an appeal. 
 
And the, sort of the classic I think and I’m sure I’m not naming 
anyone, but the classic is an individual had actually forgot the 
application form in her diaper bag — and it was in this diaper 
bag for the better part of three months — and then made the 
appeal. And of course, who wouldn’t believe that if you forgot 
this in your diaper bag for two and a half to three months that 
you’d be eligible for this? 
 
So there have been circumstances where in fact the appeal 
board has in fact ruled in favour of an individual who made a 
late claim. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, it is being 
said that this gentleman was denied Canada or Saskatchewan 
assistance program because his application was not received by 
the deadline. He was told, actually, by one crop insurance office 
— and I believe it was in Prince Albert — that as far as the 
interim payment, I believe, to just to wait to see whether or not 
. . . No, it wasn’t the interim payment. I correct myself there, 
Mr. Minister. It was to see whether the deadline would be 
extended. 
 
And so, he waited for them because he was under the 
impression that they would call him anyway. But the fact is he 
did have his application in by the 5th anyway and that was 
marked on the application form at the accountant’s office. 
 
Now when he went through the whole rigamarole of trying to 
attend to this question and then receive his money, according to 
a letter from crop insurance, there had been . . . had there been 
extenuating circumstances to warrant approval of late file 
declaration, he may have had approval. He’s very upset with 
this ruling. 
 
His application has been filed . . . filled out and mailed by June 
5, as I mentioned, by his accountant or by himself. He was 
concerned when he didn’t hear anything back regarding the 
money that he should have received. And then he contacted the 
office first in Prince Albert, then in Melville. He was told crop 
insurance had not received his declaration. So by that time, this 
was past the deadline to receive declarations. 
 
He then contacted his accountant who provided him with a copy 
of that application and it was faxed to the Melville office. He 
was then told that crop insurance could not accept the copy. 

Like, it seems this person is getting a real runaround. 
 
So he was told he could appeal. He did this but that was denied 
also. And this is very, very discouraging, Mr. Minister, because 
this money was actually owed and should have come to this 
applicant. He’s counting on this money for a lot of his 
commitments to debt and especially in drought situations like 
he is experiencing. And then to have to find that there’s all 
kinds of reasons to deny money, he just feels really taken by 
this whole thing and very upset. 
 
So I would just ask that possibly there are some suggestions, as 
I mentioned before, that might come forward from your office 
as far as asking applicants to register their mail so there can be 
no question as to whether or not the application has been 
received. 
 
I don’t think that anyone would be upset with that. It’s not a 
great deal of money — a few dollars, in this case, compared to 
$6,000 lost. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you if you would care to reply to these 
statements. And if you do that’s fine, I would like to hear your 
comments, and after which time I will turn the questioning over 
to my colleague from Watrous. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I, Mr. Deputy Chair, take under 
advisement the member’s recommendation around the 
registration of the . . . sending the application forms by 
registered mail. We certainly would look at that; I think that’s a 
recommendation that we’d be happy to look at. And there’ll be 
a cost of course involved anytime you’re expected to register 
your mail. 
 
And as you can appreciate, from time to time a small cost may 
not sound a lot to us, but when you get into this kind of 
discussion about how governments expect people to return their 
information, sometimes it then becomes the biggest issue for 
which people want to talk about, as opposed to the amount of 
money. 
 
So we’ll be happy of course to look at that. And on the file that 
you’re working on, if you would like to make . . . have it make 
its way to our department, we’d be happy to examine it as well. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I’ve just one more request of you. 
And I wonder if your officials could provide me with the 
number of applications put forward to crop insurance that were 
denied because of late application? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ll just provide the numbers then for 
you. I think there were over 200 appeals. And we’ll just get that 
information to you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Because of late application or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It would be a variety of things, I expect. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would like 
specifics — I would like to know how many were denied 
because of late application. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Agreed we’ll get that, Mr. Chair. 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I would 
like to go back to the topic that was being discussed some time 
ago, the last time the committee was meeting with the 
Agriculture estimates. 
 
And the discussion at that time was on the Treaty Land 
Entitlement Framework Agreement and how the process works 
with the Treaty Land Framework Entitlement Agreement. 
 
And I’m just going to quote to the minister what he had said at 
the very end of our discussion. We were talking about the 
process and what happens if the process is no longer working. 
And the minister said at the time: 
 

. . . that in Saskatchewan, we have a process today in terms 
of selection and renewal of Crown land. Now this is why 
we have engaged in situations that are as delicate as the one 
we are talking about today — a mediation process. 
 
And at the end of the day, if I’m asked because there hasn’t 
been an ability to resolve the issue when it comes back to 
my table, then clearly I’ll be examining these kinds of 
things. I’ll want to know whether or not the people who 
were involved in the negotiation processes were actually 
negotiating in good faith. 

 
So with that I would like to ask the minister if he would 
consider the use of foul language, verbal abuse, threats, and 
references to incidents of murder in the area, negotiating in 
good faith? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would say to the 
member that I would not view that at any occasion being a 
negotiation that would be in good faith. I mean, the use of that 
type of language or a threat to anyone while you’re negotiating 
an agreement, in my view would be detrimental to the future of 
a reselection or for that matter, a renewal . . . a selection or a 
renewal, if that type of language or that kind of practice was in 
use. 
 
And I would hope that in the discussions and in the negotiations 
that there would be a great deal more civility in trying to reach 
an agreement. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I agree with his 
answer. If either of the parties in the negotiations, the lessee of 
the Crown land or the First Nations band who was trying to 
settle an agreement, was subjected to such inexcusable 
negotiating tactics while in negotiation, would that party then 
have the right of refusal to continue the negotiation process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, that’s really why 
we have the independent mediator in place to try to find a 
solution to this particular issue. 
 
And as I mentioned in the last occasion that we were together in 
the estimates, that . . . and I expect that we’re both thinking and 
talking about the same situation, and I might recognize the 
Rosemount pasture is maybe the area that you’re identifying 
your thoughts around. And clearly it’s in this . . . it’s on this 
forefront where we have the mediator engaged today to try and 
find a compromise and a solution to all the parties that are 
involved. 

Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. In the particular 
situation that he mentioned was there not a mediator in place 
prior to basically the negotiations going south with the verbal 
abuse and so on, and the tactics? Was there not a mediator in 
place at that point in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, there 
was someone called a settlement board Chair and this particular 
individual and role has a different function in terms of 
establishing a process for conclusion. And, you’re right, there 
was an individual that was part of that process, but as I say they 
were part of the . . . they hold the title of being settlement board 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. If I’m understanding 
this correctly, basically either party that’s subjected to that type 
of negotiation tactics, be it the lessee or the First Nations band, 
if they’re subjected to those type of tactics, they really don’t 
have the right of refusal, then they have to again enter 
negotiations with yet another mediator? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I should say, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the 
member, that in the circumstance if we’re talking about the 
same file, it would be helpful if the member would just sort of 
advise me as we move along here about whether it is the same 
one that she’s speaking about, because in that particular case 
there was a change in leadership by one of the parties. 
 
And so what was required here of course is that there was a loss 
of some continuity, and of course, some history here. And as a 
result of that, it was my view that we needed to engage 
somebody who could take us back to that particular experience 
again and move from just before, if I might state it this way, 
there was a change in the leadership. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I guess, Mr. Minister, I’m not . . . I don’t 
think that you’re answering my question. Basically if either 
party is subjected to that type of verbal abuse — threats, 
references to incidents of murder, etc., in the area — if that 
happens, there is a mediator present, does either party, the one 
who’s subjected to that type of abuse, have to continue the 
negotiation process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think the answer would be, would be no, 
that you would not expect that to occur. And I think part of my 
issue was that I don’t want to — if I might use a better word — 
I don’t want to sort of tar a whole process here with what was 
being said by one particular group or another. 
 
And in the particular case that certainly I’m referring to, I felt 
that it was important for me to get a full appreciation of what 
happened. And that’s why I’ve asked and we’ve engaged a 
mediator to really go back into this process and examine it 
fully. Because I think, as you pointed out, any time that people 
are . . . where there’s a suggestion anyway or reference to where 
language may be used or inferences about the way in which 
people might be dealt with at the end of the day, it’s serious 
enough in my view to have a full review and examination of 
that process. And in this case this is why we’ve moved away 
from a settlement board Chair and gone to have someone 
examine this fully as a mediator. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. So if you have someone 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

examining this fully as a mediator, are they examining if indeed 
this type of verbal abuse had happened in the negotiations or 
not? Is that what you’re examining? Or are you examining if the 
process should continue irregardless of whether it happened or 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, I’m not, Mr. Deputy Chair, looking at 
someone who will bring me a report — or for that matter, the 
Minister of Justice — a report at the end of the day that will try 
to speak to what happened earlier. I’m not interested in having 
somebody go through that process to provide me with that kind 
of detail. 
 
At what I’m interested here is trying to find a resolve to the 
circumstance where, in fact, the circumstances could allow for 
people to continue to live together in the same area of the 
province, to continue to be able to use the facilities in a fashion 
of which people have been accustomed to using it in order to 
protect the industry for those who want it protected in that part 
of the province, and also to ensure that under the treaty, treaty 
land entitlement piece, that we stay within the, sort of, the letter 
of the agreement of which we have also established in the 
province. 
 
So it’s about trying to find the . . . a resolution that would be 
satisfactory to all the parties involved. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. In the Treaty Land 
Entitlement Framework Agreement under the “Principle 
underlying sale of Crown lands,” 4.05(a): 
 

Canada, Saskatchewan and the entitlement bands agree 
that, except as otherwise specifically provided herein, 
transactions involving the sale by Canada or Saskatchewan 
of federal or provincial Crown Lands . . . shall be governed 
by the principle of “willing seller/willing buyer”. 

 
So who determines if there is a willing seller and a willing 
buyer? Who makes that decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the willing seller would 
be the provincial government because, in this case, it’s our 
property. And in the process, we would need to be sure that this 
would be subject to all third party interests being looked after. 
 
And so in the matter of this particular case, the government is 
the owner of the property. We have the request now under the 
TLE (treaty land entitlement ) for a selection and, in all cases 
then, we would need to be sure that the third party interests are 
all adhered to. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and if I’m 
understanding him correctly he, as a provincial government 
representative, would be the seller. It would not be the group, 
interested group or individual who’s leasing the Crown land. 
 
So therefore if it’s in a mediation process and it’s been 
determined that the process is no longer being negotiated in 
good faith — and the minister agreed earlier that if indeed the 
negotiations were not being done in good faith, that he would 
not . . . or does not believe that either party should be forced 
into the negotiations past that point — then would he, as the 
representative, if he was the seller of the Crown land, would he 

then no longer be a willing seller? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, that at the end 
of the day the province or the ministry would have really three 
decisions that we could make here. One of the decisions we 
could make, of course, is that we could provide to the First 
Nations band, in this case, the selection process to take place. 
And they could in fact select the land and then the land would 
then become theirs. 
 
We would look after . . . We would ensure that the third party 
interests would all be looked after and the land would then 
change the kind . . . would change in ownership. Or we could in 
fact renew the existing lease over a period of time and then get 
into an agreement as to what the leasehold should look like and 
away we go. Or we could in fact decide to put the land up for 
sale and say that the renewal is now . . . that the renewal period 
is expired; the lease period has expired. 
 
And we would now, because there has not been an ability for 
people to reach any kind of a solution, we could exercise the 
option of taking the land and putting it on the open market, and 
allowing for whomever chooses, in Saskatchewan, to purchase 
the land. And who knows what might happen with The Farm 
Land Security Act? It could be somebody in Canada who may 
choose to purchase this chunk of land, the property, and use it 
for whatever purpose they choose to make. So our options 
would be . . . could be all three of those. 
 
I’m not suggesting for a moment that we have any interest in 
exercising any one of them at this time because of the mediation 
process, and look forward to what we’ve always wanted to 
achieve here and that is to try and find an amicable resolution to 
a very difficult piece. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If I’m 
understanding you correctly, you are listing one of the options 
of perhaps putting the Crown land for sale, which would be in 
direct conflict with our own provincial Act which states that we 
would lease land to anyone that has — or renew a lease, sorry 
— to anyone who’s leasing land as long as they are tenants in 
good standing. So you would sort of ignore that piece of 
legislation and the policy that’s been in place in our province 
for a great number of years and entertain the option of putting 
the land for sale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think what’s important, Mr. Chair, here 
is that the options that we would appreciate concluding on this 
particular file is one of two: where the parties that are 
concerned here would either come to a situation where the land 
could in fact be . . . would remain for selection, or in fact it 
could be renewed by the co-op. It would not be the option of the 
ministry to exercise the right to . . . exercise the right to sell the 
properties. 
 
Now we should not confuse for a minute the notion that in 
Saskatchewan from time to time we do sell farm land, and we 
sell farm land to people who might in fact have had the lease 
before, which is usually the case; or in fact from time to time, 
on rare occasion, we have Crown land that makes its way to 
somebody who is a brand new owner. 
 
So this would not be the option of which I would be interested 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

 

in entertaining. There’s a long history here in terms of the 
utilization of a particular pasture. There’s a long history here in 
terms of the relationship between the patrons of the pasture and 
the First Nations people who live arm’s-length from each other. 
 
And so my interest is to try to have the mediation process find a 
solution. And I’m optimistic, if I might say, that collectively 
they’re going to be able to do that. So that would be, that would 
be the intent here. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. I had suggested — or 
mentioned earlier — that if the mediation process has gone 
south in rather a drastic manner as far as threats and abuse and 
whatnot, would it then no longer be considered negotiations in 
good faith, and the minister agreed that it would not. And you 
also agreed that whichever party was being subjected to that 
abuse would not have to continue with negotiations. 
 
He recognized that he would be the seller in the case of Crown 
land, so therefore if he agrees with those and it is the renter of 
the land that has been subjected to that type of abuse, it would 
be his option to decide that he no longer is a willing seller. And 
yet he said that his option then at that point might be to literally 
put the land up for sale for whoever. 
 
I go back to what happens to the long-standing provincial 
policy that if someone is leasing land in good standing and 
wants to renew that lease, that they can indeed do so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, we have 
two policies in Saskatchewan. We have a policy in 
Saskatchewan that addresses itself to the Crown land lease 
process and a long history of how, in fact, Crown land leases 
are renewed in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we also have in this province today a treaty land 
entitlement policy of which, in this case, well they’re in conflict 
with each other not because the legislations are . . . or the Acts 
are in conflict with each other; the people who have different 
views about what should happen with the land are in conflict 
with one another. 
 
And so the issue here is to try to find a solution with the people 
who are having the difficulty in finding resolve. And it’s my 
hope and interest to see the mediator reach that kind of an 
objective. So that’s the purpose from which I’m working from 
— or premise from which I’m working from and expect that 
with optimism, that’s the kind of solution that we might see 
here at the end of the day. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister, and I realize that there 
is two pieces of legislation that’s governing this. However, I do 
also believe that that’s the reason why the TLE framework 
agreement has the clause under the “Principle underlying sale of 
Crown lands,” 4.05(a), that says that the sale should be 
governed by the principle of willing seller and willing buyer 
because that would give the province a little bit of leeway as far 
as making common sense and ethical and moral decisions on 
how some of these sales should be taking place. 
 
When the provincial government approves a TLE application 
on Crown land that is being leased by a party who is in good 
standing, who incurs the expenses involved with the mediation 

process between the third party and the First Nations band, such 
as the legal fees, research fees, accounting fees, to have a value 
calculated for any of the assets upon the land in which . . . that 
the lessee has put on the land and the time taken away from 
employment, who incurs the expenses of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, each party would incur the 
expenses. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. When an individual or 
a group of individuals enter into a lease agreement with the 
government on Crown land, is it written in the agreement that 
the lessee is responsible for any costs that may occur in the 
event that either level of government — the federal or 
provincial — chooses to enter into yet another agreement 
involving that same land but with a different party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, it’s not written in the lease 
agreement. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So my question I guess would be, how on 
earth is it even possibly fair or how can you expect a leaser — 
or a lessee, sorry — to incur those kinds of costs? This is not an 
agreement that they even knew about or had any knowledge of 
when they entered the lease agreement. Why do we all of a 
sudden throw these type of expenses on there as their 
responsibility when this is not negotiations that is their 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, in most cases, cost is really not 
an issue because it’s done with quite an expedient fashion. 
People are able to do that in an amicable way. And in most 
instances, it’s not, it’s not something that is a huge burdensome 
experience for most people. 
 
And so it’s because of this notion here that we don’t have an 
understanding of each other’s interest here, that we have sort of 
the elongated approach that’s happening here and some concern 
about good faith. 
 
And so it’s when you get into those kind of circumstances 
where you have the kind of costs that I think you’re talking 
about and that these folks are experiencing today. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Okay. When those circumstances do 
happen, when those costs do incur, such as perhaps the case that 
we’re talking about today — again, it was not included in the 
lease agreement with the lessee that there would be other 
agreements that they would be responsible for negotiating, that 
basically maybe should be the provincial government’s 
responsibility — do they, can they not legally ask the provincial 
government to pay for those costs considering that there is no 
agreement in the lease agreement that they have to incur those 
costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I think you raise 
an important point and what I have decided in this particular 
case is that the mediation services that are being conducted 
today are in fact being covered by us, because we understand 
how difficult and lengthy that this might be. So we’ve assumed 
looking after the mediation costs for both of those groups today. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. It isn’t just the 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

mediation costs I’m talking about. It’s legal costs. And we all 
know that legal costs are quite considerable. And when the 
negotiations become as complicated as they sometimes can be, 
they’re . . . the legal costs can be quite significant. 
 
So I’m talking about legal costs. I’m talking about, you know, 
the research fees that needs to be done, accounting fees to have 
values put on assets that have been built on the land; I’m talking 
about other costs other than paying for a mediator. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, we 
would have in most cases already determined what the 
particular value of the property would be. The value of the 
property would be determined based on assessment values for a 
particular area. And so I’m not sure to date, you know, what 
kinds of legal costs need to be incurred here in terms of sorting 
out this particular issue, but clearly the mediation costs which 
are ones that we think need to be borne by the department and 
by the ministry were ones that we’re going to look after. 
Whatever resources people choose to ascertain on their own to 
help them deal with this particular issue at this point, I’ve said 
to them, would be their own costs. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chairman, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s a great 
pleasure to introduce 18 high school students from the 
community of Harris in the riding of Rosetown-Biggar. They 
are grade 11 and 12 students. And they’re here with their 
teacher, Bev Seymour; and chaperones Dianne Campbell, 
Arlene Wells, Ginette Weins, Ron Genest, and Carol Cairns. 
 
I would just mention to the students who are visiting we are 
now in a process of doing estimates. And the estimates under 
consideration are from the Agriculture department so the 
Minister of Agriculture has several of his officials in the House. 
And opposition members, including the Saskatchewan Party 
critic for Agriculture, is asking usually fairly specific questions 
about how the Department of Agriculture operates. 
 
Members of the legislature, I would ask you to give a very 
warm welcome to the students from Harris who are visiting the 
Legislative Assembly tonight. Welcome here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — With leave just to make a brief statement 
to the guests who are here. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I want to 
say to the members who are here — the visitors who are here 
from Harris, Saskatchewan — back in 1972 or ’73 you had in 

your community probably one of the finest hockey players in 
Saskatchewan. He’s now the Minister of Agriculture for the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to you that our Harris team 
were an incredible group of men and women. I think we won — 
not I think; we won — the championship out there and I forget 
the . . . I don’t forget; I won’t say. But the individual who 
served us with some of the best raw oysters that you could eat 
in Saskatchewan, I still hope you have an opportunity to have 
them in . . . (inaudible) . . . So welcome to the legislature and 
the very best in your work in your community. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — The Chair won’t make a comment about 
parliamentary language or anything like that. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As the minister is 
well aware, the decisions that we make today to ensure the 
Treaty Land Entitlement Framework Agreements are settled in 
the most fair way possible for everyone concerned are of the 
utmost importance to the future of the province. And we are 
about to set precedent on how we shall rectify land entitlement 
agreements within our province with a third party. And that 
may be any third party or any special interest group. 
 
Today I’ve questioned the minister, and the last time the 
estimates were here, extensively on how the province is dealing 
with TLE agreements with the First Nations. But I think we’re 
all aware that the federal government is debating Bill C-5, the 
Species at Risk Act. And this Act, along with others I fear will 
soon follow, empowers environmentalists with their ability to 
claim land for environmental purposes. 
 
Does the minister recognize that there will be a realized 
hardship imposed upon any long-standing third party lessee of 
Crown land if they’re forced to settle on a less than adequate 
lease agreement because their only alternative is to lose the land 
entirely, and yet they have built their agriculture business, the 
business that is essentially their livelihood, upon the faith and 
the trust of the past provincial government’s policies on Crown 
land leases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think that the . . . I 
certainly don’t disagree with the member when she speaks 
about the kinds of hardship that people might experience when 
you make a decision that might not necessarily be in their 
favour. And clearly the people today who are requesting 
renewal of the pasture have made it amply clear to me that if we 
are not in a position to renew the pasture then it has all kinds of 
repercussions for the individual producers there today who are 
making their livelihood from the lease of the pastures. 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

 

Clearly an argument could be made — and is made on the other 
side of the debate — is that people who are making claim today 
in Saskatchewan for treaty land are making the case that they in 
fact have experienced hardship over a lengthy period of time as 
well and accordingly are in a position today to try and rectify 
that through the treaty land entitlement, of which provinces and 
the federal government and administrations across the land are 
trying to find solutions to. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So I’m not for a minute suggesting here that there wouldn’t be 
hardship on either front here when we talk about either making 
selection or either renewing. And that’s why I’m so sensitive to 
this issue and have asked that we take an open-minded 
approach, that we engage people in a process that will try to 
address the issues of fairness and equity and economic benefit 
over time. 
 
And with that, I say to you that I look forward to a resolution 
here as opposed to having to exercise any kind of an edict on 
either one of the decisions that are in front of me. And so my 
view is that this . . . through this mediation process, we might 
achieve that. 
 
Will there be hardship? The answer is that there’ll be hardship 
if the ministry is expected to make a decision. At the end of the 
day, there’ll be hardship on either front. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for his answer. The 
difference in a TLE settlement, or other special interest group, 
is a special interest group hasn’t already invested money into 
that land or designed their livelihood around that land. This is 
land that they haven’t had previously, that they haven’t based 
and financed a whole entire business and their livelihood upon, 
whereas the lessee of the Crown land has. They are financially 
dependent upon that land as a matter of fact. 
 
And if any special interest group shows or . . . shows an interest 
in getting Crown land and if an agreement cannot be made 
between the special interest group and the lessee, in some cases, 
it would literally mean the bankruptcy of the lessee. So I don’t 
think that it is an equal hardship between the two parties in 
many, many cases. 
 
If a Crown land lease is not renewed and the previous lessee has 
invested money into assets or infrastructure on the land such as 
fences, corrals, watering bowls, dugout, shelter, shed or a 
house, does he get paid by the government for those assets 
which could be viewed as land improvements? And who 
decides what the value of those assets would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the value of the assets would be 
appraised and then it would be, would be . . . and we would 
then, would advise the third party of what the value of the assets 
would be. And it would be from that perspective from which we 
would go. 
 
I just want to just make a short comment in terms of what the 
member has said regarding the hardship piece. We should 
recognize in Saskatchewan that this . . . the request for selection 
is not . . . I would not consider being made by a special interest 
group. This is not, in my view, a special interest group. 

First Nations in this province have a status and an agreement 
with the province of Saskatchewan. This is a fundamental issue 
that we’re dealing with here in terms of how in fact we can 
compensate people for what many in this room, I expect, would 
— or in this Assembly — would suggest has been harmful to 
the future and the viability of their society and of their lifestyle. 
And I would hardly for a minute want to be the judge of what 
that hardship has been. 
 
And so in a generic fashion, I say that if and when we get to the 
debate about how in fact this decision will be made, we 
shouldn’t forget for a minute that irrespective of what this 
decision is at the end of the day, it will be hardship on either 
front. And that’s why the mediation process, in my view, is so 
important. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for his answer. And I 
would like to point out that a significant percentage of the cattle 
industry in this province was built upon the trust and the 
stability of Crown land leases. Decisions that the government 
makes today will determine the growth of the very industry that 
this government has stated is so very important for our province 
and they’ve also quite openly stated that they wanted to expand 
in our province. 
 
If Crown land leases are no longer viewed as stable, even if a 
lessee has been in good standing and has leased the land for 
decades, there can be no question that it will jeopardize the 
cattle industry in this province and it will impede further 
expansion of that industry in our province. Cattle producers will 
hesitate to expand their herds if Crown land is necessary to 
sustain the expansion and there will be a reluctance to invest in 
any infrastructure and improvement to the Crown land. And, in 
fact, I believe it’s going to be most noticed in the cattle 
producers’ inability to secure financing for their industry if 
they’re securing financing for an operation that in any way 
relies on Crown land leases. 
 
So does the minister recognize their long-term effects on the 
cattle industry of entering into land procurement agreements 
with any special interest group and if the land has been utilized 
for a number of years for cattle production? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, I think it 
would be fair to say that in Saskatchewan the Crown land 
policy has been very instrumental in helping to build the 
livestock and the beef industry in our province. And we’re not 
suggesting for a minute that we should change that in any way 
because we want to grow the livestock industry in 
Saskatchewan in a very viable, concerted effort. 
 
There are large parcels and tracts in the province today where 
we have a very active livestock industry that has very little 
dependency on the Crown land — very little — and they’re 
growing the livestock industry through their own investments as 
opposed to using the Crown land as part of the tool. 
 
And now if the member from Watrous is suggesting that if we 
were to transfer this . . . a particular piece of property that’s 
currently being held as a Crown piece of land and that First 
Nations people wouldn’t grow the livestock industry, I would 
say to you that there’s nothing further from the truth. Because 
today in Saskatchewan we have First Nations people who I 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

meet with on a regular basis who are not only talking about 
building and growing the livestock industry, they are. 
 
They’re making investments today in the livestock industry. 
They’re buying tracts of land, not TLE land, but buying tracts 
of land today or buying land today that’s not held as Crown 
land, but it’s private land which they’re buying, of which 
non-treaty people are happy to dispose of when the Indian 
bands come by and buy the land. 
 
So I’m encouraged in this province that as we build the 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan, it will be a combination of 
a whole host of people who will be participating in it. There 
will be people who are currently in the livestock industry today. 
There will be stockmen who are there today. There will be 
people who will be using Crown land to be able to do that, and 
in my view there will be First Nations people who already own 
land in Saskatchewan, who will continue to grow our beef 
industry collectively. 
 
So we shouldn’t make the assumption here today — at least I 
don’t — that if there were a particular decision made on a 
parcel of land today which the First Nations people would 
assume, that somehow it would destroy the livestock industry in 
the province. Because I don’t think that that’s quite accurate. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’m very 
surprised that the minister has such little understanding of the 
question that I posed before him and that didn’t have to do with 
who was going to build the cattle industry. It had to do with the 
fact of the stability and trust of Crown land leases in the 
province and the history that the province has, that there is a 
trust upon that. 
 
So it’s disappointing that he went off in other directions that 
was not suggested on this side of the House in any way and 
ignored the question totally. But with that I’m turning it over to 
my colleague for the next question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a couple of 
questions related to leasing also. And to start off with it’s . . . 
I’d like to just read out clause 2(b)(iv) of the assignment of 
lease policy which states: 
 

The purchaser of the deeded portion of the farm or ranch 
associated with the lease and does not already have a total 
resource base of more than 200% of the average assessment 
equivalent, including the deeded land being purchased, of 
farms or ranches in their rural municipality . . . 

 
And my question to the minister is, does this clause apply to 
Sask-only farm land/ranch land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, currently the way in which the 
policy reads, we look at all farm assets, farm land assets that the 
individual would have, whether it’s Canadian owned or whether 
it’s just provincially owned or whether for that matter it might 
be internationally owned. 
 
So the way in which the current policy is, it encompasses the 
entire land holding that an individual might have. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Minister, for that question 

. . . or answer. Just the word municipality has a little bit of a 
different connotation in Saskatchewan. Like in Alberta for an 
example, there is no municipality system. And so it’s a little bit 
ambiguous. 
 
My next question would lead to how does one make the 
assessment from another jurisdiction of the value of property, 
because there’s no definition of resource base in different 
jurisdictions. How do you assign the assessment when it’s from 
a different jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, how we would do that is we 
would look at the various different soil types that someone 
might have ownership of and then take a look at what the 
market values might be in the particular holdings that people 
have and then try to make a determination based on that data 
that we were able to collect. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m 
sure you gather where I’m coming from with this questioning. I 
have an individual or a couple that have purchased land in 
Saskatchewan. They moved here in 2001 from Alberta. They 
bought deeded land and as part of their purchase, leased land 
went along with it. And it was transferred as part of the sale. 
And at the time, this couple owned land in Alberta and the legal 
opinion was that it was less than the 200 per cent as outlined in 
the lease policy guidelines. 
 
Now this couple have received notice that if they do not sell 
their land in Alberta before March 31, 2003, if they do not sell 
it, that the . . . I’ll read what it says: 
 

Failure to fulfill the terms of the lease utilization plan will 
result in immediate cancellation of the lease. 

 
And again, it seems very ambiguous for somebody to make the 
assessment that their farm land value is over 200 per cent of 
what they’ve purchased, and yet the legal opinion was that it 
was not. Would the minister wish to answer that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I know that my department’s been 
very busy dealing with people coming from Alberta and settling 
in Saskatchewan to farm. And I appreciate the fact that we 
recognize that we have a number of those kinds of cases. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite that under our lease 
policy, what we, what we understand . . . And I don’t have the 
details on the file, on this file, but what we’ll need to do is get 
them because there may have been in fact some agreement here 
in advance to them coming here and purchasing the land in 
terms of what they might do with theirs. I don’t know the 
answer to this because there may have been an agreement here 
for that to occur. They may have since come and the land may 
not have been sold yet in Alberta. And that may in fact be 
impacting the kind of decision that needs to be made here. 
 
So I think it would be useful for us to have a full appreciation of 
what the circumstances were when the decision was made to 
come here and purchase the property. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and it’s 
interesting, you comment about people coming to 
Saskatchewan. If we have this kind of a policy, we’re not going 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

 

to have many more come. I think this is a trial case of a couple 
of people. And you can rest assured if this type of a policy 
continues, we’re not going to have many more coming unless 
the policy is changed. 
 
I’m sure the minister is sympathetic to the drought conditions 
and to put a condition of sale on, especially in a time when its 
. . . Western Canada is drought stricken — and to put a 
condition that if you don’t sell your land — and land is not 
moving in drought areas so much right now — and to put a 
condition on that says if you don’t sell your land, we’re going 
to, going to cancel your lease. 
 
And one of the reasons they moved here, to set up a ranching 
operation. And you already alluded to how ranching is growing 
in this province and going to grow. And yet we’re being a little 
detrimental or a whole bunch detrimental to people that are 
moving here and want to continue with their lease. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’d be happy to give you the whole file that I 
have on this — in fact, I give it to you right now. I’ve got a few 
of my own notes on it but I’d be more than happy to give it to 
you. And I would like to have an answer as soon as possible 
because these people are sitting in a quandary right now 
wondering what they should do. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Also in this is a transfer fund . . . or amount of funds and it’s 
quite huge, and why would they pay a transfer fee for a period 
of time where they might only have the land until spring of 
2003? It’s kind of pointless for them to do a large sum of 
money for this summer of lease usage, I guess. 
 
So I will gladly send this over to you, Mr. Minister, and . . . But 
what I would like from you is a date that you would have an 
answer back to me because I know these sometimes linger on 
and on and on. And as I said to one of the ministers the other 
night, I’m still waiting for answers from last year, so I really do 
like to have a date, time that I can expect an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well we’ll, Mr. Chair, if you send the 
information over to us, we’ll have this back to you within a 
week to 10 days — we can make that kind of commitment . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, a week to 10 days. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite that there is a good 
deal of sensitivity, as you can appreciate, about Crown lands. 
Where there are far more people who would like to have access 
to the Crown lands than we have land available. And so those 
people today who are Crown land lease owners, they are in an 
enviable position. 
 
So when you have a circumstance like this, where you have 
somebody moving in from another province and are wanting to 
assume the extension of a lease, you would know of course that 
we would have received some calls as well from other farmers 
or ranchers in the area who are saying exactly something a bit 
different. Who would say, well why is it that you have 
somebody today coming in here from another province, 
assuming a lease of a piece of Crown land which we sure would 
like to have, as a Saskatchewan resident, access to. 
 

So I mean there’s another side to this particular debate. I don’t 
know the answer to this particular file but I’d be happy to take a 
look at it within the time frame of which I’ve suggested. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’ll 
give you a chance to read the file but I just do want to make a 
comment. You say there’s people that want lease land, and 
you’re right. But these are Saskatchewan residents. They’ve 
moved there . . . They’ve lived here since I think it was —I 
gave you the paper now — 2001 or 2000 when they moved 
here. They’re actually Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And part of the agreement of the sale was the transfer of the 
leased land, which is fairly common. If you wish to buy some 
land and leased land goes along with it, that’s fairly common to 
have a transfer of the leased land with it. 
 
So I appreciate your comment about, and a reply to me, within 
10 days. I look forward to that. And on that note I’ll pass it on 
to my colleague. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, we all know 
of the changes that you made to the 2002 crop insurance 
program, changes that we submit were not to the . . . in the best 
interests of the Saskatchewan farmer. 
 
When you were contemplating making these changes, dropping 
the spot loss hail option and dropping the variable price options, 
did you do any calculations as to what the estimated cost of 
providing those options in 2002 would be? And if so, what 
would those figures be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I’d say to the member that I 
think the overall cost of the spot loss hail and the variable 
option was somewhere in the neighbourhood of 60 to $80 
million, would be everybody all in and all done. So it would be 
the federal government, the provincial government, and the 
producers. 
 
I would take just a small exception — because I won’t take 
many — when the member opposite says that it’s not in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan farmers, the decisions that we made 
around the crop insurance. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite, he knows what the 
dilemma was this year around the crop insurance program. It’s 
the same kind of debate that we’re having today around getting 
trade injury from our federal government, where we have not 
got the kind of dollars that we were asking for. 
 
And so what we did is we took the pool of money or the pot of 
money that we had and it was our view that this year in 
Saskatchewan, putting money into grass and hay programs and 
to pasture programs was a pretty good idea because I . . . As 
important as hail insurance is — and it’s extremely important in 
our province — so is the ability to be able to provide a grass 
and hay program. 
 
When I look at the numbers this year and see what’s happened 
here, where we I think last year had on a pilot project 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of about 200,000 acres, I 
think this year we’re somewhere in the neighbourhood of 3 
million acres of forage land that’s been, in fact, insured. So I 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

think it’s not a bad investment in Saskatchewan today, 
particularly given the extent of the drought, to be putting some 
insurance opportunities available for producers as it relates to 
grass and forage. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, the information that you . . . you 
provided me with in response to a written question for the 2001 
program, your answer indicated that it cost the Government of 
Saskatchewan approximately 17 and a half million dollars for 
the spot loss hail. I would assume, with the increase in 
coverages due to an increase in most of the commodity prices, 
that that option would have cost the provincial government 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of 20 to $22 million. I’m just 
guessing at that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Could you . . . I wonder if you could comment on my 
assumption on that. Is that correct? And also in your answer, 
could you indicate what you calculated as far as the provincial 
cost for the variable price option in 2002, if that would have 
been included in the crop insurance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I was using the number 60 to 
80 million on the two programs. And from this perspective, that 
the producers’ share last year to the program 2001 was 23 
million, 313 — and that total is the Saskatchewan portion. And 
the Canadian portion was about 58 million. 
 
So if you were to look at this year’s cost to the program — and 
the variable price option, I think, last year was around 3 million 
or 3 and a half million, 3.6 million — and based on what the 
new prices are this year, my department tells me and crop 
insurance officials tell me that that could have been somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of 10 to $50 million in addition to carry 
the program. So it has a very large ticket attached to it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, when you were looking at making 
these changes, did you calculate or do an estimate as to what it 
would cost to producers . . . What additional costs the producers 
of this province would have to incur just to replace the spot loss 
hail option in 2002? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, Mr. Chair, we would have. Because 
you would have had to take then — because the hail program 
was subsidized by the provincial and the federal governments to 
the tune of $35 million — so when we were making the 
decision of moving out of the spot loss hail, the subsidized spot 
loss hail, then in fact, and if producers were going to be 
insuring their crops to the same levels as they were under the 
crop insurance program, that this would be an additional 
injection of about $35 million to producers across the province. 
Including an additional cost to our farm and I expect probably 
an additional cost to your farm too if you were a crop insurance 
carrier and you had spot loss hail. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would suggest to you that 
the cost is considerably more than $35 million. As I’d said 
earlier, the commodity prices have increased. The average level 
of crop insurance per acre, I would suspect, at the same level of 
coverage — and let’s take a 70 per cent option — the coverage 
of crop insurance per acre will be higher in 2001 than in 2002 
due to the increase in most of the commodity prices. 
 
Secondly, if you factor in the surcharges that . . . when you’re 

buying private hail insurance, the basic charge that applies to 
your cereals does not apply to crops like canola, field peas, 
chick peas, and lentils where there is one and three-quarters 
times the basic rate and as high as . . . And canola I’m told this 
year is the only crop that is being charged at one and 
three-quarters time. All the other crops, the specialty crops, are 
two times. 
 
So I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that the additional cost to the 
farmers of this province just to replace the spot loss hail option 
is somewhere in the neighbourhood of 45 to $50 million of 
additional cost, Mr. Minister — I would think that’s a closer 
figure. And I was just wondering if you would reconsider your 
answer. And do you agree with my calculations, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I wouldn’t disagree with the 
member at all. I think clearly what our costs were last year, 17 
and a half million, this year our costs would be — with the 
value of the particular commodities this year overall I think 
being up slightly when you take into account the various 
different crops that we grow in the province — that certainly 
the number of $35 million would be on the low side in my 
view. So it would be a higher number, no question. 
 
But in the case of our commitment to the crop insurance 
program this year, as we may or not agree, at the end of the day 
in Saskatchewan this year, our provincial taxpayer today is 
paying more for the crop insurance program. We added an 
additional $10 million to our crop insurance program this year. 
And so, you’re right, producers are paying more today to insure 
their crop for hail, no question about that. 
 
Producers are paying more today for insuring their crop 
insurance through Crop Insurance because the price of the 
commodity is up and the cost per acre of coverage is also up. 
Some might say not enough, but in most cases it’s up. And at 
the end of the day when we put more money, taxpayers’ money, 
into the crop insurance program, Saskatchewan taxpayers are 
paying more this year too, to provide coverage for the crop 
insurance program. 
 
Now clearly this isn’t what we wanted in Saskatchewan as you 
can appreciate. We wanted to see an enhanced crop insurance 
program which the new farm . . . the farm framework or the 
agriculture policy framework today has crop insurance in the 
safety net side, in the risk management side, we’re leading with 
crop insurance. So crop insurance will be the program of the 
future for Canadian producers, not only in Saskatchewan but for 
Canadian producers. 
 
But it will require, as you can appreciate, a fairly significant 
investment at the national level. We didn’t get the additional 
$200 million that we were looking for this year because that’s 
what we wanted, that’s what we thought that we needed to 
make the kinds of improvements that we wanted to see in the 
program; they just didn’t come. 
 
So over the next, this particular year, we’ll get an opportunity to 
share with you what we’re proposing. Producers are going to 
have an opportunity to challenge the position that governments 
are going to put forward in terms of what the new programs 
should look like. But there’s no question that everybody is 
paying more this year for crop insurance program that in some 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

 

fronts doesn’t meet the kind of expectations we’d hoped they 
would have achieved. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I guess we really won’t know what 
the additional cost to the farmers will be until the seeded 
acreage reports are in and we know how many million acres 
have been sowed to field peas and etc., and etc. 
 
But for argument purposes, if we use a figure of $50 million 
we’re probably not to far out as far as determining the 
additional cost that Saskatchewan farmers will incur this year 
due to the removal of spot loss hail from the crop insurance 
program. 
 
Now I have in front of me the latest projections from Ag 
Canada on realized net income for Saskatchewan. Last year, 
I’m reading here, that the realized net income for 2001 was 
$972 million. It’s projected to fall some 47 per cent to $517 
million. And these projections were done, this report is dated 
January of this year, so this report and these projections 
certainly would not have been aware of the changes to the 
Saskatchewan crop insurance program. 
 
So basically, Mr. Minister, what you’ve done with one fell 
swoop of your pen is you’ve reduced the realized net farm 
income by a further 10 per cent, Mr. Minister. And I don’t think 
that’s something that the farmers of this province can ill afford, 
Mr. Minister. I think this change to crop insurance was 
ill-conceived, not well-thought-out and is certainly placing a 
huge burden on our producers, Mr. Minister. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member makes a 
wonderful argument for why we should have compensation 
today for a trade injury. Clearly when you take a look at the 
numbers last year, and the member’s absolutely right, the 
realized net farm income’s over 900 million — almost $1 
billion. 
 
Of that $1 billion, the 972 million, it’s made up of $200 million 
last year that was paid out from C-SAP. We paid out $330 
million last year from crop insurance and we had some old 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) that was 
kicking around that was worth about 80 million. So when you 
put all those program numbers together and attach them to what 
the marketplace paid, our Saskatchewan producers finally got 
what they should get in terms of being competitive in the 
marketplace . . . our . . . in terms of receiving appropriate net 
farm income. 
 
The average net farm incomes for Saskatchewan producers is 
about 550 or 525 to 530 million annually. So this year’s 
projection of what the national government is suggesting of 
517, they think is acceptable. Well on this side of the House and 
from this ministry and this Department of Agriculture, we don’t 
think this is acceptable at all. 
 
That’s why the trade injury is such an important piece here 
where we’re going to see — and hopefully see — from the 
national government what we’re talking about. $1.3 billion in 
trade injury would give Saskatchewan about 500 million. If you 
were to take that $500 million dollars and attach it to the 517 

that the . . . Ag Canada today is projecting, we’d have in 
Saskatchewan next year, or for this given year, about $1 billion. 
And that’s what Saskatchewan producers should be achieving 
in net farm income every year — not because they’re getting 
only a cheque from the marketplace but they’ll also be getting a 
cheque from the mailbox for the valuable work that they do. 
 
And so when the member opposite makes the case for $972 
million in Saskatchewan, you couldn’t . . . I couldn’t agree 
more with you. That’s exactly where we should be. And what 
got us there last year? Not the marketplace. The ad hoc 
payments got us there last year. And so we should keep in mind 
when we’re debating over the next several weeks in this 
Assembly and as we promote across Canada the importance of 
the net farm . . . or the trade injury, that we want to get to $1 
billion in Saskatchewan because that’s what our Saskatchewan 
producers should be receiving. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, this report actually projects a . . . 
total market receipts for 2002 of $5.5 billion and not much 
lower than the 5.6 for 2001, Mr. Minister. And actually 
program payments were . . . are projected to be lower for this 
year, of 708 million versus 963. 
 
However having said that, I certainly agree that there is a large, 
urgent need for the federal government to step up to the plate 
and deal with this . . . the implications of this US farm Bill and 
the trade distortion that, that it has already caused. And the new 
farm Bill will have a much greater impact on trade distortion. 
 
Mr. Minister, this $1.3 billion that was put out some time ago 
by various farm groups, including the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture and the Canadian grain growers and a host of 
provincial farm groups, it’s looking like reading the papers and 
hearing your comments and hearing the comments of the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Premier that at least the 
federal people are taking this very seriously. And it seems like 
sometime down the road in, hopefully, not too many months 
time that perhaps the federal government will come up with 
some sort of a dollar figure and that sort of thing. At least, it’s 
my sincere hope that that will happen. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is, though, are you and your 
department working on any proposals to make to the federal 
government as to once a dollar figure is reached and agreed 
upon as to how that money will be used? Will it be put out in an 
acreage payment? Will it be put towards specific targets? Are 
you and your department . . . have you got any ongoing work in 
that area, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer, Mr. Chair, to the member, is 
that we are working with the federal government to look at 
various different options that might be available in terms of 
how you might make a payout. 
 
What we’re really trying to secure right now of course is the 
figure. We think that the $1.3 billion is what we need to 
achieve. At the same time, we’re also trying to ensure that the 
federal government doesn’t roll a portion of this money into the 
agricultural policy framework. 
 
Because within the agricultural policy framework today exists 
the safety net money, which is for AIDA (Agricultural Income 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

Disaster Assistance) — sorry — which is for CFIP (Canadian 
Farm Income Program), NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account), and crop insurance. And we’re always concerned that 
what they might try to do here is take whatever chunk of money 
they make available to Canada and say to us that it’s now going 
to become part of the agricultural policy framework. 
 
To date, we’ve been successful in keeping these two very 
separate, so that we get a trade injury payment from the federal 
government that addresses itself as specifically trade injury, and 
that we then work away at putting together the long-term safety 
net which I think we’ve been . . . revised long-term safety net 
from what we’ve had over the last five or six years in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. So in sort of a long-winded way, 
to say to you that we are keeping the $1.3 billion very much on 
the table for trade injury and then are looking for another parcel 
of money, if I might say, that would address itself to the 
agricultural policy framework. 
 
So when we talk about 1.3, it’s only one portion of what we 
might be looking for. We’re looking for somewhere, I would 
expect based on the numbers that have been out there now, in 
the neighbourhood of about $2 billion. And that the $2 billion 
would not be for one year, but the $2 billion would make 
themselves available for the period of the life of the US farm 
Bill, which is currently 6 years, and that’s what we would 
anticipate Canadian farmers should have access to. 
 
And clearly, if we could get that kind of an injection and $500 
million into Saskatchewan’s economy in the next couple of 
months, that would be very helpful to address a whole different 
. . . a whole host of issues that are prevailing upon 
Saskatchewan producers today. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, I certainly have to agree with 
one of the comments that you made there in the . . . Or at least if 
I heard correctly, you said that work needs to be done on a 
long-term safety net because, in fact, in this province there 
hasn’t been a long-term safety net for quite some time, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now the other question that I would have regarding this issue is 
the $1.3 billion. That figure came about through calculations I 
believe over . . . when economists looked at the trade distortion 
that occurred from ’96 to the year 2000 or . . . and really doesn’t 
take into consideration the impact of this new US farm Bill 
which is expanded. It’s much more onerous. It’s much richer as 
we all know. In fact, I understand that the latest projection is up 
to some $190 million over 10 years. 
 
Are you and your department, are you doing an analysis of this 
new US farm Bill and . . . as to how it will impact on 
Saskatchewan farmers? Will you be able to quantify as best you 
can the dollar hurt, because I think that will be a very important 
figure that you will be needing in your negotiation . . . 
upcoming negotiations, Mr. Minister? Could you update me on 
any work that’s being done in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, we are 
absolutely looking at what the costs might be here in terms of 
impact to Saskatchewan producers. We’re also assured, from 
the discussions that we had just on Friday with the Manitoba 
and Alberta people, that they’re also looking at what the impact 

numbers are for each of them. And as you point out, rightly, 
that the $1.3 billion was done in advance of the pulse crops 
being included in the legislation, in the US legislation, so that 
impact might be slightly higher than the $1.3 billion. But each 
of the provincial departments are now examining what the 
injury might be and we’ll be using those numbers, in my view, 
to justify the position of what we’re going to be enhancing. 
 
I should say though in conclusion of my comments, where you 
say there has not been any long-term safety nets, and every time 
I hear people say that to me, it creates a bit of ire for me. 
Because in Canada today, we have had long-term safety nets in 
place. Now you can argue that they aren’t any good, which 
you’ll get no argument from me about for a moment. 
 
But we have had long-term safety nets. They’ve been in the 
form of AIDA and CFIP and NISA and crop insurance. Those 
have been the long-term safety nets that we’ve had in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada now since 1997. 
 
And we’ll all agree that they haven’t worked and they haven’t 
been able to deal with the risk of the insurance piece, nor have 
they been able to provide income stability. But we shouldn’t say 
to Saskatchewan people and to Canadians that you haven’t had 
a long-term safety net, because they have. 
 
Now it hasn’t worked and we’ve put tons of money into it. Last 
year we put $200 million, additional dollars, into C-SAP on top 
of the safety nets that are there. The year before that we put 
$200 million worth of C-SAP I (Canada-Saskatchewan 
Adjustment Program ) in on top of the safety net programs that 
are there. Prior to that we put $300 million into an off . . . 
(inaudible) . . . a transportation program. 
 
So in Canada today we have had a safety net, doesn’t work. So 
that’s why we have today the new policy framework, which I 
expect that you and I will have a debate about in the future, and 
that when the provincial governments and the federal 
government bring the program together that’s going to be 
suitable, I know that you’re going to applaud it because by then 
it will be a relatively good program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report considerable progress on Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization and then proceed to estimates on Health. 
 
The committee recessed until 19:00. 
 


