















































Hansard: April 08, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 481 
 April 8, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present a petition 
today on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the new 
tobacco regulations. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Tisdale, 
Saskatoon, and Sylvania, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned with the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition, today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Tisdale and Ridgedale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations’ representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
All the signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Gerald. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. I’d like 
to read all the little notes along the side of this petition, but I 
can’t. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 

the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and the loss of economic opportunity in this 
area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people in the Vibank, Francis, 
Milestone, Abernethy, and Colfax area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
constituents who are apparently very concerned about the lack 
of tobacco control legislation in the province of Saskatchewan, 
judging from the condition of the petition. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are from the city of Swift 
Current as well as the town of Cadillac. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
dealing with tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; furthermore, anyone found guilty of 
such offence would be subject to a fine of not more than 
$100. 

 
As duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Moose Jaw, Aylesbury, 
Pangman, Lloydminster, Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
read a petition from citizens concerned about the increasing 
crop insurance premiums and the coverage reductions. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plans to take money out of crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from citizens 
concerned about the deplorable state of Highway No. 15. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Simpson, Young, 
and Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are received as addendums to sessional 
papers no. 7, 8, 10, 11, 18, and 25. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 21 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how much revenue did the 
government collect from provincial sales tax charged on the 
used goods sold by auction companies in the fiscal year 
2000-2001? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have an identical question pertaining to 
the years 2001-2002. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 21 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: can the 
minister please provide this Assembly with which 
communities were turned down under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program that applied 
for funding for water and sewer upgrades in the calendar 
year 2001; and further to that, why were these communities 
turned down? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
through you or to you and through you to the members of this 
place, nine students from the road to employment program at 
the Rainbow Youth Centre. They’re accompanied today by their 
teachers, Raylene LeBlanc and Jen Reid. 
 
It’s a very successful program, Mr. Speaker; it’s in its fifth 
edition. So in the spirit of the Rainbow I’d like to bid them a big 
Ta wow, a big bienvenue, a big shalom, salaam, and welcome 

to this place. So join me everyone please in welcoming our 
guests from Rainbow Youth Centre. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well I 
would like to extend a special welcome to the group from the 
Rainbow Youth Centre and wish them well in their road to 
employment. And we trust that you’ll have an enjoyable 
afternoon observing question period and the way this Assembly 
works and how your members work so hard on your behalf. 
Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon we are joined by 
the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, David Karwacki, 
and by the Liberal candidate in Weyburn-Big Muddy, Ms. Janet 
Ledingham. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce two former constituents of mine — I wish they were 
still my constituents. 
 
Seated in your gallery are Allan and Ulla Cinnamon who used 
to reside in Carnduff, actually about 10 miles south of my farm, 
and unfortunately for me but fortunately for the member from 
Estevan they have moved to Estevan to reside and to participate 
in activities in those communities. I’d like to ask everyone to 
welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Synagogue Fire 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
last weekend Saskatoon’s Jewish community was victimized by 
an arsonist who torched a synagogue. Valuable pieces of the 
synagogue’s history, including some books that were over 100 
years old that were stored in that particular library, were 
destroyed. 
 
This is a very sad time for the congregation of Agudas Israel 
Synagogue, the Jewish community, and for all people in 
Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan. Since the fall of 2000 when the 
latest round of fighting broke out in the Middle East, the 
Canadian Jewish Congress has reported 50 anti-Semitic 
incidents, including five fires, in Canada. We sincerely hope 
that this fire is not an intentional act against the Jewish 
community. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, condemns such acts of 
violence and destruction, especially those directed at a religious 
or ethnic group. We ask that the people of Saskatchewan come 
together and support the Saskatoon Jewish community as they 
rebuild their synagogue and heal the emotional wounds that 
these acts of hate and disrespect cause. 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Synagogue Fire 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this past Friday an 
act of arson took place in the basement library of the Jewish 
community centre and synagogue in my constituency. 
 
The fire was restricted to this one room but damage of about 
$130,000 was suffered; and more significantly, some 
irreplaceable religious books and archives were lost. Thankfully 
no one was injured. 
 
The Premier visited the site yesterday and today issued a 
statement which I’d like to quote in part. He said, and I quote: 
 

There can be little doubt the synagogue was targeted, 
making this more than a random act of violence. On behalf 
of Saskatchewan citizens, I would like to convey our 
sadness that such an uncharacteristic incident of violence 
should occur within our province. I am confident I speak 
for people of all faiths in Saskatchewan who see such an 
act as appalling. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this act is uncharacteristic of our province. We are 
not a people who tolerate acts of hatred and intolerance. We’re 
proud of our multicultural, multiracial, multi-faith, and we 
cannot stand for incidents that would tarnish that value. 
 
I know I speak on behalf of all members of the legislature when 
I say that this was the isolated act of a marginal individual. 
Nevertheless it is a reminder that as long as there is one 
nameless, faceless individual willing to exercise hatred, the rest 
of us must be constantly prepared to stop it. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

YWCA’s Women of Distinction Nominations 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I was fortunate to be with a group of amazing women 
who are working to make Saskatchewan a better province for all 
citizens — especially women — to live in. 
 
Some of my colleagues and I attended the Regina YWCA’s 
(Young Women’s Christian Association) 2002 Women of 
Distinction nomination tea at the Centre of the Arts yesterday 
afternoon. At the tea we met a group of women who have come 
to exemplify the YWCA’s women of distinction — that is a 
woman who displays sustained and significant commitment to 
society in her field of endeavour and beyond, whether that 
commitment is displayed locally, nationally, or internationally. 
 
The Regina YWCA’s Women of Distinction Awards are some 
of the oldest in the country. Mr. Speaker, they were introduced 
in 1981. These awards reflect the YWCA’s commitment to the 
women of this province; to strive to empower women to reach 
their full potential — be it through innovative support programs 
and services or encouraging them to pursue their dreams and 
aspirations. 
 
The awards give us as community and a province the 

opportunity to celebrate women’s talents and achievements. Mr. 
Speaker, 36 women in all have been nominated for awards in 
nine categories. These women come from Regina and 
surrounding areas. And although only nine of these nominated 
will be officially recognized at the May 2 awards dinner in 
Regina, Mr. Speaker, I believe all of these women deserve 
recognition from the members of this House for their 
accomplishments, their contributions to Saskatchewan 
communities, and to their continual efforts to make 
Saskatchewan a better place in which to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 7 
to April 13 has been proclaimed Sexual Assault Awareness 
Week in Saskatchewan. This week is an opportunity to raise 
awareness of sexually oriented violence in our society. This is a 
time to recognize that every person has a right to live without 
violence or the fear of violence, degradation, and sexual 
exploitation. It is also a time to recognize that we all have a 
responsibility to take action against violence. 
 
The week is annually proclaimed by the government at the 
request of the Sexual Assault Services of Saskatchewan, SASS. 
SASS is a provincial coalition of 10 Saskatchewan agencies that 
provide support and services to people — primarily women — 
who have been sexually assaulted. 
 
Prevention through education is the most effective way of 
protecting vulnerable persons from sexual violence. The 
members of SASS are working towards that goal. As 
individuals we can prevent sexual assault by raising awareness. 
We can talk to our children about keeping safe. We can support 
women in our communities who have been sexually assaulted 
by not blaming the victim. 
 
Violence continues to be reality for too many women and 
children in our province. Sexual Assault Awareness Week is a 
time for all of us to reflect and to take action towards the 
elimination of sexually related violence. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

2002 Roland Michener Canada Games Award 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
congratulate a young man from my constituency, Ryan 
Schedlosky. Mr. Schedlosky is the recipient of the 2002 Roland 
Michener Canada Games Award. He received this honour from 
the Canada Games Council at the 29th annual Canada Games 
Sports awards. 
 
The award is presented every two years to Canada Games 
athletes who exemplify strong leadership skills on and off the 
playing field, combined with an ongoing commitment to 
scholastic and athletic excellence. 
 
Ryan is a first year kinesiology student in Saskatoon at the 
University of Saskatchewan. He is a member of the varsity 
wrestling team. At the Canada Games he won the gold medal. 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

He went undefeated at the games, winning seven matches, 
including five pins. Ryan was also the Canadian juvenile 
wrestling championship . . . champion. 
 
I have had the privilege of speaking about Ryan’s 
accomplishment in wresting over the last few years. Ryan is a 
very gifted athlete and has worked hard at this sport. So I’d like 
to take this time today to congratulate Ryan Schedlosky. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Final Project Day 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday I had a 
very pleasant and informative time touring the exhibits of Final 
Project Day. This was a display put on by the University of 
Regina Engineering faculty and the Regina Engineering 
Society. 
 
The projects on display were created by the graduating 
engineering students and cover the disciplines of electronic, 
industrial, environmental, and petroleum engineering. 
 
There were 51 projects in all and I understood each one of 
them, Mr. Speaker. As a reporter for The Leader-Post said, they 
ranged from the “humorous to the highbrow,” from an 
automated beer and wine sanitizer to an “Intelligent Traffic 
System — a before and after study.” 
 
At the risk of slighting the others, my personal favourite was a 
lawn maintenance robot which will, quote: 
 

provide general lawn maintenance tasks without human 
intervention. 

 
That leaves both hands free for the more appropriate summer 
pastimes, some of which involve the automated sanitizer 
mentioned previously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even if I didn’t understand every project, I did 
understand the most pertinent fact — these exhibits were 
creations by the fertile minds of energetic and excellently 
trained Saskatchewan students who are now poised to make 
their way and make a difference in the workplaces of the world. 
 
I congratulate and I wish them well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Hockey Championships 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Sunday, March 31 the Pipestone Valley Jets defeated the 
Melville Millionaires to win the south Saskatchewan double A 
midget league championship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was an accomplishment as they entered the 
playoff round sitting in fifth place and quite a few points behind 
the league leaders. I would like to congratulate the Pipestone 
Valley Jet team, their coach Dennis Scott, and his assistants 
Scott Hamilton and Marvin Kay on a job well done. 
 
As well this past Friday, April 5, the Moosomin Rangers 
defeated a team from my colleague’s seat, the Churchbridge 

Imperials, to win the triangle hockey league championship. 
Congratulations to Lyle Balog and his staff and the Moosomin 
Rangers team for a very successful season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Growth in Regina 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak about the growing Regina economy. In the month of 
March construction, manufacturing, management, and 
administration jobs all increased according to the StatsCan 
numbers compiled by the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority. 
 
Management of companies, administration, and other support 
service positions have more than doubled from this time last 
year. Moreover construction is up 83 per cent and 
manufacturing up 30 per cent. 
 
Regional Economic Development president/CEO (chief 
executive officer), Tim Feduniw, said, and I quote: 
 

Looks like construction jobs are still showing growth 
because of major projects such as the soundstage, new IGA 
store, and some apartment buildings. When we look at the 
bigger picture more people are looking for work and most 
of them are finding jobs. 
 

More examples, Mr. Speaker, of a growing job market in 
Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

North Battleford Water Inquiry Report 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the report of the commission of inquiry into the outbreak of 
cryptosporidium in the North Battleford water supply was 
released to the public late last Friday. The report is a damning 
indictment of the NDP (New Democratic Party) government. 
 
It outlines how the NDP sacrificed the safety of our drinking 
water and the health of Saskatchewan residents beginning with 
the decisions made by the new Department of Environment in 
1993. Justice Laing’s report says, and I quote: 
 

Whatever power struggles or discussions went on within 
the department over budget the end result was that the 
quality drinking water program was sacrificed as a matter 
of choice not necessity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what power struggles went on 
with the NDP government that led them to sacrifice the quality 
drinking water program in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, day after day we stand in 
this Assembly and we hear that opposition — spend, and spend, 
and spend, Mr. Speaker. That opposition, Mr. Speaker, they 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

 

spend left and they vote right. 
 
And we’ve always maintained as a province, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to work alongside of our towns, of our hamlets, and 
our villages to work together to meet the challenge of providing 
safe water. 
 
And I would ask those members and that member in particular, 
Mr. Speaker, to rise above the politics of the day, to try and 
work alongside of the government in a cohesive fashion so 
we’re able to come up with a solution that will serve 
Saskatchewan residents for many years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has made good progress and 
greater progress will be made. But the first step is to not play 
politics with this issue and let us rise above all the politics and 
get to the bottom of this challenge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, politics aside, the NDP 
cannot hide from their responsibility for the fact that thousands 
of people became sick and hundreds still have long-term health 
care problems from the contamination of the North Battleford 
water supply. 
 
The NDP had a choice. Mr. Laing indicated that they had a 
choice and they knew what the consequences would be. He says 
in finding no. 44, the choice was made knowing the result 
would be a reduction in overall quality of drinking water in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP had a choice, and all of the people of Saskatchewan 
need to know they had a choice. And they knew what the results 
would be, yet they chose not to fulfill their mandate to ensure a 
safe supply of drinking water in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could the NDP choose not to meet their 
mandate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government will meet 
its mandate. Mr. Speaker, this government has made good 
progress. And, Mr. Speaker, this government will make greater 
progress. 
 
And I’ve asked that member time and time again not to play 
politics with this water file because it is above and beyond 
politics, Mr. Speaker. Time and time again we’ve asked him. 
And Commissioner Laing’s mandate was to not lay blame, Mr. 
Speaker. Commissioner Laing’s mandate was to find out what 
went wrong and how we can stop it from occurring again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is exactly what this government intends to do, Mr. 
Speaker. The problem is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. The minister has 
20 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we tell 
a story. First of all, last year, this province put in $1.4 million in 
new funding for staff. We hired 11 new inspectors through 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 

Management), Mr. Speaker; 4.5 new positions at the Provincial 
Lab to make sure and turn around some of the tests quicker and 
sooner; mandatory certification of water treatment plant 
operators by 2005, Mr. Speaker; and last year we spent $30 
million in CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) 
funding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Justice Laing is very 
clear about the government and particularly, Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management not fulfilling their 
mandate. He also indicates that perhaps the provincial cabinet 
did not fulfill their mandate. 
 
Mr. Laing says in finding no. 43 that the provincial cabinet was 
fully aware of the effect of water quality management would 
have . . . the reduction in water quality management would have 
on the province. 
 
The Treasury Board was presented with SERM’s budget 
proposals and all the background information that accompanies 
them. They knew that cutting the drinking water monitoring 
program would mean SERM would not meet its mandated and 
legislated responsibilities. They knew that as it states on page 
210 of this report, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Without active management of the program, the health of 
people with some Saskatchewan communities will be at 
risk. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how could the NDP cabinet approve this decision 
to allow SERM to break its own legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again we look 
forward to standing up on this question period and providing as 
many of the answers and providing components of our plan to 
help the communities across this country and across this 
province by way of example and by way of support to show 
them how, together, we can build a brand new water treatment 
system and make sure the water that people are drinking is safe 
water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say that, members, shame on you for playing politics with 
this very important . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. First I 
would ask members to quieten down a little and I would ask the 
member to direct all of his remarks to the Chair. The member 
has about ten seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And this year, 
Mr. Speaker, for that member’s information, to meet this 
challenge . . . to meet this challenge and work alongside of the 
many communities, I want to make sure people know out there 
that we have 18 new positions and $2.4 million in new funding 
to bring to a total of two years, $3.8 million and 33 new 
positions . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, we as the opposition are 
extremely curious and I think the people of North Battleford, 
who got sick, are extremely curious. How is it that the minister 
can stand there and he can defend the fact that this government 
did not fulfill its mandate through Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management, cabinet did not fulfill its mandate 
and 7,000 people got sick as a result of it. And they broke their 
own law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, time after time I get up in 
this Assembly and we ask that member and that party to join us 
in approving budgets to help put in some support systems in 
place. Inspections are one too, Mr. Speaker. We have to have a 
co-operative relationship with all the communities who own 
and operate these water systems, Mr. Speaker. It is a partnership 
approach of the First Nations community, with the federal 
government, the local governments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And any time you put any kind of support systems in place, Mr. 
Speaker, that member and that party vote against it. So I’d ask 
them today again. There’s been some good progress made, there 
are some challenges that we have to overcome, and greater 
progress to be made. Mr. Speaker, this government is going to 
respond quicker and faster and, Mr. Speaker, the response will 
be in concert and in tangent with our local partner which is the 
governments of the cities, of the towns and the villages, the 
First Nations. We will work together to solve this problem, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The number of 
inspectors didn’t actually seem to have a lot of bearing on it. 
Mr. Laing states that the lack of inspection of the North 
Battleford surface water treatment plant . . . didn’t get an 
inspection for 10 years prior to 2001, and that that had a direct 
bearing on the contamination of the water supply. 
 
According to his report, SERM officials were indicating by 
1995 that the reduction in waterworks inspectors in the province 
was being noticed and it was having a dramatic negative 
impact. As early as 1994, SERM officials were indicating to 
Sask Health that there were so many drinking water safety 
problems in the province that they were preparing a cabinet 
decision item because of the sensitivity of the issue. 
 
Yet even after all that, Mr. Speaker, the NDP moved to the risk 
management model, further reducing the number of water plant 
inspectors. Mr. Speaker, why did the Environment minister and 
the NDP government continue to ignore the warnings of their 
own department officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again we sit back 
and listen to members of the opposition rant and rave about 
what they should be spending on, what they shouldn’t be 
spending on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to point out . . . I want to point out last year when 
we hired some new inspectors, Mr. Speaker, to help meet some 
of the challenges, what did that member do, Mr. Speaker? What 
did that party do? They voted against that budget. So if they 
weren’t going to play politics with this matter, they should have 
got up and they should have said you should have hired more 
— which we done this year, Mr. Speaker. And yet . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister may continue — 20 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, Mr. Speaker, last year we hired 
more inspectors. They voted against it. This year we wanted to 
hire some more, and again they voted against it. So as we 
provide tools as we’re able to afford some of these tools to help 
our community partners out there begin to address the 
challenges, they put up every roadblock possible. 
 
So I would say again to that member, to that party: this is above 
and beyond politics. We have to make sure we work together 
with the community to begin to address these long-term 
challenge that we all face. And, Mr. Speaker, that work has to 
start now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Justice Laing concludes that it was only due to concerns raised 
by the Department of Health and Municipal Affairs that SERM 
did not completely abandon its role as regulator of drinking 
water in this province. 
 
In the fall of 1999 and the spring of 2000, the Minister of Sask 
Water — who was then the minister of Environment — it was 
his department who was wanting to shirk their responsibilities 
and reduce water monitoring even further. 
 
An e-mail Justice Laing prints in his report on page 215 from 
one department official says it best. And I quote: 
 

I have never been comfortable with our overall approach 
. . . drinking water at SERM . . . 
 
. . . it’s our mandate, we’ve either got to deliver it ourselves 
or develop a partnership with another agency like Health 
for delivery . . . Whichever agency delivers the program, 
they’ve got to have the horsepower to do it; at the end of 
the day, the provincial government has a responsibility for 
safe drinking water. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why his Department of 
Environment was trying to get out of monitoring water quality 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the most important thing 
is to point out water inspections are one tool that we all need to 
make sure that safe water is provided to all citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And last year, Mr. Speaker — for the record — last year we 
increased the water inspection team to help with this whole 
challenge. And this year we’ve done it again. And on both 
occasions, what absolutely floors me, Mr. Speaker, is that 
member and that party voted against that. 
 
So what we’ve always maintained, Mr. Speaker, is water plant 
inspection is one component of a series of supports that we need 
to put in place to make sure we have quality water for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

 

This government is going to work to meet that objective, Mr. 
Speaker. We are not going to play politics with the issue; we’re 
going to stand by our municipal partners to make sure — and 
the First Nations partners — to make sure we have a good 
system in place to serve Saskatchewan for decades to come, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the whole province now 
knows that the NDP has abrogated its responsibility for water 
quality. We know that they chose to reduce the water quality 
monitoring program. We know that despite repeated warnings 
from environment, health, and municipal officials, that they 
chose and chose continuously through choice. Mr. Laing uses 
that word over and over again in his report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is one question: will anyone — will anyone — be held 
responsible? Thousands of people have had their health 
compromised because of these decisions. Yet somewhere in the 
NDP there are people who made those decisions, who chose to 
cut program spending. Or maybe that responsibility lies with 
the NDP cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did it cost $2 million for a public inquiry 
only to be told that the NDP government from cabinet on down 
has known for the last 10 years about the problems that existed 
with water quality and actually made decisions contributing to 
those problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, 
we can appreciate that 60 to 70 per cent of our population as a 
province is being served adequately to meet some of the 
standards and objectives to make sure drinking water is safe, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know we have about 30 to 40 per cent of the communities 
to work with. We are going to work with those communities, 
Mr. Speaker. We are going to take the lessons that we’ve 
learned from Justice Laing’s document to make sure that we 
apply those lessons right across the province. 
 
And I will point out, Mr. Speaker, no matter what good that we 
do with our partners — the municipal partners, the First Nations 
partners, the RM (rural municipality) partners — it’s not good 
enough for the members opposite. And I will point out that we 
all have to be part of the overall solution. 
 
And on this side, we’re going to lead. On this side, we’re going 
to support. On this side, we’re going to learn. And on this side, 
we’re not going to blink when it comes to commitment to 
helping our communities meet those needs in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is quite fond 
of throwing percentages around but we’ve had the incident in 
North Battleford and, at present, there are still 33 communities 
in Saskatchewan who don’t meet minimum water treatment 
standards and 44 communities under boil-water advisories. Yet 

the NDP are still sticking to their communication strategy as set 
out in the cabinet decision item from last year. You remember, 
don’t you? And I quote: 
 

The government realizes that drinking water quality is a 
priority issue and is committed to working with local 
governments and private systems’ operators to provide 
quality drinking water in Saskatchewan to present and 
future generations. 

 
Don’t worry, be happy. Sound familiar, Mr. Speaker? Again 
today, that’s all we’ve heard from this minister. 
 
When is this minister and this government going to take 
responsibility for enforcing and maintaining their own laws, 
their own mandate, their own legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — For that member’s information, this 
government has accepted the recommendations of Justice 
Laing. And, Mr. Speaker, we have been preparing for the last 
several years and will continue working to meet some of those 
recommendations and putting a plan in front of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But we know, Mr. Speaker, that as a province we cannot do that 
job on our own. We have to have support from our partners, Mr. 
Speaker, and that includes the First Nations government, that 
includes the local governments, and that includes the federal 
government. 
 
And I would point out again, Mr. Speaker, so very, very 
important — in this whole message of safe water we are telling 
absolutely everybody that we have to get involved, that 
education has to be out there, awareness has to happen. And 
what we get, Mr. Speaker, from that member opposite and that 
party opposite, nothing but politics. We will work the solution 
through and we’ll stand by those communities who have 
particular problems, Mr. Speaker. At due times a solution will 
be found, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, last year in the 
government’s own cabinet decision item, Mr. Speaker, it was 
indicated in there that it cost this province in excess of $8 
million a year in additional health care costs because of 
contaminated drinking water in this province. Hans Peterson of 
the Safe Drinking Water Foundation thinks it’s probably around 
10 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years, $100 million. Is the minister prepared to 
go another 10 years and spend another $100 million on people 
being sick in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, 10 years, $700 million a 
year in interest payments; $7 billion, Mr. Speaker, would have 
picked up every waster water and water treatment plant in this 
province for decades to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

So I’ll point out, I’ll point out that that there’s been good 
progress made in many of the communities that he has listed. 
And that boil-water order has been worked on and many 
communities, as we speak, there’s solutions being put in place, 
Mr. Speaker. And that work’s not going to stop; that work’s not 
going to stop. 
 
This is only year 2 of a 5-year agreement, Mr. Speaker, and we 
will work away with that problem in concert and in 
co-operation with our partners, Mr. Speaker. And again, I point 
out, Mr. Speaker, $7 billion could have fixed a lot of roads, a lot 
of water treatment plants. You could have put a lot of programs 
in place, and thanks to those cousins across the way, we had to 
clean up their mess to begin with. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely incredible 
that as of Friday this minister wants communities in this 
province to accept the financial and legal responsibility for safe 
drinking water in this province, but he will not provide anyone, 
the people of this province with any immediate answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we’ll be moving an emergency motion 
calling on the provincial government to accept its responsibility 
in the North Battleford water crisis and that the government put 
forward a clear plan of provincial action for management and 
regulate safe water that does not off-load a majority of the 
responsibilities and costs onto communities and taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP accept their responsibility? Will they 
vote in favour of this motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 
opportunity to debate. And what we’re going to do as a 
government to meet some of the challenges . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The minister will 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 
opportunity to stand in this Assembly and debate the merits of 
our plan versus their non-plan to help meet some of the 
challenges of the water quality across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. I look forward to that debate. 
 
But what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is so very, very 
important, so very important, is every community — and I 
understand that member was a mayor at one time — they own 
their own system, Mr. Speaker. They set rates and they hire 
staff and they deliver services. 
 
We never owned that system, Mr. Speaker. But we have to 
work in concert with the partners and make sure we regulate 
those systems and to make sure that we . . . any plan that we put 
forward, that the communities are aware what those plans are, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as a former mayor myself, I know communities own these 
systems. They look to the province for assistance to make sure 
training is there. They look to the province to make sure some 

financial support is necessary. The province has got to be there, 
Mr. Speaker, and we are going to be there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Loss Statistics 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The headline in 
Saturday’s National Post said “Canada’s job market on fire.” 
 
That should be great news except for one fact — the NDP has 
built a firewall at the Saskatchewan border. March was the best 
month in history for job creation in the entire country except for 
one province, and that province was our province, the province 
of Saskatchewan. Thousands of jobs created across the country 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member will 
continue. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every province 
creating jobs except Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evidence is in. The NDP is killing jobs right 
here in this province. And we have to ask: why is that? How 
can the NDP continue to lose jobs when the rest of the country 
is in a job-creation boom? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to respond to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know as we have gone through the last 
decade, and it’s . . . and we’ve gone through the transition that 
has taken place in agriculture in terms of the job numbers. I 
have listened in this House as members opposite have indicated 
their concern about the changes in agriculture, about how 
farmers are not getting enough for their commodity, and how 
farmers are leaving their farms, and how farmers are getting 
larger, and how the technology is making changes in terms of 
the amount of people that it takes to deal with our agriculture 
community. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I agree with 
them. 
 
And it’s not only happening . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order. I recognize the minister, 15 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
transition in agriculture, I agree with them. And it’s not tied 
only to this province, Mr. Speaker. Canada lost 35,000 jobs in 
agriculture last year, of which 10,000 were right here in our 
province and 10,000 in the neighbouring province of Alberta. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he may want to play politics with the 
numbers, but we had the third-highest job record this March in 
the history of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

 

people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of the minister 
responsible for Economic Development snivelling and whining 
and providing excuses for his government’s lack of 
employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want the 
minister to listen. The minister and the government blamed 
September 11; but Canada has now recovered from the events 
of September 11. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister and his government, the NDP, blame 
the low oil prices. Well, Mr. Speaker, oil is back to over $26 US 
(United States) a barrel. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, like the minister did just a minute ago, they 
blame agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new figures show — and I want the minister to 
listen carefully — the new figures show that there were actually 
12,000 new jobs created in agriculture across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, only Saskatchewan is the exception. Mr. Speaker, 
when is the minister and when is the NDP going to stop making 
excuses and start taking responsible . . . responsibility for their 
failure to create jobs in this province? 
 
(14:15) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 
member that he is well aware of the transition that’s taking 
place. He is well aware of this government’s intention to move 
from primary agriculture to diversified agriculture. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that’s the only member of this 
House — he along with his colleague — who don’t understand 
that this transition is taking place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in the last decade this 
province has grown 50,000 non-agriculture jobs, and I think 
that’s a record the people of Saskatchewan have got to be proud 
about. But, Mr. Speaker, take little credibility with what that 
member’s saying, and I want to tell you why. 
 
His economic development game plan is pretty simple; it’s a 
one-liner. And that is that he’s going to grow 100,000 people in 
10 years. Mr. Speaker, how’s he going to do it? He’s going to 
do a great big tax decrease which he now admits he can’t 
afford. He’s going to carve the stomach out of the Crown 
corporations. He’s going to fire civil servants, neither of which 
members of his caucus will admit to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s their plan; they’re afraid to talk about it. 
Our plan is here. We’ve lowered taxes and we’re increasing 
jobs outside of agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 20, The Consumer Protection Amendment 
Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Oh, why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — To move a motion of urgent and 
pressing necessity under rule 46, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member is requesting leave to move a 
motion of urgent and pressing necessity. Could the member 
read the motion, please? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — The motion reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly call on the provincial government to 
accept its responsibility in the North Battleford water crisis 
and to put forward a clear plan for provincial action to 
manage and regulate safe water that does not off-load a 
majority of the responsibilities and costs onto communities 
and rate payers. 

 
And the motion is seconded by the member from North 
Battleford. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

North Battleford Water Inquiry 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that the common consensus on Friday when the Laing 
report was released was that it was a damning indictment of the 
provincial government and its ability and its efforts in water 
management and regulation. 
 
Now certainly there were other areas of responsibility as well, 
Mr. Speaker. But those other individuals and other voters will 
have a right to, at some point in the future, judge those for their 
actions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we’re here to do today is to discuss this 
government’s performance, the decisions that this government 
has made over the last 10 years with respect to water quality. 
 
I think one of the things, Mr. Speaker, that was the most 
surprising to anyone who read the report on Friday was that, 
when these decisions were originally taken to reduce the water 
quality programming, the water quality funding in this 
province, it wasn’t done as a result of fiscal necessity. It wasn’t 
done out of some greater good. 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

It was done as a result of power struggles within the NDP 
government; it was done because of turf wars between 
departments and agencies; and from all appearances some of 
these decisions, Mr. Speaker, were also made as a result of 
squabbles around the cabinet table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I attended the release of the report on Friday 
it was extremely interesting for me to be sitting there now as a 
legislator, because I was taken back to my previous experience 
as mayor of Porcupine Plain as I was sitting there and listening 
to the response of the minister and the discussion that was going 
on. 
 
And then later on in the weekend, listening to the talk shows 
and listening to a lot of the commentary about the report, I think 
that it reminded me so much of when I was mayor of Porcupine, 
how in so many cases, Mr. Speaker, when it came to the issues 
of water quality, to the issues of attempting to upgrade facilities 
in attempting to provide the best quality water possible for our 
ratepayers, on so many occasions, Mr. Speaker, we felt 
completely and totally alone. 
 
It was extremely difficult to know which government 
department you were to go to and for what purpose. I mean, it 
was as bureaucratic a nightmare as you can possible imagine. 
 
One of the recommendations that Mr. Laing made that I very, 
very much appreciated, Mr. Speaker, was that that be cleaned 
up; that we do look at a way of consolidating those regulatory 
functions, of bringing them in to a single place, where when 
communities require assistance, they can go and then they can 
be further forwarded into specific areas if that’s necessary. 
 
But I know just prior to leaving the mayoralty, Mr. Speaker, 
what we eventually did out of frustration was we actually hired 
a private consultant. We hired a private consultant to come into 
our community and to do a full-blown assessment and analysis 
of all of our water treatment facilities, of our filter, of our filter 
media. And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, we got the answers 
that we needed and we were able to do a lot of things. 
 
As a matter of fact, once we knew what a lot of the problems 
were and we had that extremely technical expertise to be able to 
help us through it, a lot of that we were able to do ourselves and 
a lot of that we were able to do in a very, very cost-effective 
fashion. 
 
And I understand that the current mayor and council of 
Porcupine have actually gone on from there and they’ve made 
some further additions and improvements. And I think they 
should be really congratulated for that. And I think there are a 
lot of communities in this province, Mr. Speaker, that have 
taken the bull by the horns. They have saved their money. 
They’ve sacrificed infrastructure elsewhere, but realizing how 
important quality drinking was to their citizens, they put the 
money, they put the effort into it. 
 
But not all communities in this province, and I would dare say, 
Mr. Speaker, most communities in this province do not have 
that ability. After 10 years of this government those 
communities have had so many other costs off-loaded onto 
them. They’ve had their revenue sharing reduced down to 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. They have been victims of a deliberate 

strategy by this government to depopulate small town 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, they no longer have the ability 
to be able to accept the legal and the financial responsibilities 
that this government wants to absolve itself completely of and 
just blindly, blindly throw it back to the municipalities. 
 
It was interesting listening to Mr. Mike Badham this weekend, 
Mr. Speaker, and some of his comments as a result of the 
inquiry report. He actually suggested that some communities 
could raise their water rates by 10 times and they still wouldn’t 
come close to having the financial wherewithal to be able to do 
what needs to be done in their communities in order to be able 
to provide safe quality drinking water to their citizens, because 
they just don’t have . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
the hon. member for allowing me to introduce guests. 
 
I draw the Assembly’s attention to the west gallery: three young 
men — they’re retired educators — and now present board 
members on different credit unions. From the right is Dan 
Palsich, who’s a retired educator and member of the board for 
Lloydminster Credit Union; the fellow in the middle is Earl 
Nostbakken, who’s a retired teacher and also board member for 
Biggar Credit Union; and the fellow on the left is my father, 
Angus Addley, who’s a retired principal and board member for 
Saskatoon Credit Union. And coincidentally tomorrow he’s 
celebrating the 29th anniversary of his 39th birthday tomorrow. 
 
So would all hon. members please welcome the three guests 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

North Battleford Water Inquiry 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think we have 
to understand the context that a lot of the issues around safe 
water have manifested themselves, Mr. Speaker. This 
government . . . this is all about responsibility, Mr. Speaker, all 
about responsibility. And Mr. Laing in his report uses that word 
over and over and over again. 
 
And how did this government fail to meet its responsibility in 
terms of providing safe quality drinking water to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Because they started out 10 years ago 
attempting to evade all sorts of other responsibilities — by 
evading the responsibilities to their communities, to the 
municipalities, to revenue sharing, to assisting . . . to not 
off-loading costs that rightfully, Mr. Speaker, have been the 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

 

purview of the provincial government. 
 
The deliberate and cynical attempt by this government to evade 
those responsibilities almost 10 years ago is what led them to 
the position where they eventually started making choices — 
another word that Mr. Laing uses in his report over and over 
again — start making choices in terms of decisions that they 
knew would ultimately impact the water supply and the quality 
of the water supply in this province negatively. 
 
Now we’ve got communities that are struggling. We’ve got a 
government that has completely evaded its responsibility and 
now, Mr. Speaker, even after all of that and after 7,000 people 
got sick in North Battleford, they still — they still — refuse to 
accept responsibility. 
 
They don’t want to talk about the decisions that they made in 
terms of downsizing the budgets for the various water quality 
units. They don’t want to talk about the decisions that they 
made in terms of reducing the number of inspectors. They don’t 
want to talk about the power struggles that went on behind 
closed doors that led to some departments coming out winners, 
some coming out losers. And, Mr. Speaker, it would almost be 
laughable if it wouldn’t have been so tragic. Because apparently 
the big losers in the power struggle were the people of North 
Battleford and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management is a 
department that Mr. Laing looks at and he very carefully 
scrutinizes their role, Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years. And I 
was actually stunned by some of the language that he . . . that he 
used when it came to, when it came to describing how it is that 
they had conducted themselves. 
 
He uses words like ineffective, incapable. He also, in some 
ways, makes the department look like the poor cousin within 
government because at one point he actually suggests that the 
rest of government would not give SERM the authority to 
implement its mandate. 
 
(14:30) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is, what is it that went on internal 
to government that put the government department responsible 
for maintaining and managing water quality in this province on 
the back burner to the degree where they weren’t even able to 
fulfill their mandate — their mandate, Mr. Speaker, that they 
have by law, through legislation? 
 
There were a number of weaknesses too in terms of 
communication. I talked about this a little earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
But I think that when you talk about three or four different 
government departments sort of having varying degrees of 
responsibility in different areas of water quality, that very 
obviously led to part of the difficulty in North Battleford. And 
Mr. Laing quite correctly points that out. 
 
And part of that was municipalities didn’t know where to go in 
their times of need. But yet by the same token, SERM then 
wasn’t able to develop a system whereby they could identify 
municipalities or where they could follow through in situations 
where maybe they had identified problems, and ensure that they 
had been rectified. 

And one of the comments that Mr. Laing makes, Mr. Speaker, 
is the absence of a flagging system that would allow SERM to 
detect municipalities who do not comply with the requirements 
for submitting water samples is a serious shortcoming in its 
monitoring capability. 
 
And I know last session, Mr. Speaker, in response to a written 
question around the compliance rates in the province, I was 
very surprised at the number of communities who had 
extremely poor compliance rates. And I guess I asked the 
question, was there a breakdown in communication where 
perhaps the communities didn’t even know what their 
obligations were, that they didn’t realize the requirements, they 
didn’t realize the time frames within which they had to submit 
samples. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker — perhaps there are even 
some communities out there who didn’t even realize that they 
were required to submit samples. 
 
But at the end of the day, SERM, Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management, had absolutely no way of 
determining who those communities were. And you know, 
when you think about one of Mr. Justice Laing’s first findings 
and that was that the city of North Battleford hadn’t been 
inspected by a Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management inspector for 10 years prior to the outbreak, I 
guess then I can understand why there were so many 
communities out there with such poor compliance rates. 
 
If there wasn’t someone out there who was interested, and 
maybe taking a drive out there at least once in 10 years, then 
it’s extremely difficult, Mr. Speaker, to fault the community as 
well, and its citizens, if they didn’t know what the requirements 
were. 
 
Now when SERM chose to withdraw, and it ended up being in a 
position where it couldn’t manage water quality in 
Saskatchewan, and where it couldn’t develop a communications 
system with the communities — and with other departments of 
government I might add as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I guess what I find particularly troubling is that it 
was Treasury Board who, with the responsibility that they have, 
Mr. Speaker, who were aware of SERM’s choice to withdraw 
from the water quality management program, and from 
management of water treatment plants throughout 1990s, and 
they realized that SERM would not be meeting its legislated 
mandate to do all of the things that needed to be done in order 
to ensure safe quality drinking water. 
 
And this perhaps may be naive, Mr. Speaker, but how is it that a 
government department just so easily abandons its legal 
responsibilities, its legislative mandate? How does it do that? 
 
I can understand decisions being made in the interest of 
efficiency, and a number of other things, Mr. Speaker, but how 
can decisions that aren’t going to allow the department to fulfill 
this legislative mandate; how are those decisions made? 
 
And I think at some point, Mr. Speaker, when people come to 
realize just the degree to which this government has been 
responsible for the water quality problems and issues in this 
province — and the degree to which they were responsible for 
the situation in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker — I think that at 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

some point they will, they will in fact pay the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I think surprised everyone as 
well was that two years ago — or last session, excuse me — we 
had a cabinet decision item leaked to us that had all of this in it. 
Almost all of the findings from Mr. Justice Laing’s report were 
almost drawn right out of the cabinet decision item — or were, 
as a result . . . the findings were as a result of warnings from 
other government departments, from the various departments’ 
own officials, a lot of that. 
 
And it’s interesting to note that they understood what their 
responsibilities were. They walked away from them. 
 
Then their own department officials — being professionals, Mr. 
Speaker, wanting to do their job properly, and being people 
who care about what they do, being people who care about 
water quality in this province — these officials put together a 
document and warned the government that if they continued to 
ignore this issue . . . 
 
And right on the front page of that cabinet decision item, Mr. 
Speaker, was a sentence that still stands out for me today. And 
it was that if they continued to ignore this issue, we could 
potentially be facing a Walkerton-type situation in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I find that absolutely incredible, Mr. Speaker. And I was asked 
on the weekend by someone, well does this mirror a lot of what 
did happen in Walkerton? And certainly there are a large 
number of similarities, Mr. Speaker. But so far . . . And no one 
has been able to correct me on this, Mr. Speaker, but as I 
understand it the one thing that the Government of Ontario 
didn’t have — didn’t have — was a full-blown cabinet decision 
item warning them two years prior to Walkerton. 
 
This government had that, provided by their own officials, 
spelling out all of the problems that they would face if they 
didn’t make some decisions and they didn’t take a serious look 
at their role, their legal role, in water quality in this province. 
And they didn’t. They ignored it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we ended up with 7,000 people in North 
Battleford being sick because they deliberately ignored the 
warnings. 
 
Mr. Laing, or, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Laing’s report, Justice Laing’s 
report also . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I would ask 
members to take their argument outside of this room if they 
wish to yell in that manner. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well sadly 
enough — sadly enough, Mr. Speaker — I don’t think we have 
to go through the history of this particular issue any more. I 
think it is now extremely well understood between the 
government’s own cabinet decision item, between Justice 
Laing’s report. 
 
I think everyone understands the decisions that this government 
made and I think everyone understands that they very clearly 
abrogated their responsibilities. Now where do we go from 

here? What about the fallout, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well they came up with a response, Mr. Speaker, and what was 
particularly interesting, Mr. Speaker, was that that response was 
nothing different than what we’ve been hearing from this 
government since two weeks after the original cryptosporidium 
outbreak in North Battleford. Nothing different, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely nothing. 
 
They reduced one budget prior to the report; now they’ve taken 
that amount of money, they’ve put it somewhere else; oh we’ve 
got the problem solved. Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have the 
problem solved. And the way that they expect the problem to be 
solved is by making it someone else’s problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in North Battleford on Friday, it was particularly 
interesting to talk with some of the residents — some of the 
residents who were actually able to make it to the press 
conference, because the other thing about the press conference, 
Mr. Speaker, is that very few people actually knew when and 
where it was. Very few people actually knew when and where it 
was. One almost has to wonder if this wasn’t some type of 
deliberate strategy to limit the exposure. 
 
But those residents that did make it, Mr. Speaker, had some 
very, very interesting comments. And some of them were 
extremely angry — extremely angry. I remember one 
gentleman in particular that after having listened to the press 
conference, and looking at the promotional material that the 
government had provided around the room, he was just 
frustrated. And actually, this gentleman was later on quoted in 
The Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. And here’s his reaction to the 
response. I quote: 
 

They just sat down, took a deck of cards, shuffled them 
around, and said here is your new plan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there was a single citizen of North 
Battleford that was the least bit impressed with the 
government’s response — not a single one. 
 
Now we’ve got other residents who’ve been equally critical to 
the point where they’re saying they don’t trust their water any 
more, Mr. Speaker, and they certainly don’t trust this NDP 
government any more. And, Mr. Speaker, they probably don’t 
have much reason to trust them. 
 
But as well as a few million dollars that they’re sort of putting 
back — they’ve taken from somewhere else, Mr. Speaker — 
what’s the other response to the water quality issues in this 
province, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s about as typical as typical can 
be coming from a bunch of socialists. 
 
They’re setting up — they’re setting up — another Crown 
corporation. Mr. Laing suggested they consolidate some of the 
regulatory function within a single department, some of the . . . 
There were a number of other things that they do. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And what did these folks see, Mr. Speaker, but just an excellent 
opportunity to set up another Crown corporation — a Crown 
corporation to manage the recommendations and the 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

 

implementation of those recommendations from the 
government. Absolutely incredible, Mr. Speaker. If there was 
ever a basic function of government — and in this case it’s a 
legal responsibility — it’s to provide good quality, safe 
drinking water to its citizens. 
 
But no, we have to set up another Crown corporation. They 
can’t consolidate and streamline the regulatory function, 
implement the recommendations, without bigger government, 
without more government. My God, Mr. Speaker, you only 
have to wonder, if 10,000 people would have gotten sick, would 
it have been two Crown corporations? 
 
This is about as ridiculous as it gets. They need to get their feet 
back on the ground. They need to figure out what it is that they 
are responsible for in terms of the provision of good quality, 
safe drinking water in this province. They need to give a 
department of government the ability to be able to do that and 
then they need to go out and they need to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they can’t expect communities and ratepayers to accept and 
absorb those kinds of responsibilities while they’re forcing 
them to shrink more and more. They have reduced the 
population — the numbers are all there, Mr. Speaker, of this 
province, particularly small town Saskatchewan — and those 
communities just don’t have that ability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they certainly have the will, they certainly have 
the will. They certainly would very much like to be able to do 
everything that they can to provide safe drinking water to their 
citizens. But without the resources, without support — without 
support they can’t do that. They don’t have the finances, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And another interesting observation from Friday afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, was that as well as setting up a new Crown 
corporation, as well as further bureaucratizing the entire issue, 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the other thing that they did? Well, they 
kind of turned Sask Water into something akin to a consulting 
firm. 
 
So now we’ve got a Crown that is going to take the 
communities of this province, it’s going to . . . saying that it can 
provide service to them, but only unless they haul out their 
cheque book, Mr. Speaker. So not only do we have the whole 
business of now we’ve got the legal costs and we got the 
financial costs that the government expects the communities to 
completely absorb, Mr. Speaker, but now if they make a phone 
call and they want to ask a question or two, they’re going to 
have to pay the new high price consulting firm of Sask Water 
Inc. for that information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely incredible to think about 
how, after as damning an indictment as the Laing report was, 
that this government has the audacity to turn around and say to 
the communities you will now bear all of the financial costs of 
water quality in this province, you will bear the legal 
responsibilities for water quality in this province, and not only 
that, but if you want our help, you will pay for it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that leads me to the motion. And at this 
point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the motion to the Assembly. 
It reads as follows: 

That this Assembly calls on the provincial government to 
accept its responsibility of the North Battleford water crisis 
and to put forward a clear plan for provincial action to 
manage and regulate safe water that does not off-load a 
majority of the responsibilities and costs onto communities 
and ratepayers. 

 
The motion is seconded by the member from North Battleford, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
the water crisis hit my community last spring, I think it is fair to 
say that most of the citizens of North Battleford took the view 
that it was more important to get on with the work of fixing the 
problem than to assign blame and to point fingers. And that was 
my initial concern as well, that the inquiry might do little more 
than point fingers and actually delay action to fix the problem. 
 
I’m pleased actually, though, that I think the inquiry has 
provided a blueprint for a way to move forward. I think it’s also 
fair to say that most of the citizens in my community decided 
not to participate in the court action on the grounds that suing 
the city and suing the province would not solve the problem and 
get the infrastructure of North Battleford in terms of water 
treatment and waste water back to a standard where it needs to 
be. 
 
Well I think that, while there was admittedly some anger in 
North Battleford, the primary, the primary reaction in North 
Battleford was, let’s get on with the business of fixing the 
problem. 
 
But last Friday in the wake of the minister’s announcement — 
or I should say non-announcement — there was universal anger 
in North Battleford. And I want to read just two, I want to read 
just two statements from Mr. Justice Laing’s report, the first on 
page 223: 
 

The choice was made (referring to the choice to cut the 
budget of the Environment department, the choice was 
made) knowing (that) the result would be a reduction in the 
overall quality of drinking water in the province. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t something that merely 
happened — one of those unintended, unfortunate 
circumstances and incidents that could not have been foreseen. 
Mr. Justice Laing made a finding that the provincial 
government made a knowing decision to reduce the number of 
inspectors, to reduce the budget of the department, knowing that 
a reduction in the quality of drinking water would be the result. 
 
Also on page 226, Mr. Justice Laing made the following 
finding, that: 
 

The lack of inspection by . . . (the Department of the 
Environment) of the North Battleford . . . water treatment 
plant for ten years prior to 2001 had a direct bearing on the 
events of April, 2001. 

 
So there is a direct finding of responsibility. A direct finding 
that the province made knowing actions which had a direct 
causal link to the crisis which overtook our community last 
April. 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

Well, in the minister’s announcement on Friday, we had an 
announcement that the department will take its regulatory 
responsibilities more seriously and there will be more 
inspections. I congratulate the government for that. 
 
We also have an announcement that they will take their 
responsibility for a watershed protection more seriously. I 
congratulate the department and the government on that. 
 
However, when it came to the crucial question as to whether 
there would be any help for the municipalities to upgrade their 
water treatment systems in this province, the answer was a 
resounding no. Indeed, the minister used the term partnership. 
He used the word partnership, but when he was pressed what 
partnership meant, he made it abundantly clear that the word 
partnership means absolutely nothing because what is offered to 
municipalities is the prospect of criminal prosecution. Criminal 
prosecution if they don’t do the necessary upgrading to their 
water systems, but in terms of money from the province — 
zero. 
 
Now, I hear some of the members opposite saying, well, that’s 
not right. Well the minister did try and say that the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program was a response to 
the water program. But of course, Mr. Speaker, that’s totally 
false. 
 
The infrastructure program initiated by the federal government 
was in place before the water crisis. It was in no way a response 
to the water crisis overtaking this province. It was all monies 
that were in place before and were going to be spent before. 
 
So to say the 30 million from infrastructure is somehow a 
response to the water crisis — none of which, of course, is 
coming to North Battleford — is simply false. The 
infrastructure program was there before. It is not a response. 
 
Threatening municipal leaders with criminal prosecution is not 
going to resolve in the upgrades we know need to be done. We 
also know that 43 communities in this province have 
precautionary drinking water advisories against them. Most of 
those communities are very small, and their mayors and 
councils are basically volunteer positions. So I wonder what 
impact it’s going to have on mayors and councillors who are 
paid little or nothing to begin with, who are now told that the 
only help they can expect from the provincial government is: 
(1) consulting for which they will have to pay; and (2) the 
prospect that they could be in criminal court facing charges. 
That is not likely to expand our volunteer base in our small 
communities and throughout rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now on the inquiry itself. We spent $2 million on the inquiry 
but we have nothing, nothing to help the city of North 
Battleford, nothing to help any of the communities facing 
precautionary drinking water orders. 
 
It has been said in this Assembly that I was opposed to the 
inquiry. Well I certainly don’t mind saying that I have 
throughout said it is more important to get on with the business 
of dealing with the problem then it is to get into the blame 
game. And also my fear was that the inquiry itself would delay 
action. Nothing would be done for a year because we were 
awaiting the inquiry. 

Well now the inquiry is out and the government announced that 
they still won’t be doing anything. So I guess maybe the delay 
only meant that it took a year for the government to tell us that 
there was no help. Instead of telling us a year ago there’d be no 
help they’ve now announced a year later there will be no help. 
 
The government of course pleads poverty. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
know and all members of this House know that indeed we are 
facing a very substantial price tag. I have heard the figure of 
300 million for the entire province being used. That is a large 
amount. 
 
We know that in North Battleford alone 1 million has been 
expended for the new ultraviolet treatment plant for the water 
treatment. We know that a new sewage treatment plant which is 
unquestionably required will be somewhere in the 12 to $15 
million range. Those are large figures for North Battleford and 
for the whole province. 
 
But for the government to say they have absolutely zero, not 
one red cent to help, these pleas of poverty, Mr. Speaker, are 
undone when the government in its priorities or lack of 
priorities says we are happy to spend $2 million on studying a 
problem, we will spend nothing on fixing it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what does need to be done? This past 
summer my wife and I were in the province of Newfoundland 
and we enjoyed our visit to many of the smaller communities in 
that province. And as we know, Mr. Speaker, Newfoundland is 
another province which has been economically disadvantaged. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Many of the smaller communities we visited had boil-water 
orders posted around the community. And I remember asking in 
one of our stops how long that boil-water order had been there, 
and the woman behind the counter couldn’t remember; it was 
just something that was always there. In other words, those 
communities simply do not have safe water. 
 
That underlines the point for Saskatchewan, as for 
Newfoundland, that we need national standards. We need a new 
water infrastructure program on the national level. 
Saskatchewan should be pushing for a new national water 
infrastructure program — that should be the position of our 
provincial government — that will have to be cost-shared by all 
levels of government. 
 
They should quit this dishonest charade of saying the existing 
infrastructure program is a response to the water crisis, because 
clearly it is not. The mere time frame says it is not. And instead 
they should come to the table and say, we need all levels of 
government in a new national water standards agreement, and a 
new national water treatment infrastructure program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada has some 20 per cent of the world’s fresh 
water — 20 per cent of the world’s fresh water, less than 1 per 
cent of the world’s population. We should be the last country in 
the world to have drinking water concerns. 
 
Nature has blessed us more than any other country in the entire 
world with more fresh water per capita by far than any other 
nation on earth. We are defined by our great rivers and our great 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

 

lakes. And so it is a national shame that we, of all countries, are 
now in the position of safe drinking water not being a right of 
all Canadians no matter where they live. 
 
And safe drinking water will only be a right if our government 
pushes for a new program contributed to by the federal, 
provincial, and municipal governments — yes, and by the 
consumers. 
 
I would like to say that while I disagreed with most of what we 
heard from the minister for Sask Water last week, I do agree 
that we, as consumers, as water users, are going to have to be 
prepared as well to do our part to say we value clean, safe water 
coming to our homes and we recognize that that is going to 
require a contribution from us as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the atmosphere on Friday in North Battleford 
was one of anger, was one that we have been ignored, we have 
been insulted. It was goodbye, good luck, and the minister was 
gone. 
 
A government which says it has no money, no money to deal 
with problems, has $2 million to study the problem, zero to fix 
it; it has $111,000 to hire a person with dubious qualification 
and dubious responsibilities. These things undermine the 
government’s claim that it cannot assist municipalities. We 
need more assistance for our municipalities than simply to 
threaten them with criminal prosecution and then to offer them 
consulting services for which they will be required to pay. 
 
When the inquiry was called, the Premier said it was because of 
their concern for the situation in North Battleford. But then the 
lawyers for the province at the inquiry spent the entire inquiry 
denying that the province had any responsibility. And they 
simply repeated again and again and again that water quality is 
no concern and no province and . . . of the government, but 
rather of municipalities. So this alone left many people 
wondering why the province had called the inquiry if their only 
position at the inquiry was that this had nothing to do with 
them. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, again and again throughout the inquiry 
that was the position put to Mr. Justice Laing by the people 
representing the provincial government, was to simply do the 
Pontius Pilate routine of washing their hands and saying, the 
province is not involved. 
 
And that denial of responsibility was not accepted by Mr. 
Justice Laing in his report. He clearly laid much of the blame at 
the feet of the provincial government. Yet in spite of that, the 
response of the provincial government on Friday was to offer 
consulting for which municipalities would have to pay, the 
threat of criminal prosecution against municipal leaders, and 
beyond that no help at all. Mr. Speaker, that simply is not 
adequate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 
opportunity to enter into debate on this very crucial issue and 
speak to some of the concerns that I’m sure all of us in this 
Assembly share or we should share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard members opposite using the words 
responsibility. Well, Mr. Speaker, in sitting here and listening to 

some of the debate, responsibility entered my mind as each and 
every one of us having been elected to collectively ensure that 
any problems and issues that our constituents sent us to discuss 
are debated and are discussed for a common solution, not to 
point fingers and lay blame. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I recall, the purpose of the inquiry which 
people had called for and Premier Calvert had ordered — the 
Premier had ordered — the purpose of that was not to lay blame 
but to determine why what happened happened. We have the 
results of those findings and we’re very, very pleased to accept 
the recommendations that the Justice has brought forward. The 
inquiry was not to lay blame. It was to determine why it 
happened. The responsibility . . . And he also indicated what 
measures should be put in to make sure that this doesn’t happen 
again. 
 
But we can’t seem to get all the members in tune here to realize 
that that’s our responsibility collectively as elected members 
from our constituents. We’re sent here on their behalf to 
collectively solve any problems or serious issues facing our 
communities throughout the entire province. Not to holler at 
one another here and point fingers and say it’s all your fault. 
We can do that on every issue. 
 
What’s happened in the past has happened. We have . . . An 
inquiry was carried out, recommendations for certain measures 
to be put in place to make sure it doesn’t happen again. And we 
should collectively be working towards that and not trying to 
determine whether or not it’s your fault or my fault or 
somebody else’s fault. 
 
Collectively, we have to accept that responsibility as elected 
members of this Legislative Assembly. It’s not the views from 
the past, but it’s looking towards the future, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well it is kind of unbelievable, as 
the member from Swift Current says. Unbelievable, certainly it 
is. I mean, it’s easy to blame. It’s so easy to criticize, but not be 
able to come up with any solutions. That’s the easiest thing in 
the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well there is a plan, Mr. Speaker. There has been response, 
there has been a response . . . there has been a response to what 
has occurred. I’d just like to put this into some context, Mr. 
Speaker, and without nobody’s . . . nobody anywhere should be 
shirking any kind of responsibility. 
 
But let me just point out, municipal and waterworks owners 
have the primary role in providing safe drinking water and have 
always carried this responsibility. That’s first and foremost, Mr. 
Speaker. Contravention of any environmental Act or regulation 
has always been potentially subject to prosecution. The member 
from North Battleford should know that; he should know that, 
Mr. Speaker. Determination of the compliance and enforcement 
approach taken depends on the nature and the significance of a 
contravention. 
 
The commissioner . . . and let’s, let’s qualify this and calm the 
waters a little bit because it’s very easy again to suggest, as the 
member from North Battleford, we’re going to be prosecuting 
all the local town councils’ mayors and so on. That’s not the 
case, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s totally irresponsible of the 
member from North Battleford to even be suggesting that. 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

The commissioner recommended that an offence be created 
where the operator continues to operate the water treatment 
plant in contravention or contrary to the operational terms set 
out in the permit. The key is the word knowingly, Mr. Speaker, 
and the commissioner uses that word on purpose and is trying to 
address the situation where the operator purposely acts contrary 
to the permit. 
 
To aid communities in the future, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan water utility will undertake with communities to 
develop solutions to their water supply and infrastructure needs. 
Water consumers would cover those costs on a fee-for-service 
basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve had some comments about the lack of assistance for 
communities in these kinds of situations. Well there are 
communities, Mr. Speaker, that have addressed their water 
issues and I’m pleased to name them, without any assistance 
from federal or provincial governments even prior to any 
infrastructure programs came to being. I’ll tell you the ones that 
are though, member from Redberry Lake — Swift Current, 
Yorkton, Meota, Wawota, Indian Head. 
 
Those communities saw the need for repairs to their 
infrastructure and they went ahead and did it before there were 
any kinds of assistance programs in place. And how they might 
have done it, how they might have done it is the same way that 
communities have taken the initiative to have capital projects 
underway through the Municipal Financing Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those communities that have accepted 
the responsibility, as I outlined earlier, to ensure their 
infrastructure and their water supply system was safe. 
Obviously members here are not aware of the Municipal 
Financing Corporation. 
 
I’ve raised this issue and I would suspect and expect that those 
people, those communities that I mentioned, who took it on 
themselves when they saw that, well we should maybe upgrade 
our infrastructure as it relates to water, took the initiative, no 
help, no financing, no infrastructure programs, went ahead and 
did it. 
 
And how they might have done it is approach the Municipal 
Financing Corporation, determined what costs they required, 
and on the long-term basis made a loan from this corporation to 
assist them in mortgaging whatever repairs were required. 
 
That corporation of Saskatchewan was established in 1969, Mr. 
Speaker, under the authority of The Municipal Financing 
Corporation Act, and its purpose is to assist in making capital 
funds available for the financing of sewer and water, school and 
other essential construction and local improvement projects by 
municipalities and school divisions. 
 
Now there is a limit in borrowing from this corporation. That 
corporation allows local authorities to minimize interest costs 
by offering extremely competitive interest rates and the ability 
to repay debt prior to maturity. In addition, the Municipal 
Financing Corporation offers very, very flexible borrowing 
terms that can be customized to meet the needs of the project 
being financed. 
 

The interest rate charged by that corporation depends on the 
terms of the debt and current interest rate levels. But the interest 
rate is a sum of the province of Saskatchewan’s costs of 
borrowing plus a small amount to cover MFC’s (Municipal 
Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan) administrative costs. 
 
Now the Financing Corporation is authorized to finance up to 
50 per cent of the total authorized borrowings of a capital 
project except, except, Mr. Speaker, for sewer and water 
projects, which can be up to 100 per cent of authorized 
borrowing. 
 
Now during 1998-99 the province and the municipalities . . . 
there was an infrastructure program, provincial municipal 
infrastructure program, $10 million per year. 
 
In 2000 the federal government came on board and agreed to 
sign a tri-partite agreement that would allow something like 
$170 million federal-provincial money to flow through over a 
five-year period to talk about fixing local roads, infrastructure. 
At least 50 per cent of all those projects that people apply for 
will be directed to rural projects. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, just on that note, Saskatchewan’s share of the 
federal funding will be $56.7 million over the next five-year 
period. The program in the first year was considered to be a 
success, Mr. Speaker, and it’s continuing this year. There are a 
number of projects with a priority being given to those 
communities that applied for help to fix their infrastructure and 
are under boil-water advisories get the highest priorities. And 
those communities do receive help in the form of funding from 
the province and the federal government. 
 
On the matter of North Battleford’s situation, they had in fact 
— and I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it should be 
recognized that grants from provincial and federal governments 
can only be part of the solution and that those resources are 
limited — hence I’m sure that those Municipal Financing 
Corporation loans, and people that accessed those monies to 
ensure upgrading of their facilities and their major projects, 
were made available to them, recognizing that funds under 
particular targeted programs are limited. 
 
North Battleford’s been a . . . have been assisted in upgrading 
their water and sewage infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. Their 
2001-2002 application for two new wells in the amount of 
$254,970 from this particular federal-provincial government 
program, was reviewed and approved under that 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. The total cost 
was $394,000. 
 
When the problem became apparent in that part of the country, 
an additional $500,000 of federal and provincial funding from 
this Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program was 
approved for a second project to install ultraviolet disinfection 
equipment and to upgrade the filtration and monitoring 
processes, and that was funded through a strategic project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those monies . . . North Battleford still has access 
to $950,000 from this kind of a program in addition to a number 
of other communities who will have access and who have 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

 

applied and who have had their projects reviewed, and the 
priority is given to those that are critical in nature and those that 
require immediate attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, above and beyond that, we have communities that 
have been working with our Sask Water utility and obtaining 
their advice and direction on perhaps what’s the best way to 
address their immediate problems. And there are a number of 
those small communities throughout the province that have 
utilized the expertise that exists from the engineers and the 
technicians within Sask Water utility, Mr. Speaker, and as I 
speak to the Assembly here today, we have those technicians 
dealing with communities and addressing those kinds of 
problems, and particularly where it deals with water quality. 
 
So it is not something, Mr. Speaker, that’s been taken trivially 
by this coalition government, Mr. Speaker. It’s been something 
that’s been seriously addressed and not trivialized nor has it 
been made an attempt to play petty politics with something as 
serious as a water quality throughout this great province of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of communities that require 
help, and they are being helped. Perdue is, as we speak, member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers, Perdue is being helped. And they 
are one of the small communities working very, very closely, 
member from Redberry Lake. You should check your facts . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just ask the 
member from Melville, the Minister for Government Relations, 
to direct his remarks to the Chair please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I guess I 
should know that, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize. From now on I 
will, through you. 
 
Those members from Saskatchewan Rivers and Redberry Lake 
should know full well, Mr. Speaker, if they checked their facts, 
that Sask Water has been working with the people in Perdue, 
even over the weekend, to try and address their concerns and 
their problems. 
 
The province has been there for the municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker, as I mentioned, through the initial program that the 
province and the municipalities shared, in assisting them with a 
variety of their needs in upgrading — whether it’s been their 
roads, whether it’s been upgrading their facilities. For the two 
first years, in ’98 and ’99, the $10 million each year, shared 
with the municipalities, went a long ways to assist. 
 
I heard one of the members earlier speaking about the drastic 
reductions to the revenue sharing. Well, Mr. Speaker, once 
again it’s a matter of looking . . . thinking about what’s 
happened in the past. Well we’re not looking at the past; we’re 
trying to make things better for the future. And I’m happy to see 
— and as a result of this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, the 
headlines in one of the local papers says, “Losing streak ends 
for municipality”— that we are working with them to try and 
assist them in every way possible. 
 
It’s just a little bit concerning, Mr. Speaker, when we do have 
people that are being criticized — and we talk about credibility 
— when we’re being criticized and the government’s being 
criticized for sitting on several hundred millions of dollars in 

one breath and then in another breath being criticized for not 
having that money and saying that it’s not there and it’s never 
been there. I’m not sure. 
 
The other credibility issue here is when you do, in a budget, 
initiate a program where you include a number of people, 
front-line people, Mr. Speaker, to work on various aspects like 
highways, water quality inspection in the different plants, and 
they vote against it. Even the member from North Battleford 
would vote against that kind of a budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You have to ask . . . And again with the current budget, this 
year’s budget, where there’s additional money for 
municipalities, for health care, and a continuance for highways, 
and other programs, education — they vote against it, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t understand that. That’s a credibility problem, I 
think. 
 
And so I go back to what I started out with. And as I complete 
my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving an amendment to 
the motion. But I again would just like to go back to trying to 
. . . I think folks forget why they’re elected and why they’re 
sent here — not to play party politics but to come up with 
solutions to the problems that we have back home in our 
constituencies. 
 
And you know something, Mr. Speaker, we have to work 
together to do that. I mean the easiest thing in the world is to be 
critical. That’s the easiest thing in the world, but to come up 
with constructive solutions to some of our problems, that’s what 
the folks back home expect us to be doing here. Not hollering 
and screaming at one another but to come up with solutions to 
their problems that we are responsible for ensuring that we 
address to the best of our ability and the best interests of the 
communities at large, and the best interests of this great 
province of ours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That all words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and 
replaced with the following: 
 
Endorse the provincial government’s acceptance of the 
recommendations of Justice Laing and respond with a clear 
plan of action that improves the regulatory system and 
works co-operatively with municipalities and First Nations 
to secure a reliable source of safe drinking water in the 
future. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m very pleased to be able to enter into 
this debate and to speak as Minister of the Environment on this 
very important matter. 
 
And if members will forgive me a slight pun, this is indeed I 
think a watershed debate that we are having here today. 
Because quite clearly what we are seeing is the difference 
between the philosophy and values and approach of members 
on this side of the House versus the blame-throwing and 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

irresponsible pitter-patter that happens on the other side of the 
House. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we have seen in this House over the 
last 10 years a political philosophy emanating from the 
members opposite who first of all called themselves 
Conservatives, and then Liberals, and then Saskatchewan Party. 
And I don’t know if they have yet another problem within their 
leadership, which it certainly appears that they may have. 
They’ll probably have to reinvent themselves again. 
 
But what we’ve seen is a clear difference in emphasis on this 
side of the House and that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the opposition, what are they 
saying constantly? Tax cuts, tax cuts, tax cuts. At all and at any 
cost, they want tax cuts. Mr. Speaker, they believe 
fundamentally that government is bad, that government is 
intrusive, government has no role. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, when it suits their convenience, all of a 
sudden they want to stand up and say, government should be 
Santa Claus, and government should immediately find all sorts 
of money — I don’t know where, because they want to get rid 
of all the tax base — but government should find money to do 
anything in a knee-jerk fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when my party formed government in 1991 we 
understood that there was a clear fiscal mess that we had to 
clean up. And we, Mr. Speaker, we acted decisively to deal with 
the excesses of the Devine government. We acted to clean up 
the debt and the deficit. 
 
Just think, Mr. Speaker, if we hadn’t had to spend between 650 
and $900 million a year on interest costs, what kinds of 
programs we could have implemented that would have 
responded to today’s Santa Claus request that the opposition is 
making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we moved in the ’90s to clean up their fiscal mess. 
And now in this first decade of the 21st century, Mr. Speaker, 
we are enlarging on that. We’ve got stability in terms of our 
financial house and now, Mr. Speaker, we are moving to deal 
with the problems that we were unable to deal with as 
effectively and as expansively as we might have wished in the 
early ’90s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fixing the roads. We recognized that there 
was a problem and we moved to fix the roads. Mr. Speaker, we 
recognized there was a problem with the health care system and 
we are fixing the health care system. Mr. Speaker, we know that 
there are problems with the water system in this province and 
we are moving to fix the water system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of 
sadness that the Premier of this province heard about the 
problems in North Battleford. And indeed we continue to be 
saddened by the experiences that the citizens of North 
Battleford went through around Easter last year. It was very . . . 
a very difficult time for a great number of the citizens of North 
Battleford and the people who travelled through during that 

unfortunate time. 
 
So at this point I do want to say very clearly, Mr. Speaker, our 
heart goes out to those people who unfortunately drank the 
water that clearly had the genotype 1 cryptosporidium in it 
which resulted in some illnesses that they experienced. I do 
want to give my sympathy, and I believe all of government’s 
sympathy, to those people who experienced the illnesses and to 
their family members who were affected by the illnesses. We 
hope that through the improvements that we plan to implement, 
Mr. Speaker, that no other community will have to go through 
that kind of a period of difficulty and illness. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to, at this point, also thank Justice Laing 
for responding very promptly to the request by the Premier to 
implement a commission of inquiry. He conducted himself in 
an extremely professional manner. Indeed, as all of us who 
know Bob Laing personally would say, he conducted himself as 
we would have expected. But it was his even-handed, judicious, 
and thoughtful response to what he was hearing that has 
brought us to this point where we are able to consider his report. 
 
And I understand that some 3,000 copies of his report, the 
Report of the Commission of Inquiry into matters relating to the 
safety of the public drinking water in the City of North 
Battleford, Saskatchewan, I understand some 3,000 copies of 
this have been printed. And I hope that all members of this 
Assembly and anyone who has an interest in water matters will 
take the time, will obtain a copy of this report, and read it 
through in its entirety. 
 
It’s extremely detailed, goes through and talks about the North 
Saskatchewan River, gives very clear scientific information 
about the cryptosporidium, talks about guidelines, standards, 
and permits, talks in very specific detail about the North 
Battleford plants department, and then does an excellent job of 
gathering together in one place all the policies, guidelines, 
procedures, and practices related to drinking water prior to 
April 2001, and then goes in and gives us several 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker — in total, 28 recommendations 
— which we will be acting upon. I want to emphasize that. We 
will be acting upon them. 
 
We called the commission of inquiry in order to learn what 
happened in North Battleford and to receive recommendations 
from the commissioner in order to improve all aspects of 
drinking water delivery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re not simply focused on the North Battleford specific 
issue, though of course as I said, our heart does goes out to 
those people who suffered as a result of drinking that 
contaminated water. But we are concerned as well about 
ensuring that the system is improved all across Saskatchewan 
for all citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did not stand idly by and wait for Justice Laing 
to report. Immediately that we realized that there was a 
problem, we moved and we acted very quickly. 
 
And members of the opposition like to howl when we remind 
them of it, but I’m going to say it again. We asked in the last 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

 

budget last year, we put in the budget the require . . . the 
resources for 15 new positions to deal with water issues in this 
province. This was in advance of the Laing inquiry report. 
 
Fifteen positions, Mr. Speaker — 11 water inspectors in the old 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management 
department, now called Saskatchewan Environment, and four 
workers for the provincial lab. Fifteen workers in total, Mr. 
Speaker, to assist and improve our water capability. 
 
And what did the members opposite do? They voted against it. 
As a matter of fact, what they did was they said that our budget 
with that improved water responsiveness, they called our budget 
a slap in the face to every Saskatchewan taxpayer from a 
government that has completely lost touch with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that it is the opposition that has 
lost touch with the people of Saskatchewan. The slap in the face 
is the slap that they deserve for trying to play politics with 
people’s health and with water delivery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we focused on solutions. The purpose of the 
inquiry was to find out what went . . . what happened in North 
Battleford and then to use that information to improve the water 
program all across the province. 
 
The report contained many positives and many negatives for all 
parties involved. We understand that. We are dealing with the 
recommendations though, Mr. Speaker, and we are dealing with 
them in a strong and forthright, proactive manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we listened to what the people of Saskatchewan 
and in particular the people of North Battleford had to say about 
water. We’ve heard what Justice Laing had to say as he worked 
on his commission of inquiry. We listened, we heard, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we acted. Twenty-eight recommendations and the 
government has accepted them. 
 
The member from North Battleford is very good at feigning 
outrage and discovering an issue — perhaps two or three or four 
weeks or months late, but he’s very good at the bombast. He is 
very good at bombast and indeed, Mr. Speaker, at hypocritical 
responses when it suits him. He says we’re doing nothing. In 
fact, of the 28 recommendations, seven deal specifically with 
the city of North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, we concur in all 
seven of those recommendations. 
 
One recommendation deals with the health districts and the 
establishment of sentinel pharmacies. Mr. Speaker, we concur 
in that recommendation. 
 
The other 20 recommendations, Mr. Speaker, this government 
accepts and we will be acting on all 20 of those 
recommendations. 
 
The member from North Battleford would have us believe that 
he is the great drinking water king of Saskatchewan; that he 
cares. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to simply quote from the 
Laing report which again I did encourage all members of this 
House to read. 
 
But I would call members’ attention first of all to pages 98 and 

99 of the report. Mr. Speaker, in many ways this sad tale that 
happened in North Battleford is also the story of a worker 
understanding that things were not quite as he expected and as 
he wanted them to be, and so he attempted to blow the whistle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Allen, who gave testimony before the Laing 
inquiry, tried to get his superiors to listen to the concerns he had 
about the safety of the North Battleford drinking water. And 
indeed, on September 20, 1999, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Allen went so 
far as to e-mail Dale Goldhawk of CTV (Canadian Television 
Network Limited) television with his concerns. And what did 
he say to Mr. Goldhawk? He said, quote: 
 

I am having problems at work to get health and safety 
concerns addressed. Methods I have tried so far include 
approaching my supervisor, the City engineer, the City 
commissioner, the Mayor, a City counsellor, my union, 
Occupational Health and Safety . . . and even my local 
member of the legislature. 

 
Prior to September 20, 1999, his local member of the 
legislature, the current member for North Battleford, had been 
contacted by a concerned worker at the North Battleford water 
treatment plant. And what happened? Absolutely nothing. 
 
What happened, Mr. Speaker, was that this worker in question 
was labelled as negative and confrontational. And rather than 
the member for North Battleford dealing responsibly and 
responsively with the concerns expressed by this water 
treatment plant worker, he blew him off. He said no, doesn’t 
matter. You’re confrontational, you’re negative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this same member, I would point out, was prior to 
election in this august chambers, Mr. Speaker, the current 
member for North Battleford was a member of city council in 
North Battleford during the 1990s. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I would refer members of this 
Assembly to pages 95 and 96 of the Laing report wherein Mr. 
McEwen, the city commissioner, comments; he made it clear 
that he was proud of the fact the city had absorbed his 
reductions without any increase in the mill rate. He said he was 
constantly striving for efficiencies within the various civic 
departments. And he was proud, Mr. Speaker, proud because he 
had been conditioned into this by the city council of which the 
current member for North Battleford is a member. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for North Battleford on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is deliberately 
and dishonestly putting words in the commission’s report that 
are not there. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Orderly. Order, order. 
 
In the first place, the matters under debate are matters that are 
debatable. It is not a point of order. 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

Secondly, I ask the member to withdraw his statement and to 
apologize for using the words, deliberately being dishonest. I 
ask the member for North Battleford to apologize and withdraw 
those statements. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I withdraw the reference to deliberately and 
dishonestly, but nonetheless it is incorrect. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, you have just required the 
hon. member to withdraw the remarks, apologize to the House, 
and to do that unequivocally. Mr. Speaker, when I listened it 
was . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I will just take care 
of it now and allow me to do so, please. I’ve heard the 
withdrawal but I have not heard the apology from the member. 
And I urge him to apologize without equivocation at this time. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I apologize but it is incorrect. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. One more time. I’ll just ask the 
member to apologize for his remarks. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would at this time like to thank the member from North 
Battleford for his apology. And I also would like to apologize to 
him because in the heat and the passion of the debate, I did use 
the phrase he blew off the concerns, and I would like to 
withdraw that from the record because what I was trying to say, 
Mr. Speaker, was that the indication from the Laing testimony, 
as is printed in the Laing inquiry, clearly indicates that Mr. 
Allen, the junior operator at the North Battleford water 
treatment plant felt he received no help from all that list of 
people and including his local member of the legislature. As he 
says, even my local member of the legislature. 
 
I apologize if I’ve hurt his feelings but, you know, there used to 
be somebody in this House that said if you throw a stone in the 
dark and the dog barks, you know you’ve hit the dog. 
 
I want to further talk about on page 96 of the Laing inquiry, it 
does say that the city commissioner stated: 
 

. . . that throughout the 1990s the City of North Battleford 
was one of the wealthiest cities in the province in terms of 
financial reserves on a per capita basis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the current member for North Battleford, the 
former city councillor for North Battleford may take issue with 
that, but it is stated clearly in black and white in the Laing 
report: 
 

. . . North Battleford was one of the wealthiest cities in the 
province in terms of financial reserves on a per capita basis. 

 
Mr. McEwen then goes on to say, and I quote again from page 
96 of the Laing inquiry: 

He admitted candidly that staffing of the plants department 
was frozen throughout the 1990s at the direction of city 
council who felt its mandate was to effect economies 
wherever possible. 

 
Frozen at . . . because of the direction of city council. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Now, I understand the feigned hypocrisy from the member 
opposite, but it is time that we got to focusing on the solution 
rather than trying to throw blame or trying to, through some 
fancy words, pretend it’s a matter of principle, when really what 
the member from North Battleford is concerned about is the 
money, not the principle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we are concerned about 
the principle. Mr. Speaker, we have done many things and are 
doing many things to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan 
have comfort and know that they have access to safe, clean 
drinking water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already said, we are accepting all 20 
recommendations addressed specifically at this government. We 
have established a watershed authority to improve co-ordination 
and to ensure that all people who are involved in the water piece 
get together, talk, share their knowledge, share their planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re making regulatory improvements because 
our priority is public health and safety. 
 
Environment. The Department of Environment has a drinking 
water quality unit that we are establishing. We’re making sure 
that there are enforceable standards for bacteriological and 
turbidity limits. We will be doing regular inspections, one to 
two compliance inspections per year. Health will be making 
improvements, municipal government will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably most importantly, we’re ensuring that 
this issue will not go away. We will be requiring that there will 
be an annual report to the legislature so that all people of 
Saskatchewan will know just exactly what has happened with 
their water treatment plant in the preceding year. 
 
We will be ensuring that the water treatment plants of this 
province are up to par. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say I endorse the provincial 
government’s actions, very strong, proactive, forward-looking 
actions, as a result of the Laing inquiry. And I do believe that 
we do have a clear plan of action that does improve the 
regulatory system and that works co-operatively with municipal 
governments and with First Nations to ensure a reliable source 
of safe drinking water for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place in seconding the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d a 
great deal of pleasure to speak to the amendment and to the 
motion today. It’s been a tragedy in North Battleford for the 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

 

people of North Battleford, the sickness and problems that 
individuals had. 
 
It’s also a tragedy for the business community in North 
Battleford. It affected their businesses, it’s affected their 
tourism, and again it affected many people’s health and welfare. 
And our thoughts really need to go out to those people because 
a number of them did suffer in fairly substantial ways. 
 
But we need to take a look at the reasons behind the North 
Battleford situation. The water inquiry was held. Judge Laing 
did bring his recommendations down and the government today 
doesn’t seem to want to take any responsibility for the water 
situation in North Battleford. 
 
And it’s very unfortunate that the government of the day who 
must take responsibility for the water situation in North 
Battleford and other communities in this province . . . If not this 
provincial government, who else would be responsible for the 
water safety of this province? There’s only one answer and it 
has to be this NDP-Liberal coalition that is the government of 
the day. 
 
And as Judge Laing said, there was choices to be made and 
unfortunately this NDP-Liberal coalition made the wrong 
choices. They’ve cut the Environment department’s budget, 
they’ve ignored the health of the North Battleford residents in 
the past, and today what do we see their response to the 
recommendations — that they are deflecting criticism, 
deflecting responsibility to the local municipalities. 
 
They are hiring more civil servants to do more inspections but 
when it comes down to the necessary funding for infrastructure, 
this NDP-Liberal coalition government is not stepping up and 
helping the citizens of this province and in particular the 
citizens of North Battleford. 
 
I’d like to talk about a number of issues and a number of 
communities but one that comes to mind that’s in Redberry 
Lake is the community of Perdue which has been going under a 
similar situation. And for three years running now, the 
community of Perdue has applied for the federal-provincial 
infrastructure program to upgrade their water treatment plant, 
and three years in a row they’ve been turned down, and it’s very 
critical. This community needs to spend hundreds of thousands 
of dollars to upgrade their community’s water treatment plant 
and, as I mentioned, three years in a row they’ve been turned 
down. 
 
And just recently, Mr. Speaker, the councillor that has been 
really working hard to try to get some funding from the various 
levels of governments to help with their upgrading of the 
treatment plant, has been notified by the federal-provincial 
infrastructure program and has been told in no uncertain terms 
not to even contact them anymore. He’s not even to phone them 
about Perdue’s water problems and to apply again for the 
federal-provincial infrastructure program. While they’ve been 
turned down three times, and I suspect they’ll be turned down a 
fourth, but we hope for their sake that they won’t be. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not helping their situation in any way. They’ve 
been really left out on their own. 
 
And I would also like to mention the provincial government 

speaks about going to Sask Water for help. Well, the only help 
that Sask Water will provide is consulting services, which the 
community of Perdue will have to pay for. And the Municipal 
Financing Corporation, they will offer communities like Perdue 
a loan. 
 
Well, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this community cannot afford 
a loan. They have a deteriorating tax base. They have lost 
elevators which affected their tax base. It’s mainly a rural area 
and, as we know, rural Saskatchewan is hurting at this time 
financially. 
 
And I’d just like to quote from a letter from the village of 
Perdue, and it reads that they recently had a visit from the 
senior project engineer with Sask Water, and he toured the lift 
station and was made aware and agreed that there was many 
upgrading plans needed to be done. And: 
 

He (was) . . . quite certain that if Occupational Health came 
out to view it, they would condemn it. 

 
And that’s his words. This is the words of the town 
administrator: 
 

Our lift station is probably designed the same as many 
other small communities in that the working area below is 
very small. To come up to Occupational Health’s standards 
for work in a confined area, the whole system would have 
to be redone (so as no other) . . . is no way to adapt . . . to 
what is required. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say some of the problems in the 
village of Perdue: 
 

(And) In 1997 & 1998 . . . (the village) undertook a project 
to fix and expand . . . (the) sewage lagoon. The cost of . . . 
(that) project was in excess of $85,000 and . . . (the village) 
did it with no funding from outside sources. In 1998 . . . 
(they) built . . . (an) elevator road which cost over $12,000 
. . . with no outside funding. In 1999 . . . (they) had a major 
water line break that ended up costing (the village of 
Perdue) $35,000.00. 

 
And this is all without any help from any other level of 
government. They took it upon themselves to do this. And it 
reads: 
 

As you can see, our infrastructure is in serious need of 
upgrading. We are doing our best but with . . . (our) 
continually shrinking tax base, (our elevators are scheduled 
for demolition this spring) (and) we must have assistance 
with funding from some other source. 

 
Signed by Pam McMahon, the administrator for the village of 
Perdue. 
 
So you can see by that example that communities are doing 
their best with what they have — they are. They are working 
very hard. They understand the problems that they have with 
their water treatment situation, their wells, and so on. But they 
need some help from this provincial government to upgrade 
some of the major costs that has to take place with their water 
treatment plant, their wells, and so on and so forth. 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

As a side note, the third refusal by the federal-provincial 
infrastructure program came on a Friday. And the next Monday 
one of the two village’s wells collapsed. And they were in 
desperate need of water and they did some minor repairs and 
did get, did get it going again. But they’re going to have to dig 
at least one well, maybe two wells in the foreseeable future to 
get just water, let alone the adequate water. 
 
And the village of Perdue has, has in the past have had some 
very poor water quality. And just to quote from the councillor 
from the village of Perdue. 
 

Mr. Bott said . . . (the) community of Perdue needs a new 
water treatment plant . . . their water is awful. Their plant is 
. . . rotting and the quality of their water is just gross. 

 
And it goes on to say that, you know, the village of Perdue 
needs a water treatment plant and needs everything — 
plumbing, new pumps, pipes, clean tanks, new filters, so on and 
so forth. 
 
And I’d like to quote from a letter that was written by Dale 
Bonke, the Environment minister, Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management. And the letter, he says: 
 

Dear Mayor and Council: 
 
Water Treatment Plant Problems 
 
In my November 30, 2000 letter to you, I recommended 
that the Village hire a water treatment plant consultant to 
audit the plant, suggest ways to improve the . . . 
(portability) of your . . . (treatment) water supply, and 
apply/ (and) find the resources to correct the problems 
identified. It is my understanding that the Village has 
followed through on (all) my recommendations but to date 
has not acquired sufficient funding to fix the problems. As 
a result, the situation has now reached a critical level. 
 
By way of this letter, I strongly urge council to use every 
means possible to acquire the necessary funding to correct 
your water quality problems. Failure to correct these 
problems immediately could result in serious safety issues 
for your citizens and liable issues for (the) council. 

 
Signed by the Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management environment officer. 
 
This is very disturbing news and to be turned down again. And 
it seems that the only communities that are even considered to 
get help for infrastructure is communities that have had a 
boil-water advisory. And the town of . . . the village of Perdue 
has not had that. They have very poor water and . . . but it just 
shows that . . . how bad the water in a community has to get 
before the provincial government will step forward and try to 
do something about it. 
 
And this speaks directly to what happened in North Battleford. 
How bad did it have to get in North Battleford before some 
steps were taken? Well it had to get extremely bad and it 
actually put people’s health at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole situation that the member opposite 

spoke about — the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to cut taxes — 
she misses a very fundamental point. If we had a robust 
economy in this province, if we had a growing economy as 
outlined by the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to grow 
Saskatchewan, we would have the expanding businesses in this 
province; we would have a larger tax base; we would have a 
growing population; we have more workers in this province. At 
the end of the day what we’d have is more tax revenue for the 
government of the day to spend on infrastructure programs — 
for highways, for hospitals, for schools, and for water treatment 
plants and upgrading infrastructure in communities. But this 
government doesn’t see it that way. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is lagging behind 
other areas of the government. We are losing jobs; we are 
losing businesses. And it’s only going to increase the strains on 
our infrastructure program because we do not have a growing 
economy and a growing province like we need so desperately. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Another issue that surrounds that is the government’s plans and 
talk of rural revitalization and the bus tour that the Premier and 
the government went on last summer. They go into a 
community, and they were in Perdue. They were in Perdue. And 
they heard about the problems of the water situation in Perdue. I 
suspect they didn’t drink any of the water while they were 
there; they were only there 15, 20 minutes and left. 
 
But as the bus tour went around Saskatchewan, they heard from 
people what the concerns were and they always said, oh well, 
we’ll look into it. And in each case that I’ve heard, when they 
went through Redberry Lake constituency, they said, well we’ll 
look into it, but never did do anything about it. 
 
And when you look at rural revitalization, as the whole 
economy of Saskatchewan, in order for municipalities and 
villages and towns to have the adequate money to upgrade their 
infrastructure program, they need a growing community. They 
need more jobs. They need more taxes being paid by a growing 
economy which would give those local governments the added 
revenue to improve their infrastructure that they so desperately 
need to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in North Battleford the people there have borne 
the brunt of the problems that this government has allowed to 
happen. And we must be very careful that this situation does not 
happen again in other communities, like it happened in North 
Battleford. And the villages and towns of this province realize 
that they need to do something, but what they need to do is get a 
little bit of help from their provincial government to help in 
their situation with their local infrastructure and particularly 
their water problems and their water treatment plants. 
 
This government does not accept any responsibility for the 
water situation in this province and unfortunately they’ve never 
had a clear plan put forth to deal with it. All they’re saying now 
is that they’re going to manage and regulate the water system. 
But the communities of this province need more than just to be 
. . . just have more regulation and management dumped on 
them. 
 
What they need is help, financial help, through 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

 

federal-provincial infrastructure program or any other program 
that the government can come up with. Because we’re dealing 
with people’s lives and their health and it’s not their fault that 
the provincial government continues to off-load the majority of 
the responsibility and the financial costs onto communities and 
the local ratepayers. And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like, in 
summing up, that I will not be supporting the amendment, but I 
will support the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. And certainly it’s my pleasure to enter in the 
debate today on water quality in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just like to say, right from the start, that I will be supporting 
the amendment put forward by the member from Melville and I 
won’t be supporting the main motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about the problems that we’ve seen with regard 
to the situation in North Battleford and how it came to be that 
cryptosporidium got into the municipal waterworks in North 
Battleford, this is indeed a tragedy, a serious occurrence in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think anyone should be 
saying that it isn’t, because this government has taken this issue 
extremely seriously. 
 
But when we look at how this happened and we look at how the 
municipality of North Battleford gets its water from surface 
water, from the river, and how it comes into their water 
treatment plant, and some of the concerns that happened with 
regard to filtration of cryptosporidium, it wasn’t so much the 
level of chlorine or the fact that the chlorine wasn’t monitored, 
but it had to do with the filtration blanket that was interrupted 
and not properly dealt with. 
 
Now these issues came out with regard to Justice Laing and it 
indicated that cryptosporidium, because of this filtration blanket 
failure, got into the water system in North Battleford. And 
people who assume that this water was clear, fresh, and safe, 
was not and people got sick, Mr. Speaker. And I think all of us 
agree that that should not have happened. It should not have 
happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we talk about why it happened, we can see problems. 
And Justice Laing has indicated where those problems 
occurred. He’s indicated that there was perhaps not so much 
things to point at in terms of blame, but there seemed to be a 
sort of a, just a lack of recognition that water was important and 
that maintaining good, safe drinking water was extremely 
important and it required the alertness of a whole host of 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we talk about, you know, perhaps some failures in the 
municipal system and we talk about source water, you know, 
from our surface water, from the river, and we talk about 
sewage treatment and the fact that the sewage treatment plant 
was located upstream from the intake for the water system. We 
can talk about all of these things, but what they’ve done, Mr. 
Speaker, is they’ve highlighted problem areas that need to be 
addressed. 
 
And what this government has done, immediately when we 

became aware, is we called for this inquiry and now we have 
the report — a very intensive report. And I commend Justice 
Laing on his report because it really did deal with the depth of 
water concerns in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So this government has accepted close to 30 of these 
recommendations. But we didn’t just accept them; we started a 
process of dealing with some of these concerns some time ago, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year in our budget we hired additional water quality in 
both SERM and within the Health department to deal with some 
of the issues that were at hand, Mr. Speaker. So even though 
this report has just come out, what the government has done in 
terms of a response has been out there for some time. 
 
And what we have done in our plan is we plan to do more. And 
just to talk a little bit about what we’re planning to do and our 
response, Mr. Speaker, let’s just talk about the principles of 
long-term safe drinking water strategy and the vision: a 
sustainable, reliable, safe, and clean supply of drinking water 
that is valued by the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the principles that we have is the strategy must be 
responsive to the needs of all citizens. Human health is the 
primary concern. Preventing risks to drinking water quality, 
including meeting the national drinking water quality 
guidelines, is a high priority. Transparency and clear lines of 
accountability and responsibility must be there, Mr. Speaker; 
full-cost pricing for the supply of water, commitment to 
knowledge-based approach, and partnership amongst all levels 
of government and citizens in developing and implementing 
water management solutions. We can no longer take our water 
supply and quality for granted. We all have to work together to 
ensure that our supply and quality is of high quality and 
top-notch all of the time. 
 
So what we’ve said in our response, Mr. Speaker, really there’s 
four goals and objectives. And the first goal is that the 
waterworks system provides safe, clean, and sustainable 
drinking water. That means waterworks staff are capable and 
well trained, that infrastructure produces water that meets the 
national drinking water quality guidelines, and waterworks 
systems and operations are financially sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And point number two, goals and objectives, the drinking water 
regulatory system is clear and effective. Regulations must be 
clear and ensure that health and drinking water quality will be 
protected in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
professional regulatory staff have access to the tools necessary 
to ensure compliance. 
 
And the third goal and objective in the strategy in our plan, Mr. 
Speaker, is that source waters are protected now and into the 
future. Risks to source water quality are known, they must be 
known, and watersheds are protected, natural purification and 
protection processes are maximized, and potential for 
contamination is minimized. 
 
And the fourth goal and objective, Mr. Speaker, is that citizens 
and consumers trust and value their drinking water and the 
operations that produce it. And this means: citizens have 
meaningful access to information about the quality of their 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

water on an ongoing basis; that reduced consumption of water 
is entertained; that consumers value quality water and are 
willing to pay for it; and citizens and consumers trust the 
quality and reliability of their drinking water systems and are 
confident in the regulatory system. 
 
And to that end we have created a Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority to ensure that our source waters are of the optimum 
performance, Mr. Speaker. And we have talked about 
regulatory improvements. The recommendations of Justice 
Laing are being adopted with regard to regulatory 
improvements and we have talked about water system delivery 
and improvements that need to be made there. 
 
So our response, our plan is a very good one, Mr. Speaker. We 
recognize that problems have occurred; that indeed the tragedy 
of North Battleford should never happen again; and that we are 
working with partners, communities, and citizens to ensure that 
we have this. 
 
Now let me just speak a little bit about the Municipal Financing 
Corporation. Mr. Speaker, there was some talk that perhaps, 
you know, this was something that was something new or it’s 
been around . . . it hasn’t been around for very long and that 
somehow there were some strange accounting principles 
associated with it. 
 
Well I mentioned, you know . . . For example, the Finance critic 
when he talked about the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation, well this particular new corporation is modelled on 
the Municipal Financing Corporation. And what it does, Mr. 
Speaker, is it provides dollars to communities, 100 per cent for 
water infrastructure using the borrowing power of government 
to provide those dollars. 
 
Now when you ask, well how long has this been in existence 
and how long have these accounting principles been in 
existence? Well it’s decades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no shifting of accounting principles or policies with 
regards to the Municipal Financing Corporation and there’s no 
shifting with regard to the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation. Those accounting principles have been in 
existence in this particular province for decades and across 
multiple stripes of government, Mr. Speaker. So there’s no, no 
skulduggery or funny bookkeeping going on here. 
 
But what this says is that we have, and as the member from 
Melville has indicated, we have the potential now for anyone 
who asks, who want to improve their infrastructure structure, 
the dollars are there. They just have to ask for them, Mr. 
Speaker, and this government will provide them. 
 
And yes, we will work in partnership with the federal 
government and municipalities and working on infrastructure 
programs that can be capitalized. There’s no problem there 
either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about what we’re doing in this province and 
our response to make sure that we have quality water 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan, I have to remind the 
members opposite about what their approach has been. Because 
when they put their eggs in their platform basket and they got 

all of their heads together — and I’m sure they had glasses of 
water sitting in front of them, Mr. Speaker — they did not 
mention water quality. They do not mention water quality in 
their platform. 
 
And when we asked them about what they would do with 
regard to municipalities, guess what they said in their platform 
in 1999, Mr. Speaker? Guess what they said? And I quote from 
page 17, bullet no. 4 on the bottom of, new partnership with 
municipal government, The Way Up, it says: 
 

Amending legislation and regulations to give municipalities 
the freedom to deliver local services with a minimum of 
provincial government interference. 

 
That’s what they said. And then they have the nerve today to 
get up and say we need to be . . . have more regulation in the 
provincial government, Mr. Speaker. They criticize the 
provincial government when they would have turned all of the 
regulations over to municipalities. 
 
Well this provincial government will not ignore its 
responsibility for water in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we 
are making sure that the regulatory regime is in full place so 
that the people of Saskatchewan can be protected. 
 
Now when we have, you know, action plans and our plan is 
intensive, and we look at their plan to grow Saskatchewan and 
their points — what did they say about water and water quality? 
Nothing. Nothing, Mr. Speaker. They have not said one thing 
because water is not important to the members opposite because 
it’s an issue of no concern to them. 
 
So I just cannot believe that they come up here and ask for an 
emergency debate on an issue that we’ve had out there for some 
time; that this government has been responding to for some 
time; and now we have an action plan — all 28 
recommendations adopted — and the plan that will provide for 
good quality water in the province of Saskatchewan for years 
and decades to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we plan on doing as a government is ensuring that all 
of the levels of government — whether it’s municipalities, 
provincial, or federal — and the citizens of Saskatchewan can 
participate in making sure that quality water is of prime concern 
to the people of this province and to this government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with these remarks I would just like to say that 
I will be supporting the amendment. I support the approach of 
government. I will not be supporting the amendment of the 
members opposite. 
 
And I just wanted to highlight again, Mr. Speaker, that they 
have no plan, and that their motion makes no sense, and their 
track record on water is zero, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will be supporting our amendment. Thank you, very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a pleasure 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

 

to be able to enter into this afternoon’s debate, this very 
important debate, dealing with water — both the quantity and 
quality of supply and safe drinking water to all our communities 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know of the importance of water and the 
vital role it plays in everyone’s life, Mr. Speaker. That certainly 
has been brought out by recent events in North Battleford where 
they had a quality problem — it wasn’t so much a quantity 
problem, but it certainly was a quality problem. 
 
There are numerous communities in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
who have problems both with quantity and quality, and who are 
at the same time facing a revenue shortfall, a cost-price squeeze 
if you will, in their communities. Many small communities in 
my constituency are losing . . . have lost their grain elevators, a 
major tax base in their communities, and at the same time their 
water and sewer infrastructure is aged, it’s near the end of its 
useful lifetime, and they are looking at replacing it. And so they 
have that problem, and now there are one or two communities 
in the constituency who are at this moment experiencing some 
very serious water supply problems. And I will mention the 
village of Elfros in a moment or two. 
 
But what I’d like to say at this time, Mr. Speaker, is that we on 
this side of the House put forth a motion today which calls on 
this government to take its responsibility in not only managing 
and regulating, but also it has a responsibility to help with some 
of the costs that these communities are facing at this present 
time. 
 
Now I know . . . And some of the members opposite, they like 
to talk about the fact — and we’ve seen that most of them live 
in the major cities — that there aren’t any taxpayer dollars 
going into these cities’ water sewer and supply. Well I’m not 
too sure if that actually is a fact. I think back to the Buffalo 
Plains water pipeline, it seems to me that there was some 
massive federal and provincial dollars that went into that. 
 
And I guess what some of the small communities are saying is, 
look, we don’t expect the taxpayers of this province to do 
everything for us, but when we’re in crisis we do need a bit of a 
helping hand. 
 
And what does this government come forward with in their 
amendment? They talk about improving the regulatory system. 
There’s no mention of financial assistance. In fact there isn’t 
even any mention of technical assistance. Currently, I 
understand, through Sask Water there is some minimal 
technical assistance to some of the communities and it’s 
certainly useful, and the communities are making use of these 
technical assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, you may have noticed in the 
media that there is a problem in the village of Elfros with their 
water supply. Last year, last August I believe it was, the village 
of Elfros spent $30,000 in drilling a new well to ensure a supply 
of water. They thought that they had at that time tapped into a 
very reliable, good quality water supply for their village. As I 
said, it cost them $30,000. I should mention that the village of 
Elfros has about 160 people living in that community and they 
did this on their own. 
 

They had applied earlier, probably in the fall of 2000, for an 
infrastructure grant. They received a letter dated April 9, 2001 
saying that they were . . . from the infrastructure program 
administrator saying that the village of Elfros was not 
successful in getting any financial help from that program. So 
the residents of the community went ahead, got a well driller, 
drilled this new well, and they thought they were . . . had a good 
and safe water supply secured. 
 
But much to their disappointment and concern, on March 19 the 
well went dry and ever since that time, Mr. Speaker, they have a 
well driller in to drill . . . look for a new water supply but in the 
meantime they’re hauling water. And hauling water is not a 
cheap undertaking. In fact it’s very costly. 
 
I’ve heard members of opposite, ministers of this government 
say, well some of these small communities may have to look at 
hauling water in the future because we just can’t fix all the 
water supplies that are out there; we can’t fix the infrastructure 
and the distribution system so we’ll go back to the old system 
of the waterman with two 5-gallon pails delivering 10 gallons 
or 15 gallons or 20 gallons of water to each household. Well I 
don’t think that’s a . . . I don’t think anybody believes that 
that’s realistic and I don’t think these people, when they made 
these suggestions, actually looked into what hauling water to a 
community would cost. 
 
Well I can give them some factual information, Mr. Speaker, as 
to what hauling water to a small community costs. The village 
of Elfros, as I said, has been hauling water to their residents, to 
their town reservoir since March 19 and it’s a 40-mile round 
trip to haul the water, Mr. Speaker. And they’re hauling about 
12,000 gallons a day and it’s costing them $1,000 per day to 
haul this water. And that has . . . that’s just to haul the water, 
Mr. Speaker. I believe there’s no cost in getting the water. If it 
is, it’s very minimal but the large costs are in hauling water. 
 
And this is something that they . . . the small village is going to 
have to pay for. They’ve been asking this government for some 
financial assistance, and the only thing that they get from this 
government, to this point in time, is go and see the Municipal 
Financing Corporation and borrow the money. There hasn’t 
been one dollar to this time, Mr. Speaker, in helping these 
people. 
 
Since March 19, as I mentioned, they’ve engaged a well-drilling 
contractor to seek a supply of water. I talked to them this 
afternoon. They are currently pump testing a well and they’re 
hopeful that this will be the supply. But this is the sixth hole 
that they’ve drilled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As far as costs of this water crisis since March 19, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve received invoices from the person hauling the water for 
them and also from the well driller to this point totalling about 
$30,000, Mr. Speaker. But they feel that there’s probably 
another 15 to $20,000 to come in outstanding bills. 
 
So for this small village of 160 people, since last August they 
will have incurred about $80,000 in expenditures just for a well, 
just for a safe supply of water, Mr. Speaker. That works out to 
about $500 for every man, woman, and child living in that 
community. 
 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

And that has nothing to do with the distribution, the filtration, 
their water plant. This is just to gain a reliable supply of water. 
And as I said, Mr. Speaker, they don’t know whether they have 
that. They’re hopeful. It looks encouraging. They tell me that 
they’ve been pumping it since last night, the well, and they’re 
going to pump it for a couple of days. 
 
They have been . . . Sask Water has been in touch with them, 
and the people that are looking after the water situation in 
Elfros have been talking to some of the Sask Water engineers. 
They’ve been getting some advice. The comment that I had is 
they’re not sure how helpful it is. But most of the decisions that 
have been made in that community have been made by the local 
individuals. And as I said, they feel they may have a good 
supply of water. 
 
But that doesn’t say anything to address their aging 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. And that’s another cost that they’re 
very concerned about and that’s something that they will have 
to deal with at another day. 
 
I should mention that they did get a little bit of help with these 
high costs on their very first well that they drilled last summer, 
Mr. Speaker, and that was $1,400 from . . . through a PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) grant from the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other communities in my 
constituency that are very concerned about their water supply. 
In order to have a viable community that will attract industry 
and economic activity in their communities, water is of course 
one of the very . . . the essentials that are needed. 
 
The town of Wynyard has, as I have mentioned on numerous 
occasions, has a . . . the only poultry processing plant in this 
province. And that processing plant, I had the opportunity to 
tour it a couple of months ago. That poultry processing plant 
uses a lot of water to . . . in its operation. 
 
And the town of Wynyard is having some real major problems 
in supplying enough good quality water for that plant. They are 
constantly developing new wells and looking for other supplies 
and so on, and that’s . . . I’ve been in discussion with them for 
quite some time as to how we can attack this problem. 
 
They haven’t found any solutions. They’ve been talking to 
agencies of government and to this point in time there hasn’t 
been a real solution put forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The First Nations community of Day Star, which is in my 
constituency, has had a long, ongoing problem with good . . . a 
good supply of drinking water. In fact, I believe they were on a 
boil-water list for quite some time. I’m not sure. I was told by 
the chief that there is some movement in that area, that they feel 
that they will be able to perhaps rectify that situation before too 
long. But this is all through their . . . I asked them if there was 
any help from this NDP government and he said no, they have 
been able to do this on their own through the resources that they 
have at their disposal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we get . . . when we look at the amendment to the 
motion that this . . . the members opposite moved by the 
member from Melville, it’s devoid of any reference at all to any 

financial help. And it’s of course . . . it’s not surprising at all 
because this government is broke. They don’t have any money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve got a 45-cent surplus, if you want to put their budget in 
terms of a family budget. If you take the budget, it’s a budget of 
$6.3 billion of expenses and a $45,000 surplus. If you want to 
reduce that down by simply knocking off some zeros and 
putting it in terms that the average citizen can understand — it’s 
a $63,000 household budget, you do all your budgeting and at 
the end of the year they’re telling us they’re going to have a 45 
cent surplus. 
 
Well, I mean, anybody that looks at it for more than two 
seconds will realize how ridiculous that is so it’s no wonder that 
there’s no reference to any type of financial help. And why do 
we find ourselves in this situation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well you don’t have to be a rocket scientist, you just have to 
sort of stand back and look at what’s been happening in this 
province for quite sometime. This NDP government, they have 
no plan or no vision as to how to grow the province, how to 
create more employment, to have more people living in this 
province, to have more taxpayers, to have a bigger base of 
revenue for the government. 
 
We have real needs all across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s needs for water, there’s needs for highways, there’s 
needs for health. And we can’t continue to meet those needs 
with a declining population, a declining number of people 
working, and no plan to rectify that situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, therefore, as they say out in farm country, the chickens 
have come home to roost, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately the 
communities such as North Battleford, Perdue, Elfros, and 
Arran are bearing the brunt of that. 
 
But who are the other communities that’ll be facing similar 
situations very shortly, Mr. Speaker? We don’t know, but I’m 
sure the clock is ticking and the infrastructure is wearing out 
and it will be just a matter of time before unfortunately there are 
other communities, whether they have problems with quality or 
quantity or both, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what’s the response from this government, Mr. Speaker? 
Well more regulation; we’re going to hire a couple of extra 
regulators. But they don’t talk about actually solving the 
problem and dealing with the crisis that we have out there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So it’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the 
motion and certainly not supporting the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
want to express my thanks to the many people that worked very 
hard over the term of the commissioner’s work. There’s many 
compelling tales and many stories and instances of support, and 
certainly a challenge for the people of North Battleford and the 
province as a whole. 
 
There’s no question that the government was profoundly 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

 

saddened, deeply saddened by this tragic event, and that we 
want to advise the people of North Battleford and the people of 
Saskatchewan as a whole, that there are many lessons we have 
learned and that we need to build from here on in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe that the sentiment in North Battleford is one of there is 
lessons learned and now it’s time for us to move on. 
 
(16:30) 
 
I want to commend the city as a whole for doing a tremendous 
job of going through what no city, no town or village, wishes to 
go through — and that of course is a challenge with their water 
system that resulted in several thousand people becoming ill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, as we’ve mentioned 
time and time again, we are profoundly saddened by the events 
of North Battleford. But, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we’re 
known to turn adversity into opportunity. And that the 
commissioner pointed out some recommendations which the 
government has accepted, and the government has been 
working on for the past several years to meet those 
recommendations, to meet other recommendations, and go on 
from here. 
 
I believe the people of North Battleford wanted to have the 
inquiry to find out what went wrong, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Premier called the inquiry very quickly, and I think so very 
importantly that leadership at this stage of the game is so very 
important in the overall strategy of helping communities find 
solutions to some of their safe water challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people wanted answers. What went wrong and 
what can we do differently. Justice Laing provided those 
answers in the form of recommendations which this 
government and this province has accepted. 
 
People wanted to make sure we had inspections, Mr. Speaker. 
And yes, some people wanted tougher rules, regulations that 
would force communities to do certain things in a brand new 
fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that people wanted fair water prices. Not 
high, not low, but fair prices to reflect what it costs to bring 
them safe water to their home, to reflect what it cost to treat 
sewers so we’re not dumping raw sewer into rivers which we 
ultimately draw our water from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of North Battleford, 
through their example and through their sacrifice, want to also 
tell people that if you stick together and build from here that we 
can learn many lessons; but now it is time to move onto the next 
chapter, the city of North Battleford and the water challenges 
that they faced, and ultimately all citizens and communities face 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So yes, Mr. Speaker, many valuable lessons learned; many 
valuable lessons that’ll be applied; and now it is time to 
building together, over a period of time, a new system to make 
sure our water quality is there forever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for information: 60 per cent of our communities 
across Saskatchewan have access to good, clean, safe drinking 

water, and we think it’s only fair that those citizens that are 
getting that good, clean, safe water should pay for the delivery 
of that good, clean water. Some communities pay, Mr. Speaker, 
$50 per year — not per month but per year — while other 
residents in Saskatchewan pay 80 to $90 a month. So we 
believe now it’s beginning to look at the whole aspect of a 
user-pay basis when it comes to that water need. 
 
This government’s role has never been, nor is it now, to fund 
systems. We’ll help those systems through provincial 
government money and money from Ottawa through CSIP, the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. Our role, 
through this Assembly, is to legislatively make sure that the 
water is safe. We are the regulator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very important to also point out that, in this 
Assembly, we believe in partnerships. And meeting the water 
quality issues across this country requires partnerships, and we 
want to lead by example here in the great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, obviously everybody in the province knows that the 
opposition will get up on this day and rant and rave and point 
fingers and assess blame. They want to assess blame, Mr. 
Speaker and, as a government, we want to show leadership and 
not point the finger and say it was that person’s fault or this 
system’s fault or the federal government’s fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have always maintained on this side of the 
Assembly we are part of the solution and it’s not proper for us 
to point a finger and say they created the problem. We are 
saying you are also part of the solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it takes great courage for our Premier to get up 
and quickly announce the inquiry. The Premier believed that the 
people of North Battleford wanted an inquiry, and he put that 
inquiry together right now. And he said I want to know what 
happened here and how we can stop this from ever happening 
again to any Saskatchewan community or family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, approximately 60 to 70 per cent — and those 
figures, of course, get better each day — of the people that we 
serve through our municipal systems for water service are being 
served with safe water. We’re fairly comfortable with that 
statement. It is the last 30 per cent that we have to concentrate 
on, Mr. Speaker — the last 30 per cent. 
 
Of the remaining 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 15 per cent of them 
are farm families or farmers that have their own well system 
and that well system will be regulated or monitored through the 
Health department. The last 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker, is where 
we have to begin the work. 
 
And often you hear opposition talking about a number of small 
communities and I say, as the minister responsible for Sask 
Water, is we will stand by those communities, large and small, 
and begin to help them address their safe water needs. And I’ll 
point out, as my hon. friend has said, that many of the 
communities last year that were on boil-water advisories have 
been serviced or in the process of being serviced with some new 
systems to help them meet some of the guidelines that we have 
imposed. 
 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is much more progress that needs to be 
made and as a government we’ve made that well known, that 
we will stand behind the First Nations government and 
alongside of municipal governments, with the federal 
government, and we will say together, we can impose a 
schedule, we can impose some new rules, regulations. We will 
help with funding, but to those communities that specifically 
need funding. 
 
We also want to make sure that public awareness is there, the 
education of the public, and make sure that they can appreciate 
that sometimes we may have to pay more for our water bill than 
we pay for our cable bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The priorities that we all have as Saskatchewan people and as a 
government is to show leadership on this whole matter and turn 
adversity — as the fine citizens of North Battleford have done 
— to turn adversity into opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned lessons. We’ve seen the leadership 
of the city as a whole to teach us, yes you can go through some 
very trying times, but let us rebuild that hope, that opportunity, 
the economy, and the safety of our public in a brand new day, in 
a brand new system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have not been sitting on our hands worrying 
about what we should do with the system. In fact, last year we 
spent $1.4 million in new funding to hire 11 inspectors in 
SERM. As well, we employed 4.5 new positions at the 
provincial lab to make sure that testing was done as quickly as 
possible on water and the turnaround of those test results were 
well known. We also, Mr. Speaker, had mandatory certification 
of water treatment plant operators by 2005. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also put in through our partners, municipal, 
federal, and provincial governments put in $30 million to the 
CSIP program, of course which is meant to help many 
communities meet some of the water treatment plant costs, as 
we go down this path. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the challenge I think the opposition faces is not 
that they voted against the budget. That’s a known fact; they 
voted against last year’s budget. But the challenge that they 
particularly face, Mr. Speaker, is that they had challenged the 
workers that we put out there. 
 
They went after many of these civil servants, Mr. Speaker, with 
no regard. And let the record show, last year when we hired 
some new water inspectors, there was a lot of opposition for 
those inspectors from across the way. 
 
So it’s one thing to vote against the budget, Mr. Speaker, but 
it’s another thing to attack a civil servant that we have 
employed to make sure they’re able to meet some of those 
challenges when it comes to safe water. And that is what hurts 
them the most, Mr. Speaker. The record shows they attacked 
those civil servants, those front-line civil servants, and now 
today they’re saying, oh, we’re not doing enough now. 
 
Well let’s go back, Mr. Speaker, again to a couple of days ago 
when we announced 18 new positions and $2.4 million in new 
funding, bringing up the total of two years, $3.8 million and 33 
new positions, which include 9 new inspectors in Environment, 

6 new public health inspectors, and 3 additional new positions 
at the provincial lab for water testing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, we have a new computer system for 
faster tracking of water problems and for better communication 
between all the parties. The computer system, Mr. Speaker, has 
Internet capability, where many residents, or any residents can 
look up their municipality’s compliance, with sample 
submission requirements and what the quality of their water is. 
 
We have some tough new regulations, Mr. Speaker. It requires 
system operators to report when pieces of equipment break 
down, and certainly when chlorine levels are low. We’re putting 
guidelines into legally enforceable standards, Mr. Speaker — 
penalties for breaking the minister’s orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipalities have to report annually to their 
residents on their financial plans for their water systems, their 
compliance with submitting water samples, and the quality of 
water that they produce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a new drinking water quality unit in Environment 
will oversee the whole process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’ll also be an annual report here at the 
Assembly on drinking water throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
We will continue educating operators, and, Mr. Speaker, to 
complement some of the work that has been done, we are also 
going to institute a new watershed authority to protect water at 
source in some of the watersheds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a three-pronged approach. First of 
all we put in some tough regulations and rules to make sure that 
some of the communities know they have to follow through. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we also provide some funding through 
CSIP and the municipal financing board to support some of the 
communities out there that have a difficult time in meeting 
some of the needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have promoted user fee, public information, 
public education to get to the solution, Mr. Speaker. And now, 
Mr. Speaker, we have a watershed authority Act which is going 
to help protect water at source so throughout Saskatchewan we 
can have some real plans, a coordinated plan to make sure that 
water — no matter where it is — is protected at source; which 
of course lessens the demand for treatment at the water 
treatment plant, thus lessening the pressures on some of the 
communities in providing that safe water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also expect an announcement later on this 
month, an announcement from the minister of government 
affairs and the federal government, to talk to us and tell us what 
exactly they’re putting forward as a partner between the 
municipalities, between the communities, between the 
federal-provincial governments as to what we’re going to do to 
meet some of the demands of the last 15 per cent to 20 per cent 
of the smaller communities that we want to help solve in terms 
of meeting some of their water quality standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no question this is a difficult file for any 
government to go through. Walkerton was a wake-up call; 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

 

North Battleford was one as well. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has not stopped moving since those wake-up calls. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue building on that 
relationship with our partners to come up with a solution. And 
if that takes us two years to five years to seven years, this part 
of the Assembly, this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, will not 
blink. We will stand with our municipal partners and our federal 
partners to come up with solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also point out there’s a lot of good things that many people 
have done, but a lot of these processes and this progress we talk 
about is going to take time. There is no overnight solution. The 
most amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, despite what the progress 
was made last year with $30 million, and the progress made this 
year, once again the opposition gets up and says, well we vote 
against that. 
 
Why would they vote against having more inspectors out there? 
Do they not believe in the recommendations made by Justice 
Laing, where Justice Laing talked about that? Are they 
attacking Justice Laing’s points when he talks about putting 
together a better system? 
 
Well we need to ask those questions. The recommendations are 
very clear. Does the opposition support the recommendations or 
do they not? On this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we 
believe the recommendations are very sound. We have been 
acting on them for the past year and will continue acting on 
them this year. And I think, Mr. Speaker, actions speak louder 
than words, as I rattled off a number of things that we have 
done to make sure that we have a good sound water strategy in 
this province. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to protect our water from source right to 
the tap. And I think it’s very important that we look at all the 
players and their roles and responsibility everybody plays, Mr. 
Speaker. Not only do we have to make sure we protect the 
water at source, but we’ve got to have trained, certified 
operators operating these water treatment plants. 
 
And many communities and citizens of these communities, they 
are beginning to realize when you pay $50 a year for water, 
then fundamentally you have to be very careful because that’s a 
very low price. And all of a sudden we begin to assess, well 
perhaps $50 a year is not enough money to operate our water 
treatment plant to the level it should be operated. And this is 
what I talk about, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about public 
education. 
 
The municipalities out there have to know that they have a 
support system in place now to help them with inspections. But 
they also have to know and they have to tell their consumers or 
their customers, look, listen, we had to put a financial plan 
together to make sure that this plant not only operates with all 
the rules and regulations and a certified staff, but they also have 
some money set aside for future growth or to replace older 
equipment. And if we don’t do some of these things then we 
could be subjected to fines; we could be subjected to being 
closed down; or we could be subjected to the government 
operating our system. 
 

Now I know many communities, Mr. Speaker, they want to 
protect their local systems. They have great pride that they own 
their systems and they do generate fairly decent revenues. All 
we are saying is, as a result of the lessons, that we have to now 
make sure that we’re more stringent in the rules and regulations, 
that you’re more professional in some of the approaches — and 
the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as time goes on we are going to talk more and 
more about water over the next several months. I look forward 
to that opportunity and I say today that it’s not about politics 
that we have to do this work. It is about progress, it’s about 
leadership, it’s about commitment, and it’s about partnership. 
So therefore I’ll not be supporting their motion. I’ll be standing 
in support of the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly today to make a few 
comments in regards to the motion before us and the debate 
around the quality of water in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, having observed the papers 
and certainly following the release of Justice Laing’s report in 
regards to the problems that the residents of North Battleford 
faced, to find that there was certainly anger on the part of many 
people, as The Leader-Post, Saturday, April 6 . . . one comment 
is: 
 

. . . anger has only intensified among many people in North 
Battleford towards those who let their water treatment 
system fall into disrepair. 
 
(And) “There are lots of reasons why we feel like victims,” 
. . . 

 
And it even goes on to talk about the fact of trust and gaining 
that . . . regaining that trust. I think a comment in this article 
talks about the fact that: 
 

“North Battleford should have the safest water in Canada. 
(And I think referring to the . . . what they’ve had to face 
over the past year or two years.) Yet, I can’t bring myself to 
have a glass of water. Logic tells me I should. But I can’t 
trust it.” 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we think about water. I think we take 
water and quality water, good quality water, for granted in . . . 
not only in our province but even in our country. 
 
We think about the water supplies we have, or we have had 
access to, and it’s hard to believe and even fathom that we 
would run into situations such as we’ve had in Walkerton and 
now most recently in North Battleford, that the residents of 
these communities and many communities across this province 
and across this country would be facing situations where their 
water quality would really be at question to the point as we’ve 
seen in the North Battleford situation — some 7,000 people 
who have been affected and sick as a result of the quality of 
water. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it would be easy to point the finger. And I 
think we could . . . I believe the member from Melville talked 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

about the fact that we blame the city council in North Battleford 
when many of the councils across this province are basically 
offering a volunteer service. And I don’t think any member in 
this Assembly actually today wants to point their finger at a 
specific council or some of the decisions that they’ve made. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, we certainly need to take a look at 
government; we need to take a look at the way government 
implements policy; and the leadership role government takes. 
And I believe, I believe, Mr. Speaker, Justice Laing points that 
out. And there’s a comment. One of his findings talks about the 
lack of inspection by SERM of the North Battleford surface 
water treatment plant for 10 years prior to 2001 had a direct 
bearing on the events of April 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current minister responsible for Sask Water 
just made a comment about the fact that there really won’t be a 
lot of provincial assistance for communities in dealing with 
their water problems. And when I . . . as the member from 
Melville mentioned communities like Wawota that have 
upgraded their water plants. 
 
And I want to talk about that for a minute, Mr. Speaker. 
Because first of all when you look at a community like 
Wawota, for example, that community — when they took a 
look at what they were facing in regards to quality water in their 
community — they looked at their aging facility and they 
realized that they had a problem on their hands and they’d 
better start dealing with it. 
 
And at the time when they started looking into what would be 
needed to upgrade that plant, they went to . . . they approached 
the provincial government, they approached the federal 
government for some assistance because of the immense cost of 
upgrading that plant. And at the time there wasn’t any 
assistance available of any kind, at any level of government. 
And the community finally, and the community leadership 
basically said, came to the conclusion that the health of their 
residents was more important than waiting for governments — 
the senior governments — to come up with an infrastructure 
program that would assist them in meeting the needs of their 
communities. 
 
Now you can say, well maybe for Wawota that was fine 
because they had the resources within their community to bring 
together the much needed financial resources in order to 
upgrade their plant. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are communities throughout this 
province that are looking at a significant financial cost to 
upgrade their water treatment plants. And I know the 
community of Kipling has currently . . . has put forward a 
proposal and I believe they’ve received some assistance through 
the infrastructure program. And so some communities receive 
and some communities don’t receive; is that fair? 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it fair for the government to point the finger at 
local authorities and say, you’re responsible, and if you’ve got a 
problem it’s your responsibility to fund that problem, when, Mr. 
Speaker, over the past 10 years we’ve seen a significant 
off-load onto rural governments by this government in regards 
to a lot of the services. 
 

Meaning that a lot of these communities have already gone to 
their local citizens through the tax base for the funding, 
significant funding, just to maintain the services that they need 
to provide to their communities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be, it would be appropriate for 
a government and governments to realize that they have a 
responsibility. The minister of Sask Water talked about the 
responsibility to lay out some guidelines and regulations that 
could be followed. But at the same time, while you’re setting 
out the regulations — and making sure that they are regulations 
if significant changes are needed — that we don’t off-load more 
onto rural communities so that when they have to address the 
need of upgrading their water facility that they’ve tapped their 
taxpayers to the limit and they have nowhere else to look in 
order to fund their water management programs. 
 
Yes and I did . . . the member from Melville’s pointing out that 
Kipling did get their approval. And that came about, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of the realization of that council that they 
needed to take a significant look at water quality and the health 
of their residents as well. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to comment on the fact that 
communities like Kipling have been very diligent in their . . . 
making sure or seeing to it that their maintenance personnel 
have been going to ongoing training sessions so that they can 
manage the facilities, so that they make sure that all the checks 
and balances are in place to guarantee that the water quality . . . 
the water leaving their plant is of a quality that would meet the 
needs, to the . . . health needs of their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so I think what I want people to realize is that 
local governments in many cases are going beyond what is 
needed to guarantee that there is quality water and that they are 
seeing to it that there is the quality, the infrastructures in place, 
that the guidelines are in place to guarantee that the treatment 
plants are upgraded and maintained and managed properly. 
 
The unfortunate part is, senior governments over the past few 
years have off-loaded on those local governments, and then 
when a problem arises senior governments are not prepared to 
accept their responsibility for the problems that have arisen. 
 
In fact, as we’ve seen from this government over the past 10 
years, they found it a lot easier to point the finger at somebody 
else rather than accepting responsibility for their actions or lack 
thereof. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that as I look at this 
issue — and it’s an issue that really demands a lot more time, 
and a lot more . . . there could be a lot more said about the lack 
of leadership coming from the government benches and from 
the government of the day. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to take a careful look at the 
recommendations and I believe we need to look at ways in 
which we can build for our future to guarantee a quality water 
supply. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, therefore I cannot support the amendment, 
but I certainly support the motion before the Assembly this 
afternoon. 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

 

The division bells rang from 16:57 until 17:02. 
 
Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 

Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Thomson 
Yates McCall  
 

Nays — 19 
 
Kwiatkowski Heppner Krawetz 
Gantefoer Toth Wakefield 
Stewart Elhard McMorris 
D’Autremont Bakken Wall 
Brkich Wiberg Weekes 
Harpauer Hart Huyghebaert 
Hillson   
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly then is the 
main motion moved by the member for Carrot River Valley and 
seconded by the member for North Battleford as amended. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on division. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move we convert for 
debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 69 converted to orders for return 
debatable. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — It now being past 5 o’clock, this committee will 
stand recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


