















































Hansard: April 02, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 353 
 April 2, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present again 
today regarding the children who are exploited through the sex 
trade. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the 
Sex Trade. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Naicam and 
Englefeld. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Crooked River, Prairie River, Tisdale, 
Bjorkdale, Star City, and Yellowquill. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present on behalf of constituents to do with the overfishing at 
Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of Yarbo, 
Churchbridge, and Esterhazy and Bredenbury, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan regarding the condition of our highways. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway No. 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injuries 
and loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Sedley, 
Radville, Weyburn, and Odessa area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about the changes to crop insurance. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Bengough and 
Viceroy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from Swift Current and area concerned about the 
tobacco control legislation in the province. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners, they are from city of Swift Current 
and the community of Success. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents of Carrot River Valley who 
are concerned about certain inadequacies in the tobacco 
legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This petition is signed entirely by the good citizens of Carrot 
River, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with a petition, 
citizens opposed to possible reductions of services to the 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctor services available as well as laboratory, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today regarding the legislation for tobacco. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received and are tabled as addendums to previously 
tabled petitions, being sessional papers 7, 8, 11, and 16. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall, on Thursday next, move first reading of The 
Government Accountability Act. 
 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to give notice 
of a written question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Corrections and Public 

Safety: in the past year, what is the total number of women 
who have died while undergoing treatment in the 
methadone program at Pine Grove Correctional Centre in 
Prince Albert; how many days or months were allowed to 
escape between the time Corrections officials told of a 
possible drug trade in Pine Grove, and of actions taken by 
the Justice department to address this; why was the 
information regarding a possible drug trade included in 
pre-sentence report, but withheld from officials; and why 
didn’t Pine Grove report concerns of possible methadone 
abuse to Corrections officials? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, I’ll like to present another written 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization: as of April 2, 2002, who is employed in the 
office of Rural Revitalization, and what are their titles and 
duties; and what is the budget for the office of Rural 
Revitalization in the 2002-2003 fiscal year? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Environment: of the 10 
municipal inspectors that will be hired by your department 
this fiscal year: (a) what is the anticipated start date of these 
inspectors; (b) in which community will each of the 10 be 
based; (c) which regions of the province will each inspector 
be responsible for; (d) what is the nature and scope of their 
job duties, and does this include water testing; (e) has your 
department made certification mandatory for all 10 of these 
positions, and if not, why not? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I have a second 
question for the Minister of Environment and Resource 
Management as well. I give notice that I shall on day no. 17 ask 
the government the following question: 
 

Which communities reported discharges of raw sewage into 
water bodies to SERM as required by provincial regulation 
on the following dates in 2001: May 30, June 20, July 4, 
July 16, July 22, and July 25. In each case, which water 
body was affected? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming: of the 
updated VLTs that supposedly identify problem gamblers 
and are due to replace existing VLTs this fall, how many 
different styles did the government consider for use; what 
was the price of each brand; which style was chosen for use 
in the replacement program and on what basis was it 
chosen; what is the anticipated total cost to replace 
Saskatchewan’s current network of VLTs with the new 
models; and who will bear the cost of the replacement 
program? 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 17 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what are the names of any and 
all reports conducted for the Department of Labour and/or 
the Workers’ Compensation Board dealing with some 
aspect of the operations of the WCB; how much did each 
report cost the government and/or the WCB; and will you 
provide a copy of each of these reports for the years 2000, 
2001, and 2002? 

 
Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Warriors Defeat Pats 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Moose Jaw North and I are quite accustomed to jokes 
about the name of our fair city. But we endure them, Mr. 
Speaker, knowing Moose Jaw is a thriving community. We 
even take them with a bit of perverse pride as only a community 
with a rock-solid sense of self and a very colourful history 
second to none could do. And in the words of the Easter hymn, 
there is much to “laud and honour” in our city. 
 
As of Sunday night, Mr. Speaker, there’s something else. And 
at the risk of further damaging the bruised egos of my good 
friends and colleagues from the Queen City, I’m happy to 
announce that the Moose Jaw Warriors have advanced to the 
second round of the Eastern Conference Championship in the 
Western Canadian Hockey League. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now who did they trounce . . . Oh, 
pardon me, Mr. Speaker. Who did they defeat in the first round? 
The favourites of course. The Moose Jaw Warriors are quite 
comfortable in the underdog role. Obviously more comfortable 
than the Regina Pats as favourites. Four games to two, Mr. 
Speaker, was the end result. 
 
The Warriors are a community-owned team. Coach Curtis Hunt 
and his team played their hearts out for Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina and Moose Jaw have a very healthy rivalry 
that is well-known. I’d like to congratulate the Pats on a very 
excellent season and I’d like to congratulate the Warriors on a 
great first series and I know all members wish them well as they 
move up the ladder. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bruno Junior Axemen Win Gold Medal 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with a 
great sense of pride that I stand today to congratulate the Bruno 
Junior Axemen broomball team on their spectacular 
performance in capturing the gold medal in the National 
Broomball Championships held March 27 to 30 in Oak Bluff, 
Manitoba. The round robin playoffs netted the Bruno Junior 

Axemen five wins and only one loss. 
 
Bruno advanced to the final after defeating the Windsor Riot 
team from Ontario in the semi-finals. The final game was 
played against College Laval from Quebec and was indeed a 
heart-stopping, energy-charged game with Bruno Junior 
Axemen winning by a score of two to one — the winning goal 
reaching its mark with only 34.7 seconds remaining in the 
game. 
 
The two goals in the finals were scored by Jeff Basset of Bruno 
and Trevor Volt of Odessa. In addition, 18-year-old Jeff Basset 
was voted the most valuable player of the tournament by the 
Canadian Broomball Federation. In essence, he is the most 
accomplished junior broomball player in Canada. 
 
Jeff Basset and Cameron Weiman of Bruno were also selected 
as wingers on the first all-star team, and Chris Lepage of Bruno 
was selected for the second all-star team defence. 
 
A hearty congratulations to all Bruno Junior Axemen team 
players on this most noteworthy accomplishment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Ringette Championships 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan and Regina. 
 
Yesterday I was happy to be at the opening ceremonies to 
welcome to Regina all those associated with the 24th Annual 
Canadian Ringette Championships — that’s 500 athletes, 
coaches, and officials from 26 teams across Canada plus the 
1,500 parents and guests who are here with them. 
 
The host committee consists of representatives from Ringette 
Regina and Ringette Saskatchewan, co-chaired by Fred Pollock 
and Keith Doering. At the onset, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
congratulate those organizations for bringing this important 
event to Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to point out to the members that 250 volunteers are 
involved to ensure its success. Another example of the spirit 
that defines our province. 
 
The games will take place this week at several rinks in Regina 
and in Balgonie. As well, there will be several activities during 
the week. This event will provide a good economic boost to our 
community of about $1 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The young ringette player who spoke for her sport at the 
opening ceremony stated her pride in her province and her city 
as well as her pleasure in welcoming so many other Canadians 
to see for themselves our great province. She and all her 
Saskatchewan teammates are worthy ambassadors for us, and I 
join them in welcoming all ringette players, fans, and parents to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

Eston Panthers Win Midget A Provincial Championship 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Thursday the Eston Panthers were in Weyburn and defeated the 
Weyburn Pan Canadian Drillers to win the female Midget A 
provincial championships in hockey. The Eston Panthers, Mr. 
Speaker, have provided for our community exciting hockey and 
provide a strong leadership example for the younger girls in the 
area playing hockey. 
 
Some of the members of the midget team also earlier this year, 
just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, were on the bantam 
provincial championship team as well. And I understand that 
many of the young ladies on this championship team will be 
going on to continue playing hockey at the university or US 
(United States) college level. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the legislature, 
especially the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, to join with 
me in congratulating the Midget A Eston Panther ladies hockey 
team on winning the provincial championship. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Filmpool Cooperative 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Filmpool is marking its 25th anniversary. 
 
The Saskatchewan Filmpool Cooperative is a non-profit, 
artist-run centre which supports, encourages, and assists 
independent visionary filmmaking in Saskatchewan. The idea 
25 years ago — and today — Mr. Speaker, is to pool expensive 
cameras and editing gear and to promote artistic collaboration 
in making films. 
 
The Filmpool is committed to developing an awareness and 
appreciation of independent film which reflects the individual 
and collective cultural expression of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the Filmpool on its dedication 
and success in promoting the Saskatchewan film industry and 
promoting a co-operative and collegial approach to this industry 
and art form. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wartime Mission to Afghanistan 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Brendon Warwaruk 
joined the Canadian Navy 11 years ago and after the equivalent 
of five years of sea-time experience, he is ready for his first 
wartime mission to Afghanistan. 
 
As a naval communicator, 31-year-old Brendon will be 
travelling along with his crew of 260 people for at least a month 
until they reach the waters they will be protecting alongside the 
Americans. 
 
Brendon said he has been told rumours that they will be passing 
through mines in the water, as well as the ship will be facing 

another level of endangerment as they encounter refugees and 
other vessels along the way. 
 
Brendon is the son of the Mayor Peter and his wife Anita 
Warwaruk of Unity, Saskatchewan. Might all members of this 
legislature pray for Brendon’s safety during his time in 
Afghanistan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Air Security Fee 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, as members are aware, the federal 
government has implemented a $24 air security fee on most 
domestic and trans-ocean air flights. The federal government 
also implemented a $12 fee for cross-border flights. Both these 
effective April 1, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have serious concerns about this exorbitant air 
security fee and its impact on air travel. This air security fee in 
its present form will be a major disincentive for short-haul 
travel, both within the province and inter-provincially. 
 
The added cost for a ticket between Regina and Saskatoon, for 
example, will discourage travel between these points and 
further aggravate what is already a serious financial crisis for 
our local carriers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government’s move will have a major 
impact on Saskatchewan based carriers such as Transwest, 
Norcanair, as well as WestJet. This could be another tax grab by 
the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, air security and the protection of all Canadians is a 
national issue and is therefore the responsibility of the federal 
government. Cost of airfare should not be effectively offloaded 
to air passengers. We are talking to industry organizations such 
as airlines, airport authorities, tourism, and the chamber of 
commerce, which has also raised over the size of the fee, its 
implementation, and impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the federal government to reconsider the air 
security fee, and I suggest the member from North Battleford 
and his leader speak to their federal colleagues. It is an urgent 
matter to the travelling community and the Saskatchewan local 
airline carriers. 
 
Thank you for allowing me to speak on this important issue 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prominent Citizen of Estevan Dies 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city of Estevan 
said goodbye to one of its most dedicated and colourful citizens 
last week. Glenn Peterson, owner of Glen Peterson 
Construction and Redimix, passed away on March 23 at the age 
of 84 years. 
 
In 1938, Mr. Peterson, grabbed a shovel, purchased a nine-year 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

 

old truck and went to work. And, Mr. Speaker, he never stopped 
working until the week of his passing. 
 
Mr. Peterson’s business grew to include a payroll of over 30 
people and over 50 units of equipment. Mr. Peterson was a very 
generous supporter of the community, making significant 
donations towards the construction of St. Joseph’s Hospital in 
1990. 
 
Last Thursday, Mr. Peterson’s funeral was held in the Trinity 
Lutheran Church in Estevan. This church was built using 
concrete that Mr. Peterson donated. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in paying tribute 
to the memory of Glenn Peterson. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government Accounting Practices 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In April of 1995, 
former Finance minister, Janice MacKinnon introduced 
balanced budget legislation in this House. Ms. MacKinnon 
made the following statement about this legislation. 
 

. . . this legislation contains . . . distinctive provisions which 
will help protect the public against any future irresponsible 
government. 
 
. . . the Act will prevent the government from manipulating 
accounting practices in order to meet the balance 
requirement. Provincial governments should not be allowed 
to meet the requirement to balance by simply changing its 
accounting practices and thus taking certain expenses off 
budget. Such practices will be prohibited. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this government has done by 
changing the way it accounts for capital expenditures. Mr. 
Speaker, why is the NDP (New Democratic Party) breaking its 
balanced budget legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to 
answer on behalf of the Finance minister today to say that, you 
know, last year we stood in this House and the opposition 
talked about the fact that we were sitting on a secret pot of 
money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
The member opposite who raises the question says he wanted a 
fall session of the legislature to debate how to spend the money. 
And then the Saskatchewan Party called upon the Minister of 
Finance to confirm if he was sitting on a secret bundle of cash 
and, if so, recall the legislature so it could be debated how to 
spend this windfall. 
 
Now it doesn’t matter what we do. If we’re prudent and we set 
the money aside, it’s a secret bundle — but even though it’s 
secret they know about it and they want to spend it. If we 
decide that we are going to make sure that young people have 
the education facilities they need, the universities they need, 

and that we think it’s important to leverage that money so that 
they can build those institutions, I ask the members opposite, do 
they not agree with that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the Premier to answer 
the following question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
repeat what Janice MacKinnon said in this House on April 28, 
1995: 
 

Provincial governments should not be allowed to meet the 
requirement to balance by simply changing its accounting 
practices and thus taking certain expenses off budget. Such 
practices will be prohibited. 

 
Mr. Speaker, by the minister’s own admission this government 
has changed the way it accounts for $90 million worth of capital 
expenditures. That’s an accounting change. And Janice 
MacKinnon said her Balanced Budget Act prevents a 
government from changing accounting practices mid-term in 
order to hide a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP violating their own Balanced 
Budget Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — . . . I have to say that if the members 
would turn to page 55 of their budget document, it clearly 
outlines the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation and 
the government’s total contribution to that. The fact that that 
enables communities to do more than they would be able to do 
is not a matter of hiding anything or changing accounting 
practices. It is clearly reflected in the budget, the $85 million 
that is part of that fund. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, you know, these same people 
question the revenue estimates. They say that we’re lowballing 
oil and gas. But how did oil and gas turn out, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The budget forecast for oil based on West Texas Intermediate 
was 25.50; the calendar year price 25.86 — a margin of error of 
under 2 per cent. Now the times that I’ve ever heard any 
projections from the members opposite, any time you can come 
that close then maybe you’ll be ready to govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon also talked 
about governments that try to hide a deficit by taking huge 
dividends from the Crowns. She said, and I quote: 
 

You can’t, for example, take big dividends from the 
Crowns, force the Crowns to borrow more, because your 
debt will go up. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t take huge dividends from the Crowns as 
it forces the Crowns to incur more debt. That’s what Janice 
MacKinnon said back in 1995. And it’s exactly what the NDP 
is doing today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this appears to be another violation of The 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

Balanced Budget Act. Why is the NDP violating its very own 
balanced budget law by hiding debt in the Crowns? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, unlike the members 
opposite, we believe that the Crowns are an important social 
and financial and service tool for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The fact of the matter is that they have 
helped over and over again in Saskatchewan. They’ve 
cross-subsidized telephone rates, power rates, energy rates. 
They have put money into the General Revenue Fund year after 
year to help support health care, education. Instead of that 
money going into private shareholders’ pockets, it has gone into 
the public pocket of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
right thing to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to the NDP’s own budget documents, the NDP took a 
$200 million dividend from the Crowns last year. During that 
same period, according to the budget documents, Crown 
corporation debt increased by $143 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon said under her Balanced 
Budget Act, you can’t take big dividends from the Crowns and 
force the Crowns to borrow more. But that’s exactly what the 
NDP did last year, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what they 
plan on doing this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP violating The Balanced Budget 
Act as outlined by Janice MacKinnon back in 1995? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the 
members’ opposite conversion to Janice MacKinnon’s 
principles of finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — He certainly wasn’t as enamoured of 
them when that member was with us in the House. 
 
But I have to say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Crowns play a very legitimate role in helping to support the 
services that are provided in Saskatchewan, both their core 
services as well as the other services to Saskatchewan people. 
These Crowns today have a healthier debt/equity ratio than they 
had at any time when the members opposite were in 
government and their pals. And it’s very responsible that these 
Crowns return revenues to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s ironic how this government has treated legislation 

of the past. We saw what they did with GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) contracts and that legislation. But, you 
know, now . . . now they don’t even have regards for their own 
legislation, their own balanced budget legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, no one, no one is falling for the 
NDP’s fudge-it budget. The numbers don’t add up. And now it 
appears they may be violating their own Balanced Budget Act. 
 
Janice MacKinnon said, you can’t change accounting practices. 
They changed accounting practices. Janice MacKinnon said, 
you can’t hide debt in the Crowns. They are hiding debt in the 
Crowns. 
 
And, you know, Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon had one more 
thing to say about any future governments that tried to pull 
these kind of stunts. She said, and I quote: 
 

. . . a government trying to manipulate is going to be 
caught, and the electorate is going to be alerted and the 
electorate is going to do what they should do, which is fire 
that government. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Why is that . . . Governments that cook the 
books get fired. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members, I want to 
bring the member to order. Last week I warned the members 
about use of language. I want to define more specifically, more 
specifically to members the reason for it. 
 
A definition of cooking the books — may I refer to the 
members — according to Oxford is to “falsify . . . ; (to) alter to 
produce a desired result.” Use of the word cooking, then, is 
equivalent to use of the word falsification. So I ask the member 
to withdraw the statement please, before we proceed with the 
answer. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
withdraw that comment and I’ll rephrase it by asking the 
minister this question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It’s not necessary to equivocate. I 
accept your answer. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — . . . Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
the member should relax because last week the member from 
Canora-Pelly was getting all worked up about sales tax and 
potash revenue forecasts. 
 
Now he made all kinds of wild claims about our unrealistic 
forecasts. And so what happened, Mr. Speaker? Journalists 
followed up on this accusation. And what was the headline in 
The Leader-Post? “Potash tax, PST revenue not inflated.” 
 
So what does that say, Mr. Speaker? The potash industry 
anticipates higher royalties; independent forecasters see an 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

 

increase in retail sales. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the member should just relax and they should 
listen to what the Scotiabank Group says this March 2002: 
 

Saskatchewan has been a leader among the provinces in 
debt reduction . . . The steady gains in fiscal flexibility have 
allowed the province to proceed with tax cuts and new 
spending initiatives. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, one more question. My question 
is this, Mr. Speaker: why is this government using questionable 
accounting practices to hide deficit and debt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, they have questioned the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund even though last year they wanted to 
spend it. They have questioned the projections even though 
outside analysts support them. They have questioned our 
management of the economy even though we grew faster as a 
percentage of GDP (gross domestic product) than any other 
economy in Canada for eight years. They’ve questioned our 
financial management even though our credit rating went up in 
every single one of those years. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that they are not credible on 
any of the subjects of how budgets are either constructed or 
interpreted, and I refer them to the Scotiabank which says: 
 

Saskatchewan has been a leader among the provinces in 
debt reduction. The steady gains and fiscal flexibility have 
allowed the province to proceed with tax cuts and new 
spending. 

 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that a good budget matches fiscal 
capacity to public needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford Water Inquiry Report 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management. Last week the government received 
the report from the North Battleford Water Inquiry. The 
minister said she would release the report immediately. She 
said, and I quote: 
 

It is a public document and the public will see it as soon as 
it’s presented to the government. We have nothing to hide 
here. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister make good on that commitment 
and release the North Battleford Water Inquiry report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to inform the 
Assembly that this government takes her role very seriously 
when it comes to Sask Water. There’s no question, Mr. 

Speaker, that we called the inquiry because our Premier wanted 
to show leadership. He wanted to show leadership now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve mentioned, the report is in 
government’s hands; we are looking at the report and what 
we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is this Friday we’re going to 
North Battleford. We’re going to present the report and the 
government’s response to meeting some of the water challenges 
in this province — this Friday again, Mr. Speaker, in North 
Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, you really have to wonder 
who’s running the show over there. We have the old minister 
answering for the new minister. The minister said she would 
release the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said she would 
release the North Battleford water report as soon as she received 
it. She received it last week but then she was abruptly overruled 
by other government officials. Who’s in charge? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have serious concerns 
about the safety of their water supply. These concerns extend 
far beyond North Battleford. Nearly four dozen boil-water 
advisories affecting over 5,000 Saskatchewan residents are still 
in effect. 
 
Will the minister make good on her promise to release this 
report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, this 
government believes that the first people that we should be 
sitting down with is the people of North Battleford, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to work with them because this is a very 
serious matter. And we got the document last Thursday, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to look at the document and we’re going 
to go to North Battleford this Friday and we’re going to present 
that information at the public . . . in the public to make sure that 
the people of North Battleford hear first-hand what some of the 
challenges were, and what the response of this government’s 
going to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would ask that member to be patient. Certainly the 
document is coming, and we will make it public this Friday in 
North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there are serious water safety problems in this province but the 
new minister’s actions don’t exactly inspire confidence. 
 
First she says she has 10 new positions in her department to 
deal with water quality. But then she admits that she has no idea 
what these jobs are going to be. Then she says she has money in 
her budget, but she doesn’t know what the money’s for, or 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

where it is. Then she says she will release the North Battleford 
inquiry report right away, and now we have the old minister 
saying they won’t do it right away. With leadership like that, 
some of these communities are going to be boiling water for a 
long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific actions is this government taking to 
assist 44 communities in this province that are still under a 
boil-water advisory? Will the real minister please stand up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll remind the 
member that we are now going to release the document in North 
Battleford on Friday. And I invite the member to come and 
listen to what the document says, and certainly come and listen 
to what this government is going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is play politics, Mr. 
Speaker. The first thing that we’ve done, is our Premier called 
the inquiry right now. He wanted to find out what went wrong 
and how we can stop this from occurring again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He has done that, Mr. Speaker, and this Friday, once again for 
that member’s information, we will be making public our 
response to the report from Commissioner Laing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The bottom 
line, Mr. Speaker, is the communities have been hearing these 
excuses from the NDP for years yet nothing ever gets done. 
And we know that better than anyone else after that cabinet 
decision item was leaked to the opposition last session, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the NDP has had a $2 million inquiry but they still have 
no plan and no money to deal with the recommendations. Mr. 
Speaker, what’s the point of holding a $2 million inquiry if you 
have no money budgeted to fix the problems at North 
Battleford, and the dozens of other Saskatchewan communities? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please tell us what concrete 
action is the government taking today to fix the serious water 
problems in dozens of Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government over the 
last two years has made significant strides in meeting some of 
the water challenges. And we’ve always maintained, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re going to work in concert with the First 
Nations government, with the federal government, and local 
government to try and meet some of those demands, Mr. 
Speaker. It is not going to be an overnight solution. 
 
But the $2 million that we spent on the inquiry, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of North Battleford wanted the inquiry, the 
government wanted the inquiry, everybody in the province 
wanted the inquiry because we wanted to know what went 
wrong and what we can do to fix the problem. The only people 
that didn’t want the inquiry, Mr. Speaker, is the opposition and 
the member from North Battleford. 

So what we’re trying to do here is get to the bottom of what 
went wrong and, again I state, this Friday he will find out what 
the government response is going to be. 
 
And talking about working together, Mr. Speaker, I want to take 
a quote from the Nipawin Journal, from his hometown of 
Carrot River, Mr. Speaker, and they say, quote: 
 

Council agreed, it was good to work with SERM and 
Public Health. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increase in Long-Term Care Fees 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Health. Over the long weekend, Mr. Speaker, I 
received several calls from elderly constituents. They were very 
concerned about the increase in long-term care home fees as a 
result of the NDP’s fudge-it budget. Elderly people whose 
spouses are in long-term care homes are struggling to 
understand why they are being hit with an enormous fee 
increase for the people they love. 
 
The NDP are selling this fee hike as though they were the . . . as 
though only the very rich people would pay. But in reality, Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t matter how high your income is, if you make 
over $994 a month, your long-term care fees took a huge jump 
of 40 per cent. For people with fixed incomes, any increase is a 
concern, but 40 per cent is very hard to handle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP’s rationale for charging elderly 
people on fixed incomes who need long-term care such a huge 
increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the long-term care fees have 
gone up as part of this particular budget, but only as it relates to 
certain people within that system. We have about 9,000 people 
who are part of the long-term care program in the province and, 
at the present time, we pay a large amount of that money that 
goes into that system. 
 
What happens is the people who are earning . . . or who are at 
the bottom third don’t pay any increase at all. So there’s 28 . . . 
there’s about 3,000 of them that don’t pay any increase at all. 
There’s another group of people that pay a higher amount based 
on their particular income. 
 
There’s a cap of $3,875, and there are 120 people that pay that. 
To pay the highest amount, you would have to have over 
$50,000 in income. To earn that kind of income, you’d have to 
have $1 million in the bank or some other sort of wealth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, under the new fee structure, 
under the new fee structure the NDP government will be taking 
$828 a month, plus 90 per cent of a long-term care resident’s 
income that’s over $828 a month. Saskatchewan Health says the 
minimum disposable income that a person will be left with is 
$166. For some people, prescription drugs alone will take care 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

 

of that money. 
 
One constituent of mine currently pays the maximum fee for his 
wife in long-term care. In addition he pays to the home for 
disposables, $250 a month for prescription drugs, and the total 
of that is $22,800 a year. And many, if not most, home cares 
charge an additional $75 a month for disposable items. 
 
Under the new fee structure, Mr. Speaker, my constituent will 
now pay over $50,000 a year for his wife’s care. Mr. Speaker, 
these people worked hard all their lives and paid taxes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member go directly to the question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Why is the NDP betraying these people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government, even after 
this change, will pay 75 per cent of all of the costs for the 
long-term care people in the system. Now what does happen is 
the people who have more income will pay a greater share. 
Those people on the lower income will . . . won’t pay anything 
more than what they are now. 
 
What they . . . and what we do have is a system that is 
income-tested. And what we are doing . . . It’s income-tested 
and I would note it’s not asset-tested. So there are people who 
have a large number of assets, who have a low income. They 
still will receive the particular subsidy. So what we are trying to 
do, Mr. Speaker, is deal with some of the challenges . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our plan as it relates to the 
long-term care fees is to make sure that those people who don’t 
have sufficient income will have their care covered. Those 
people who have income available, they will pay a greater 
portion of what their fees cost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister, the 
minister should tell that to another one of my constituents, Mrs. 
Iris Ziola. She’s concerned about long-term care fee increases 
because after she pays for her husband’s care, disposables, and 
prescription drugs, she’d be left with $273 a month to live on. 
 
She’s healthy and she has her own home to look after and she 
has expenses to look after. The NDP government is forcing 
elderly couples to look at legal means to separate their lives and 
their assets just to be able to live out their golden years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP claim to uphold the principles of a 
publicly funded health care system, yet the very people who 
paid into that system all their lives and have to rely on that 
system for survival are being forced to pay even more right now 
to sustain it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to Mrs. Ziola how this 
complies with the principles of publicly funded health care? 

How is this not two-tiered health? And at the very least, how is 
this not user fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, these new fees come into 
place October 1 of this year, so we have a number of months to 
work with people around these particular issues. The issue that 
the member raises here is an issue that’s been part of the system 
for a long time. 
 
And what happens is when people are involuntarily separated or 
when they end up having one of the partners going into the 
particular facility, there are procedures around how to deal with 
that and their income. These are procedures that have been in 
place for many years. And if the member would ask those 
specific questions or have her constituent raise those questions, 
I’d be happy to deal with them. 
 
What I do not appreciate, and what I know that the people of 
Saskatchewan do not appreciate, is that the negative people 
across the way will create fearmongering around these kind of 
issues for seniors because we do not want our seniors in this 
province to in any way feel that they’re being not cared for and 
not helped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What is your point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, by tradition and by rule of 
this House set down by the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures in 1975 — a committee made up mainly of NDP 
members and Liberals — the rules and tradition of this House 
are that there are no points of orders by members or rulings by 
the Speaker during question period, which disrupts question 
period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that rule and tradition still in place, or has those 
rules now been changed? 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — What is your response? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the point of 
order, there is a long-standing tradition, not only in this House 
but across the Commonwealth, quite frankly, that prohibits hon. 
members from challenging the ruling of the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s . . . I believe when I listened carefully to 
what the hon. member opposite just said, he stood in his place 
to in fact challenge a ruling of the Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would suggest it be appropriate to rule him out of order. 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the . . . Order. Order. Order. I thank 
the member for Cannington for raising the point of order and I 
thank the member for Moose Jaw North. I will consider the 
matter and I will bring back a ruling in due time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day 
and by leave of the Assembly I would like to make a statement 
regarding the Queen Mother. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked . . . has requested 
leave to make a statement regarding the Queen Mother. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to express, on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, our deep 
condolences at the passing of Queen Elizabeth, our Queen 
Mother. 
 
She was indeed a symbol of warmth, grace, and dignity 
befitting the most beloved member of the royal family. Her life 
spanned more than a century and she was at the centre of many 
of the defining moments of her and our time. 
 
Canada and Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, held a special place in 
her memory. The Queen Mother came to Saskatchewan twice 
— the first time in 1939 with her husband, George VI. That was 
their first visit ever to Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when people come to this magnificent Legislative 
Assembly building, they can view a record of that first visit 
which is carved in the stonework at the doorway to the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of our people in this province well 
remember the spring of 1939. Saskatchewan had just emerged 
from the Great Depression; there was no national highway 
system, no interprovincial air travel. It was a time before 
television. 
 
Queen Elizabeth and King George VI visited Saskatchewan in 
June of that year. They made stops across the province 
including in Regina, Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon. And many will 
still remember that specially built, silver and blue royal train as 
it crossed the Prairies. Large crowds greeted them wherever 
they went, including if I may say, Mr. Speaker, my mother and 
her schoolmates from the town of Aylesbury. I’ve often heard 
the story of their trip to the capital city to see Elizabeth and 
George. 
 
Two months later the royal couple had returned to England at 
the advent of World War II. During the Blitz of London and the 
bombing of Buckingham Palace, the Queen Mother and her 
husband refused to leave. It was a symbol that rallied the people 
of Britain and of the Commonwealth throughout the war years. 
The Queen Mother and her family stood with the 
Commonwealth during that terrible time. 
 
And since the end of that war she has continued to inspire us as 
a symbol of stability and humanity in what is a constantly 

changing world. The people of Saskatchewan and people 
around the world today stand with her memory. 
 
The feelings of Saskatchewan people have only deepened 
toward the Queen Mother over the years. Her second visit to 
Saskatchewan was with her daughter, Queen Elizabeth II, in 
1985. And it was during that visit to Canada and Saskatchewan 
that the Queen Mother remarked, quote: “to be here is to be 
among true and lasting friends.” We were privileged to be 
called friend and honoured to be part of her legacy. 
 
And so today, Mr. Speaker, we remember both with sorrow and 
with thanks one of our favourite grandmothers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Leave to respond to the Premier’s words. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s my 
honour to join with the Premier and stand today to remember 
the Queen Mother, truly one of the Commonwealth’s most 
beloved figures; a woman who will forever be remembered for 
her warmth, her charm, her grace, and her dignity. 
 
In more than the 100 years that she lived, the Queen Mother 
witnessed many notable, notable events. And I’m sure that 
some would think that all royalty live in a surreal world void of 
trouble and hardships. But some of the very difficult events that 
she lived through were the bombing of Buckingham Palace 
during World War II and the loss of her beloved husband in 
1952. 
 
Other events were cause for great joy and celebration. Events 
such as the coronations of her husband and daughter and the 
births of her grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
 
Of course it goes without saying that there are many, many 
events in the Queen Mother’s life that are simply too numerous 
to mention here, but one thing is certain: they were all made 
that much more special because she was there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure there are many who will agree with me 
when I say that nowhere was the Queen Mother more loved or 
more revered than right here in Canada. In Saskatchewan, she 
will always hold a special place in our hearts. 
 
Who can forget her journeys across the Atlantic to see us. First, 
as the Premier mentioned, in 1939 as a young queen with her 
dashing King by her side, while a country that was preparing 
for war stood on guard. A special 12-car train painted blue and 
gold carried the royal couple from the East Coast to the West 
Coast. And her stop here in Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible) . . . 
was in Regina and other communities where she was met by 
thousands of admirers. 
 
Then again in 1985, this time with her daughter, Queen 
Elizabeth II. It was clear that nearly 50 years later, time had not 
dimmed that incredible spirit or fierce determination to live life 
to its fullest. 
 
Indeed as time passed, neither age nor illness could keep her 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

 

from performing her duties, a fact that endeared her not only to 
her fellow countrymen but earned the respect and recognition of 
leaders around the world. 
 
Dignified, graceful, charming and spirited, the Queen Mother 
was a great monarch, a grand lady, a wonderful person, and one 
of the world’s best. It so suits her personality to be 
appropriately referred to as the Queen Mum. She will be sadly 
missed and fondly remembered by those of us in Saskatchewan 
and by all Canadians as well. 
 
I ask all members to join with us in honouring the Queen 
Mother in saying thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and table a response to written question no. 33. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to question 33 is tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, at the 
conclusion of the week, I was pleased to enter the budget debate 
and to second the hon. member for Canora-Pelly’s . . . Canora, I 
guess . . . his . . . Canora-Pelly’s motion, Mr. Speaker, 
amendment to the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, unfortunately, doesn’t meet the mark 
that the people of Saskatchewan felt was necessary to put our 
province back on track. Clearly this government has taken a 
dramatic turn over the last few weeks and few months from 
where they have been fiscally over the last number of years. 
 
This is a government that has now abandoned the principles of 
fiscal responsibility; have abandoned the fact that there is 
legislation in place to prohibit them from doing a number of 
things which they have done now in the budget. 
 
They offend the fact that, Mr. Speaker, there was legislation 
presented by a former minister of Finance, that did not allow for 
the things that now they are doing. And simply hiding within 
the deficit of this province, a number of things that the people 
of this province should be very, very concerned about. 
 
The use of a rainy day fund that doesn’t exist, Mr. Speaker. And 
the member in the legislature, chastising the opposition for 
saying spend it, simply isn’t the fact, Mr. Speaker, simply isn’t 

true. 
 
This is a government, this is a government, this is a government 
opposite that wanted everyone to believe that there was money 
sitting in a bank account somewhere that could be drawn on. 
Now it’s clear that the people of Saskatchewan understand that 
there is no bank account; there is no funds to draw on. There is 
no resources that this government has other than another bank 
draft that they are using to so-call balance the budget here in 
Saskatchewan, using every inappropriate step they can possibly 
come up with to hide a deficit to somehow or another convince 
the people of Saskatchewan that they are still the fiscal 
responsible people that they claim they have been of the past. 
 
And clearly the people of Saskatchewan haven’t been fooled by 
this latest effort by the NDP to mislead them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan also understand that clearly the 
province of Saskatchewan now has Crown corporations that are 
slipping further and further into debt here in Saskatchewan, as a 
result of the efforts, once again, of the NDP to convince the 
people of Saskatchewan that they are managing the finances 
responsible here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I found it very interesting, the quote that we found over the 
last few days about the balanced budget legislation that the 
NDP was so proud of back in ’95 when they introduced it. And 
the minister of Finance, I believe the minister of Finance of the 
day was making all kinds of comments about how governments 
of the future should have to respond to the legislation that they 
were introducing at that time. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government now has offended virtually all of 
that legislation, all aspects of it, and still are clinging to the 
hope that the people of Saskatchewan will be fooled into 
believing that they have managed the finances of this province 
in a responsible manner. 
 
And I think that the most telling comment probably of all in that 
statement that the minister of Finance made in 1995 was with 
respect to what will happen to a government that offends these 
principles that were in that legislation, saying that a government 
that offends this piece of legislation will first of all present it, be 
found out, and then the people of Saskatchewan in a resounding 
fashion will fire these people unequivocally. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And, Mr. Speaker, I suspect it will be pretty hard 
for the Minister of Finance and the Premier of this province to 
go before the people of Saskatchewan all over the province in 
budget meetings and try and once again convince them of the 
fiscal integrity of this government when clearly they are 
violating the legislation that those two members themselves 
voted in favour of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, over the 
weekend we’ve been hearing a lot of comments about the 
budget from people across this province, seniors that are 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

offended by the increases that they now will face as a result of 
the changes that this government has made to home care and to 
seniors’ care and prescription drug care here in this province — 
sharp increases, similar incidentally to the increases that 
farmers will face in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are hearing a great deal about that in addition to concerns 
about health care, concerns about water quality and water 
testing here in this province. A government that stands before 
us in the legislature on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, and trumpets 
the fact that they are going to provide the people of 
Saskatchewan with a good quality water testing program and 
then slashes the budget by roughly $1 million in this latest 
budget — and stand once again here in the Assembly this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and say to the people of Saskatchewan 
that they are going to come down later this week with a 
definitive statement on what kind of water quality we can 
expect. 
 
Well if anything that we’ve learned to expect from the NDP 
over the last number of weeks and last number months is, what 
the people of Saskatchewan can expect is more boil-water 
orders from this government and simply not addressing the 
concerns that they have in that respect either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the official opposition critic for Agriculture, we 
heard a lot of concern over the weekend as well from farmers 
about the misleading, once again, statements of the Minister of 
Agriculture about what kind of changes that they can expect in 
the Crop Insurance Corporation, their premiums. 
 
And the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation District has 
written to the Minister of Agriculture. And we have a copy of 
that letter — very concerned about the changes; looking 
forward to a response which I suspect will be long in coming 
from the Minister of Agriculture with respect to their concerns. 
 
We have a letter on hand from the Canadian Wheat Board 
outlining a very serious issue that they have identified for 
farmers when they contemplate putting in their crops this spring 
and arranging for financing to put their crops in. 
 
As a result of the NDP’s anywhere from 40 to 200 per cent 
increases in their premiums, now they . . . it puts at risk another 
part of the safety net that has been put in place for farmers, and 
that’s the spring cash advance program. As a result of the 
changes opposite, Mr. Speaker, the farmers now will be forced 
to buy crop insurance in order to qualify for the spring cash 
advance and as a result of the changes, will be forced to pay 
sharply higher premiums. 
 
So at a time when farmers all across this province are making 
their seeding plans; at a time when we have a, unfortunately, an 
ongoing drought here in Saskatchewan; at a time when we have 
low commodity prices; at a time when we have net farm income 
projections plummeting here in Saskatchewan; at a time when 
we have livestock producers all across this province very 
concerned about water resources, Mr. Speaker; at a time when 
we have concerns about legislation in the United States, with 
respect to speciality crop prices and farm . . . the farm Bill in 
the US; at a time when we probably can least afford to put at 
risk the producers of this province, the NDP government 
opposite brings in premium increases as high as 200 per cent for 

the farmers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, if this government did nothing for 
the farmers of this province, we’d be a whole lot better off than 
where they are right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And the farmers are . . . And the farmers in the 
coffee shops across this province were saying to me and 
members of the . . . of this side of the House, and I’m and I’m 
sure to members of that side of the House if any of them dared 
to speak to any farmers over the weekend. They were saying to 
them well, thank you very much for all your help, Mr. Finance 
Minister and Mr. Minister of Agriculture here, in 
Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, we can’t live with your enhanced 
program as it stands, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister of 
Agriculture. That’s the kind of response that we were hearing 
from them. 
 
And I was speaking to a convenience store owner over the 
weekend who now has a tarp hanging over the cigarettes in his, 
in his establishment, and he was talking about how naive this 
government must be to think that the young people of this 
province don’t know what is hiding behind that tarp that he has 
hanging there. And somehow or another, and somehow or 
another, if we don’t allow these young people to see that, they 
won’t be tainted by this in some fashion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s an attitude that the NDP exhibit in almost every fashion 
here in Saskatchewan. If they don’t know about it, if they don’t 
see it, it’s impossible for them to be affected by it. That’s the 
NDP’s attitude. 
 
And yet, and yet, in this province, the Minister of Finance and 
the Premier may not be aware of it but, on the rare occasion, 
people from Saskatchewan do travel outside of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. And in fact, not only are they travelling outside of 
this province, Mr. Speaker, they’re loading up a U-haul and 
hooking it on behind their car and moving outside of this 
province in record numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re voting with their feet in record numbers in this 
province. They’re saying to this Minister of Finance and this 
Premier that we are no longer willing to put up with a 
government that doesn’t understand the priorities that are 
necessary here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is it a priority or should it be a priority to buy a 
dot-com in Atlanta, or should it be a priority to provide health 
care and home care and senior care for our citizens here in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is it a priority to invest in infrastructure in 
Australia, or is it a priority to support agriculture here in this 
province? 
 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is it a priority to have a land titles computerized 
system that the cost has gone from $1 million to $80 million, or 
is it a priority to have good quality health care and highways in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Those are the concerns that the people of 
Saskatchewan have been raising with the official opposition — 
and I’m sure with the government — over the weekend, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, is a government that has lost 
its way, lost its direction. Many of the government members 
opposite on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I think 
understand that. I think they recognize that this Premier simply 
doesn’t know what the priorities of Saskatchewan should be. 
This Premier doesn’t have a plan for the province of 
Saskatchewan. This Premier doesn’t have hope for the province 
of Saskatchewan. This Premier does not want to respond to the 
concerns of this province, Mr. Speaker. And I say, at the end of 
the day, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will accept 
the advice that Janice MacKinnon gave them in 1995 and throw 
them out of office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there are many people, I 
understand, that want to enter the debate with respect to this 
budget. I wholeheartedly second the motion put forward . . . the 
amendment put forward by the member for Canora-Pelly, Mr. 
Speaker. And at this time I’ll take my place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter into debate on the budget. 
And first of all, as this is the first time I’ve been on my feet 
since the session began in a formal way, I want to commend 
you, Mr. Speaker, and say that we welcome you back and 
cherish the good sense and judgment that you bring in presiding 
over the proceedings of the House. 
 
I also want to extend my congratulations to the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld who has entered our House since that time 
that we last met. 
 
I also want to extend my thanks to my own constituents who 
have seen fit to have me serve as their representatives for in 
excess of 15 years now. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my thanks to my 
family and personal friends and supporters who have supported 
me over that period of time, and to say how much I do 
appreciate that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it will be no surprise to anyone that I 
support the budget, of course. And I must stand opposed to the 
amendment — to the non-confidence amendment — moved by 
the opposition. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when I listen to the hon. members opposite, 
including the last hon. member, the member from Kindersley, 
who went on some hour and a half, in excess of that, in his 
debate starting on Friday — and I do commit to the House that I 
will be shorter than that — and I look at the amendment that he 
was so proud to second and why does it say that we should . . . 
that this Legislative Assembly should lose confidence in the 
government? 
 
It’s because in part — and focus on the amendment — because 
of it’s attempts to hide this deficit through accounting changes. 
That is the argument, the meat and potatoes argument of the 
opposition as to why the budget should ought to be opposed. 
 
And they shout from their seats that they’re cooking the books, 
Mr. Speaker, and it goes on and on. That’s what they shout 
from their seats. It is because when it . . . after all was said and 
done, Mr. Speaker, because they take umbrage with the use of 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund that this government, by according 
to prudent management, is using wisely on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker . . . And I remind 
the hon. members, not what I said, not what the Minister of 
Finance had to say, but what the editorial of the Regina 
Leader-Post had to say about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund in 
November 22 of the year of 2000. And what did it say? And I 
quote, Mr. Speaker; it said this: 
 

What must be kept in mind is that these are windfall 
revenues — which, by definition, means that they might be 
no more than a one-time spike in revenues that won’t be 
repeated next year if oil and gas prices drop. Thus, it would 
not be prudent to spend this extra cash in a non-sustainable 
fashion. In fact, it would do more harm than good, for 
instance, to use it to increase health care spending this year, 
only to have to consider a cut in funding next year if oil and 
gas revenues decline. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I add it was because of the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund that this government made the commitment, 
which is repeated in this budget, to spend some $900 million 
over the next three years as a part of fixing the roads. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what did the hon. members have to say at 
that time about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund that they say, these 
days, is a source of cooking the books because we are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’d like to remind the 
member I just earlier this day made a ruling about use of that 
phrase. And I think in order to be consistent, the members on 
both sides of the House ought to respect the language that’s 
requested in this House. I ask the member to withdraw the 
statement and then proceed with his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the statement and 
I will listen carefully to the words of the hon. members opposite 
as they shout across their criticisms about the performance of 
this government, Mr. Speaker, however they may choose to 
phrase it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we go back to the year of 2000 when 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund was introduced, what did the hon. 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

members have to say at that time? The Regina Leader-Post, 
November 21, 2000 said about the hon. member for Canora, the 
Finance critic, said, and I quote: 
 

Krawetz says he wants a fall session of the legislature to 
debate how to spend the money. 

 
To debate how to spend the money. Now maybe he was 
misquoted. Maybe he was misquoted. 
 
I quote from the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
report of the hon. member from Moosomin in the Kipling 
Citizen — hardly in a position to be misquoted, Mr. Speaker — 
and he said, and I quote, on November 25, 2000: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party has called upon the Minister of 
Finance to confirm he is indeed sitting on a secret bundle of 
cash, and if so, recall the Legislature so it can be debated as 
to how to best spend this windfall. 

 
He misquoted himself apparently, Mr. Speaker, if one is to 
believe, if one is to believe this egregious error that has 
occurred, this irresponsible management of government 
finances, Mr. Speaker. And then, and then the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix, December 2, said, and again I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Leader Elwin Hermanson called Friday for a 
special session of the legislature to debate how the 
province’s $370 million oil and gas surplus should be 
spent. 

 
(14:45) 
 
There he is. Spend it again. Over and over. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
they may wish that they never said it but they did. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that when you look at the track record 
of their comment on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, it is proof 
positive that number one, they do not understand how to 
manage the finances of the people of Saskatchewan; and that 
number two, they are incapable of managing the finances of 
people of Saskatchewan; and number three, Mr. Speaker, why 
the people of Saskatchewan will never give them the 
opportunity to manage the finances of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there it is — the 
nattering nabobs of negativity coming from the opposition, 
doing what they do best which is to oppose, to whine, to 
complain, to bring doom and gloom. That’s what they do best, 
and it’s what they’ll be able to do for a long time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I support this budget 
because I believe it is a clear response to the fiscal challenges 
that face the province in these uncertain economic times. It 
meets the challenges that we have head on by supporting 
economic growth and quality education and healthy self-reliant 
families. 
 
It will be a source of irritation to the hon. members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, that this budget includes 129-new-million dollars, 

129-new-million dollars for health. Now what do they have to 
say about health? 
 
We haven’t heard them say a whole lot about health, Mr. 
Speaker, except criticize. And when Mr. Romanow came to 
Saskatchewan to hear proposals for the improvements of health 
in our nation, the Premier was there, the Minister of Health was 
there, talking about this government’s strategy for ensuring 
sustainability of effective health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Health critic was there. He was there, Mr. Speaker. And 
what did he say, Mr. Speaker? He said nothing. Like a bump on 
a log, like a bump on a log, he said nothing. When it comes to 
putting your mouth where the money is, Mr. Speaker, he 
couldn’t engage. He couldn’t engage. 
 
So there it is. But you ask them to moan and groan and 
complain and whine and give you gloom and doom and, Mr. 
Speaker, they are the masters. 
 
No clear statement on health care. But we’ve made it very clear, 
Mr. Speaker, that we stand for accessible, high quality, 
public-funded medicare. No health taxes like their friends in 
Alberta, like their friends in BC (British Columbia), Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I spent this last weekend, Mr. Speaker, visiting some family, 
my parents, my father in Alberta. And I did get a chance to take 
a look at the Calgary Herald, that great, that great left-wing 
publication, the Calgary Herald. And it said two things that I 
noticed, Mr. Speaker. It said a headline, a description about the 
Saskatchewan budget. It said, “The Saskatchewan budget 
balanced using savings.” Whoa, whoa, that was devastating 
criticism from that great publication of left-wing rhetoric. 
 
And then what did it say yesterday in the Calgary Herald, Mr. 
Speaker, when I picked it up? It said that their great friend, 
Ralph Klein, that great defender of health care in the province 
of Alberta yesterday, on April 1, introduced a $20 a month 
family increase in their medicare premium, taking the medicare 
premium in Alberta in excess of $1,000 — near $1,100 a year 
health care premium raised by their friends in Alberta. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, do we assume that’s where they want to go? 
It would be nice to hear, it would be nice to hear where they 
stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $78.6 million new in Education, bringing it to 1.2 
billion. This government’s commitment to education of the 
young people and people shaping their careers in our province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to focus my remarks this afternoon on 
the part of the budget which focuses on healthy, self-reliant 
families and to make some comments related to the delivery of 
social services as it’s encompassed in the budget that we have 
before us. 
 
And first of all, Mr. Speaker, may I say what a privilege I 
consider it to be in a democracy to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan as the member of the Executive Council 
responsible for Social Services. 
 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

 

Surely when we think about the role of government and the role 
of a democracy for our people, surely the most noble of all roles 
is the role that government plays to be an equalizer, to be a 
protector of those who are most vulnerable in our society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just simply want to say and to put on 
record what a special privilege I consider it to be as part of my 
political career in the service of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan to serve in this department as the Minister of 
Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the Social Services budget, 
which is a budget of restraint because it is . . . in fact the whole 
government’s budget is a budget of restraint but which in spite 
of restraint moves forward on a number of progressive fronts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, it has to be said that as part of the 
reorganization of the budget that the Department of Social 
Services is shrinking. We will have some nearly 23 fewer 
employees in the Department of Social Services as a result of 
this budget. But I point out, Mr. Speaker, that I’m pleased that 
we’re able to manage the vast majority of those through 
vacancies. And the losses in positions, where do they come 
from, Mr. Speaker? From administration, financial services, 
human resources, communications, and policy development. 
 
No, no front-line workers are affected. And that on top, Mr. 
Speaker, of 54 new family and youth workers who were 
introduced by the budget of this government last year and 
opposed by the hon. members opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit will also be 
reduced in this budget, when members look closely at it. But I 
want to explain, Mr. Speaker, that in fact there is no negative 
effect on the people of Saskatchewan as a result of that; because 
it is reduced by exactly the amount that the federal government 
has increased the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. 
 
Why is that, Mr. Speaker? It’s because this government made a 
decision in 1998-99 to in fact introduce to the people of 
Saskatchewan the whole benefit right up front, and paid both 
the federal and provincial amounts at that time. And so what we 
have this year is a planned reduction as the federal amounts 
increase, and that will continue until the full federal 
implementation in 2004. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that got out ahead of the 
federal government and ensured that Saskatchewan people 
would get the benefit in advance. 
 
There’s also, Mr. Speaker, I’d point out in this budget a $14.8 
million decrease in the payments budgeted for social assistance. 
Now I point out as well, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t reduced the 
benefits and we haven’t thrown anyone off social assistance. 
What we have done, Mr. Speaker, is introduced a number of 
programs to remove the barriers to employment. 
 
Now I want to quote the Leader of the Opposition, because he 
has a view about social assistance and the budget for it. And I 
quote from The Leader-Post of October 2 last year in an article 
entitled: “Saskatchewan Party policy.” And what does the 
Leader of the Opposition have to say about Social Services? He 
says: 

Also on the chopping block is the $25 million to $50 
million he wants to trim off spending by changing the 
welfare system. 
 
“Where social services becomes more of a job-placement 
agency rather than perpetuating people in the welfare 
cycle,” Hermanson said. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me point out, point no. 1, this is not a 
new idea. This brainwave that the Leader of the Opposition was 
having last year is not a new idea. Mr. Speaker, we introduced it 
in 1997. Hello. Is there anybody home over there? 
 
In 1997, Mr. Speaker, we moved away from a passive 
entitlement system to one of support for those in need in order 
to remove the barriers for employment. And in this budget we 
expand the Jobs First initiative which was introduced on a trial 
basis in Regina and Yorkton this last year and is now going to 
be introduced across the province. And through the 
reorganization of bringing the Canada-Saskatchewan Career 
and Employment Services offices into Social Services will 
enable us to continue to move forward, helping to connect 
people that are inquiring about social services to the most 
important and most valuable form of income security, which is 
a job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those who are not able to work, the first step 
program will help with transition planning, counselling, or 
assisting people in developing skills. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the building independence program as 
we introduced it in 1998 has received national and international 
recognition from both the OECD, the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, as well as British 
Members of Parliament travelling this nation looking at social 
safety nets and commending the performance of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a system that was not designed with cost savings as the 
ultimate goal. It was designed to remove the barriers and 
support Saskatchewan people, low-income people to attach 
themselves to the labour market. But as a matter of fact, cost 
savings are the result to the benefit not only to the individuals 
but to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, there is only one way, 
there is only one way that the Leader of the Opposition can 
have his way by cutting the budget of Social Services by $50 
million and that is by slashing programs to support families and 
vulnerable children. That’s the only way. There is no 
explanation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, can any member in this House — and I ask 
the hon. members opposite to stand up and be accountable if 
they support their leader — can any member in this House say, 
in tough times, what you do is you focus, you barrel in on those 
who are most vulnerable by taking $50 million away from the 
poorest of the province of Saskatchewan and still hold your 
head high? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there is any member opposite who supports 
their leader in saying rip $50 million out of Social Services 
from the poor of this province, stand up and be accounted now. 
I ask you. 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — There is, there is — the hon. member for 
Cannington, the hon. member for Cannington. Let it be on the 
record, the hon. member for Cannington says he supports his 
leader to rip $50 million out of Social Services. 
 
Is there anybody else? Is there anybody else? He’s all alone. 
He’s all alone. The Leader of the Opposition, the member for 
Cannington, Mr. Speaker. Couple of lonely bulls over there, 
Mr. Speaker. Well we’ll watch and see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proof is in the pudding. Since building 
independence has been introduced, Mr. Speaker, the caseload in 
Social Services has gone down by 4,600 since 1998. And there 
are at this day, Mr. Speaker — this day — there are more than 
10,000 fewer kids living on social assistance than there were 
when building independence was introduced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I think that is performance. 
That is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well now the hon. 
member, now the hon. member says, do you need, do you need 
the extra money? 
 
I just finished telling the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that in fact 
we’re spending less money for better results because we are not 
trapping people in social assistance; we’re giving them the 
support to get themselves into employment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have reduced the number of cases in social 
assistance in this province without giving a single person a 
one-way bus ticket out of the province, which is the way that 
their friends in Alberta decided that they would take on the 
number of social assistance caseloads. That’s not where we’re 
going. That’s where they would go. It’s the hard, right-wing 
edge of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. It is the part of the Sask 
Party that scares the people of Saskatchewan and we are not 
going there with them. They stand alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, since 1993 Saskatchewan 
stands alone. The reduction of children living in poverty, 
reduced by 30 per cent — best in Canada. But in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, I would . . . I’m proud to say that we are providing 
an even greater investment in building independence. 
 
Building independence is more than just a series of programs — 
it’s a philosophy, Mr. Speaker. A philosophy that leads to more 
integrated, holistic approaches to building the capacities for 
individuals and families to find themselves independent and 
self-reliant, and that emphasizes the principles of inclusion and 
citizenship. And, Mr. Speaker, is there anything more valuable 
that we can offer the vulnerable of Saskatchewan than that? 
 
I would also say, Mr. Speaker, that I am pleased that in this 
budget that we are investing $1.3 million more for the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. This program helps 
families leave assistance to the world of work and, just as 
importantly, makes it worthwhile for people who are the 
working poor to stay off . . . or to prevent coming onto social 

assistance. 
 
Two hundred thousand dollars for legal aid to increase the 
maintenance enforcement for single parents. 
 
An investment of one and a quarter million dollars in 
employment supports for families, for young people, for people 
with disabilities, Mr. Speaker, to help them attach themselves to 
the labour market. 
 
An increase of $1.7 million for child care, including in this, a 
half a million dollars to increase the early childhood services 
grant from 680 to $750 a month which helps with child care 
worker expenses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars for 150 new child care 
spaces. 
 
Four hundred and fifty thousand dollar increase in grants that 
support children with special needs. 
 
Fifteen new special-needs buses to municipalities to assist the 
disabled in our communities, Mr. Speaker, to get themselves to 
work and to be a part of the communities in which they live. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what do these changes have in common, 
these increases in spending? They are all intended to support 
people’s ability to attach themselves to the labour market. 
 
Another key to independence is safe and affordable housing, 
Mr. Speaker. And I point to the reorganization which has 
brought housing now into the Department of Social Services. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I want to let the Assembly 
know, and the people of Saskatchewan, that we are working 
with the federal government to develop a partnership to provide 
affordable, quality housing to low-income people, that I 
anticipate will enable us to begin this year to begin the 
construction of a thousand new housing units in urban and 
northern areas of Saskatchewan. And I point out, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s on top of 32,000 units that we already have for 
low-income people in the province today. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the importance of 
supporting people who attach themselves to the labour market 
and put that into a context, Mr. Speaker, the reality is this, is 
that there are some in our province — far too many I would add 
— who don’t know the dignity of paying income tax, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would say that when I look at the demographic forecasts 
that lie ahead in this decade, Mr. Speaker, and the tightening of 
the labour market which we forecast will peak in the year 2008, 
and we look at the increased demands and the opportunities for 
those who have traditionally lived outside the mainstreams of 
employment, there are opportunities in that challenge, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I suggest it would be a betrayal of the public trust for those 
of us who serve in this room, and for those of us who serve in 
the public service, Mr. Speaker, to have that opportunity, in the 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

 

dynamics of the real world of employment in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and not to use the opportunity to support those 
who have lived outside the mainstream, to attach themselves to 
the labour market and to once — perhaps many for the first 
time — to know the dignity of paying income tax and being 
able to participate in that great Canadian exercise called 
complaining about your income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately there are far too many — there are 
far too many who have never known that dignity, and this is a 
government which stands firmly committed to support the most 
vulnerable low-income people with disabilities in our society to 
become active participants in the labour market, and to become 
independent and self-reliant. Mr. Speaker, that is government at 
its noble best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that 2002 is the fifth 
straight year that Saskatchewan residents will see their personal 
income taxes go down, contrary to the wailing and gnashing of 
teeth that you would hear from the opposite side. 
 
And I point out, Mr. Speaker, that in this year the average 
Saskatchewan family will pay almost one-third less in taxes 
than they did in 1993. In fact, there are 55,000 fewer taxpayers 
— low-income taxpayers, Mr. Speaker — 55,000 fewer 
low-income taxpayers in Saskatchewan today than before the 
income tax reform was introduced by this government. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the tools that we use to support the low 
income in our province are many. 
 
Now before I take my place, Mr. Speaker, I also want to make 
some comments about an important sector of delivery in 
Saskatchewan, that being the community-based organizations. I 
want to acknowledge the community-based organizations have 
a challenge in recruiting and retaining their very valued staff 
who provide some excellent services to vulnerable people in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, working with the community-based organizations 
over the past five years, the province of Saskatchewan has 
increased the funding to CBOs (community-based 
organization), targeted to wages, by some 23 per cent over the 
last five years. And we now continue along this path, Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget by increasing funding for wages to 
community-based organizations by 4.5 per cent. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, this does not address all of the 
recruitment and retention issues but it is a step in the right 
direction, and our government will continue to work with them 
to ensure they continue to provide services to the people in our 
communities. 
 
I know that CBO workers want a multi-year commitment; 
however, with the financial situation our province is in, Mr. 
Speaker, the only multi-year commitment I could give at this 
point in time would be one that neither I nor CBO workers 
would find acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to note that this budget does not forget 
the needs of high-risk children. There is $2.1 million increase 
for foster care and services for at-risk children. 
 

And I also just want to draw attention of the House to the 
announcement that was made last week — I guess, it would 
have been the week before, Mr. Speaker — of $300,000 to a 
new safe house here in the province of Saskatchewan as part of 
the province’s strategic response to the committee’s report on 
children . . . bringing advice to deal with children who are 
sexually exploited and abused. 
 
In saying that, Mr. Speaker, I do want to acknowledge the good 
work and the hard work of the government members on the 
committee. When the committee delivered its report to the 
Assembly, then for the government members the really hard 
work began at that point in time as we worked together to bring 
the response which will have more debate as we deal with the 
legislation introduced. And I do particularly want to recognize 
the hard work of the Chair of the committee, the hon. member 
for Greystone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kids First, the SchoolPLUS, all part of the program 
to support those who are vulnerable, particularly focused on 
young people, to assist our young people of Saskatchewan to 
get the foundation that they need to be better able to support 
themselves and be independent contributors in our community 
in the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride in the budget, which 
has been put together by the Minister of Finance and the 
members of the government in response to the needs of 
Saskatchewan as enunciated by the people of Saskatchewan in 
difficult economic times. 
 
I need only look to British Columbia, to Alberta, to other 
provinces that are talking about deficits to recognize that this is 
a budget, Mr. Speaker, which represents a good, thoughtful 
balance between the ability to pay, as supported by the 
taxpayers of our province, and provision of the services that 
people of Saskatchewan need and want. 
 
And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I stand firmly opposed to the 
ridiculous amendment that was moved by the hon. members 
opposite and in support of the government for 2002, as 
introduced by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s a great pleasure today for me to rise and engage in the 
debate on the budget. I was unable to participate in the Throne 
Speech debate because there was such exuberance and 
enthusiasm for people to engage in the debate, but I certainly 
am privileged to be here today. 
 
And so this is my first opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
extend my welcome as well to the new member of the 
Assembly, the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
I remember very fondly some six or seven years ago now that I 
entered this Assembly for the first time, and it was a singular 
honour and continues to be singular honour to have the 
opportunity to represent people of a constituency of this 
province and particular of Melfort-Tisdale. And I am always 
very much aware of the great honour and privilege it is to serve 
the people of this province by way of participation in this 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the weekend we had the privilege to go to 
Calgary to visit with our families for the Easter season. And 
despite the fact that the weather wasn’t all that great and the 
highway was very icy and stormy yesterday, it’s always good to 
come home. 
 
But one of the questions that were raised in one of the Easter 
services by the pastor of the parish that we attended Easter vigil 
services at — and it was a very interesting question because he 
asked the question as a pastor in a Catholic community — he 
said, is what I do in my ministry, is it worth it? Is it what we do 
as Christians in our everyday world worth it? Is what we do 
with our families and our jobs and our responsibilities, are those 
things that we do each and every day, day in, day out, weekends 
— not only in our place of work but our place of worship, our 
place of recreation — are the things that we do and what we’re 
all about, are they worth it? 
 
And he went on to talk about, from his perspective, that he 
believed that for his perspective what he does is indeed worth it. 
 
And it gave me pause and made me think about, maybe that 
same challenge should be addressed to ourselves here in this 
Assembly in what we do. And the question very fundamentally 
being: is what we do in this Assembly, in what we say and the 
way we conduct ourselves and the image that we portray to the 
people of this province and how we do that, is it worth it? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day I would like to tell 
you very clearly I’ve come to the conclusion very quickly, that 
yes indeed, it is worth it because this is very much a business 
about people. It’s a business about debating and discussing, I 
hope in an intelligent way, the issues that confront ourselves as 
people in this province. 
 
And at the end of the day we need to be able to tell and believe 
that it is worth it, and that the people of Saskatchewan believe 
that what we do and what we say and how we conduct 
ourselves, is also worth it. So it’s indeed a privilege to be here 
and to hopefully make sure people understand it’s worth it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other people that I think each and every day 
may ask themselves that same question — is it worth it? — are 
the health care professionals in this province. Because each and 
every day in this province, health care professionals get up in 
the morning, or get up in the afternoon, or get up later in the 
evening on 24-hour shifts and put on their hospital and their 
medical gowns and uniforms. And I’m sure they ask 
themselves, each and every time that they start a shift, is it 
worth it? And maybe they don’t do it deliberately but somehow, 
sometime throughout the day, through the week, through the 
year, they ask themselves that fundamental question. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m here to say on behalf of the 
people of this province, thank you, thank you, thank you, for 
each and every day of deciding that what you do is worth it. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about health care in this province . . 
. And I’ve had the great privilege as well to be the critic for the 
Health care department for the last two years, and I have 

learned a great deal about how the system works and how 
people are challenged each and every day to provide the 
services that we all count on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have come to understand and believe that 
health care is indeed one of the very most important pillars of 
our society. It’s an important pillar about the way we live. It’s 
an important pillar about our identity and how we think of 
ourselves as people from Saskatchewan and Canadians. And it’s 
an important pillar of our economy. 
 
When you think of health care, you’ve got to quickly 
understand that 75 per cent of the 2.3 health care dollar budget 
is about people expenditures. The other 35 per cent — or 65/35 
or 75/25, somewhere in that order — the majority is for people, 
the minority is for things if you like. And so each and every day 
people are reimbursed for the services that they render to the 
health care system and to each other. And that’s an important 
consideration to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a bit today in the time that I 
have about how I see the issues facing health care, and I would 
like to put on the record some of the issues that people have 
asked about in terms of where we stand and how we want to 
approach certain issues. And I want to do that again today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But in doing that, I also want to point out and reference to 
people — because I’ve heard the Premier a couple of days ago 
saying, I have never heard the Saskatchewan Party or the Health 
critic say anything about health care — I’d like to reference him 
to March 22, 2002 in Hansard last year where I outlined at 
some great considerable length exactly what our position was in 
terms of health care a year ago. And I stand by each and every 
word that I said at that time and I don’t intend to repeat them 
into the record but they’re there in the official record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North just said, well 
where were you when the health care system was having 
hearings in town. Well I’ll tell you exactly where I was. I was at 
the hearing. And I made the deliberate decision to sit and listen 
to what the people of this province were going to say to Mr. 
Romanow because I thought, and I believe, and I continue to 
believe, that the health care commission chaired by Mr. 
Romanow, when they went to the public forum, was not there to 
listen to a bunch of politicians reiterating their ideological 
positions but to listen to people, to listen to people who are 
professionals in the system, to listen to people who have 
utilized the system, to listen to the people who have very strong 
feelings about the challenges that are facing the system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think Mr. Romanow was there to listen. I 
was there to listen. And many people in this province, 
politicians, have chosen to go there and make a grandstand 
political speech. I didn’t. I chose not to and that’s why I didn’t 
and that’s why I think this is the place where we go on the 
record — and I’m prepared to do that. 
 
So I hope the member from Regina South will have the patience 
to listen because . . . and also the good patience to go back to 
Hansard to see what I said last year, on the record. This I 
believe is the public record; Hansard is an important document 
that is there in perpetuity in terms of the public record. So I will 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

 

be very pleased to talk about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to be here to recognize that we 
made the presentation that I talked about last year to the Fyke 
Commission. It was in that public record. I also recognize that 
the government in December of this year came out with an 
action plan for health care in response to the recommendations 
of Mr. Fyke and I would like to touch on some of those issues 
briefly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked about primary health care and the need 
to define the role and responsibilities of people to working 
together in collaborative practice in public health care and 
primary care. And, Mr. Speaker, we talked about that in last 
year. It’s on the record. We talked about it in the Fyke 
submission, and I’ll say that I support the concept and I do 
support the initiatives that are going on by the government. And 
I certainly hope that there’s going to be the fiscal wherewithal 
to make these initiatives come to fruition in a real sense. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Second of all, I would like to say that we talked about again in 
our submission that the need that was much more logical and 
efficient to build a regional system instead of the 32 individual 
health district systems. We encouraged a regional system. The 
government has moved from 32 districts to 12 regions, and as a 
concept we do support that. It’s indeed completely in line with 
what we were talking about a year ago, six months before the 
action plan. 
 
But there’s one caution and one shortcoming that I think is 
important to highlight today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What the 
government did is essentially took the existing health districts 
and just reorganized them along the service delivery model that 
had an arbitrary grouping of health districts, and it went from 
32 to 12. And that’s well and good in itself. But as I’m sure 
many members of this Assembly understand, the original 
configuration of the health districts was not based on good 
health service delivery models. It was based on community 
competition and rivalry, by and large. 
 
And by just taking those existing districts and lumping them, I 
think we’ve missed an opportunity to do a better job of really 
looking at what is the logical pattern of service delivery and 
trading patterns and economic and social patterns in this 
province, and to look at this as an opportunity to get it right and 
to build the base for what could become coterminous service 
delivery areas throughout the province — not only for health, 
but for education and social services and justice and many of 
the other services that the provincial government delivers, and 
have a great deal of interaction with each other. 
 
And too much of too many meetings are spent trying to sort out 
who’s involved with this, what jurisdiction is it, how does the 
map work. And I really think that the government has missed a 
wonderful opportunity to get it right and to have those 
opportunities to build on logical service pattern deliveries for a 
regional model that could be coterminous with other service 
across the province. But again, the basic concept I think has 
merit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked very much in our presentation talking 

about the need that we have to really make a better effort on the 
whole front EMS (emergency medical services) trauma kind of 
service delivery. And again we support the fact that the ideas of 
having more qualified people on the front line in EMT 
(emergency medical technician), specialists and paramedics, 
and that there should be some educational opportunities for 
these individuals to improve their status and qualifications is 
important. We support that. 
 
We also said — and the government has not seen fit to support 
our suggestion — is that we believe that there is a critical 
function for a STARS (Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society) type 
helicopter trauma unit to provide that real severe trauma support 
in the province and that that is an important component of 
providing the full spectrum of trauma relief. And unfortunately, 
the government has not chosen to act on that initiative that we 
suggested again in our work beforehand and has been omitted 
from this paper, the action plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we proposed in our submission to Fyke and in the 
record last year, that there should be a 24-hour health help line. 
And we are again pleased that the government has seen fit to 
support that concept and put it into the action plan. And again, I 
think that that’s an important initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talked about the need that there has to be 
additional funding for primary research and that our 
commitment to an integrated health sciences facility building 
and the College of Medicine and the research component at the 
University of Saskatchewan, particularly building on the 
opportunities around the synchrotron, creates an opportunity for 
us to really buttress up the commitment to research in this 
province. 
 
And I note in the budget that there has been, percentage-wise, a 
pretty significant increase in commitment to health research — 
in dollars it isn’t as much as I’d like. And, Mr. Speaker, it also 
troubles me that we do not have, I believe, a fair share of the 
Saskatchewan or the Canadian research dollars available in 
health care because some of the ideological shortcomings of 
this government, in the pharmacy business particularly. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talked about the need to improve 
the educational opportunities for front-line health care workers, 
that it simply is important that we train more professional health 
care workers in Saskatchewan. But even more importantly than 
just training them is building a very strong full-court press in 
terms of making sure they understand how valued they are as 
people in this province and how needed they are in the health 
care system, and doing everything that we can to make sure that 
they understand that there are quality, full-time jobs for them in 
this province when they graduate from their courses and 
training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government came out with their 
action plan, they really didn’t say anything new. They didn’t 
come out with any new initiatives that we had not already 
identified and it wasn’t as if we had the wisdom of all the ages 
when we identified those issues. They’ve been talked about in 
the health care system for years. 
 
And it’s absolutely an amazement to me that this government 
has been so closed minded, so unwilling to listen to the people 



372 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

working in the health care system, that they haven’t had this 
plan together years prior, so that we could be well on our way 
of trying to see if there’s some real benefits from these 
initiatives. And they almost waited until the last moment — 
after study, after study, after study — to finally realize the 
information was before them all the while. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at the budget and I see that there has been 
added approximately $129 million to the health care budget — 
excuse me, Mr. Speaker — and that sounds like an awful lot of 
money and to most of us $129 million is a huge amount of 
money. And I do appreciate that the health care budget in 
difficult fiscal times had a significant increase. But I would like 
to point out some of the challenges that there are going to be in 
how this money is going to be allocated. 
 
First of all, the health districts as the 32 districts of the now, the 
nine health regions are going to continue to inherit what, I guess 
a person could say, is a structural deficit from the past. Last 
year there were significant deficits in all . . . virtually many of 
the health districts. 
 
This year because the government chose just to write off those 
deficits, districts that worked real hard to balance their budget 
are saying, why should we? Why should we bother? So I 
suspect that there’s going to be more districts with deficits than 
there were the year before. 
 
And so a good chunk of this money is already committed or 
eaten up by what I would call structural deficits already 
occurring in the districts. And that’s a great concern. 
 
The second area that’s going to be of a concern, is there has 
been a concern about the replacement of capital. Not so much 
bricks and mortar and buildings but needed medical supplies, 
equipment, new technology in terms of imaging, new 
technology in terms of testing for the different blood processes, 
etc. Basic ward equipment is badly in need of replacement and 
many of the devices that are being used are getting to be at the 
extreme end of their life expectancy. And so this equipment 
replacement dollars is going to be a very critical issue. 
 
And the third and final issue that’s a grave concern and is going 
to be a significant challenge is the whole issue around 
reimbursement for medical professionals. We heard over the 
weekend that the Alberta nurses have settled for a 20 per cent 
increase. That’s going to have a significant amount of pressure 
in negotiations in Saskatchewan, I assume. It’s going to be 
there. 
 
And in Alberta last year, before an election, they increased even 
larger which increased the pressure right across the country, and 
didn’t serve anybody particularly well by one province 
poaching medical personnel from another province. It isn’t 
helpful, quite frankly, and it isn’t going to do us any good to 
have those kinds of cost escalations. Because at the end of the 
day, this is going to take huge chunks out of the available 
medical budget, and it’s a concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where this all leads is to a fundamental thing that 
needs to happen that hasn’t happened in Saskatchewan, is it’s 
going to be a difficult challenge for any government to sit and 
live with the reality of trying to juggle a diminishing economy. 

And that’s what this government seems to be satisfied to do. 
 
The only long-term solution to any of these issues is going to be 
to grow the economy, to build a plan to grow the economy. And 
I think that that’s what needs to be done. And the record of this 
government, quite frankly, is pretty dismal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure other people are going to talk at 
much more length about the economic plan that was put 
forward by ourselves and discussed right across this province 
for growing the economy. I will leave it at this stage to say that 
that is a critical and essential component philosophically to deal 
with the whole health care issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I watched with interest when Mr. Romanow 
tabled his interim report, and there were those that said there 
wasn’t much in it; and I was one of the people that said well, I 
don’t think that you should expect any more. Mr. Romanow, I 
think, at that stage of his whole commission process, clearly 
identified the main issues and the main concerns that were 
before the people of the province and of this country. 
 
And I was commenting and saying Mr. Romanow deserves a 
chance to let his process go through to completion. And I am 
hopeful that Mr. Romanow is going to do this in a thoughtful 
way. He has a significant budget. 
 
And I was very interested when I listened to the hearings. I 
think it was Mr. Robinson who spoke on behalf of the taxpayers 
association and said a number of things, but the one thing that I 
thought was relevant to me, at least, from what he said was that 
whatever decisions we should make and whatever information 
we bring to the table should be based on empirical evidence 
rather than just blind ideology. And I think that’s true. 
 
If some other jurisdiction in another part of the world is 
achieving significant improvement in the quality and the way 
they deliver health care, then why wouldn’t we look at it? But it 
has to be demonstrated in an empirical basis and not on a lot of 
anecdotal evidence that seems to point in a certain direction, 
and it also has to be able to be made applicable to 
Saskatchewan situation. 
 
I listened to a conference where a gentleman from Sweden 
came and talked about the health care system and how they 
were changing in Stockholm. And he was saying one of the 
things that seemed to result in some significant benefit in 
Stockholm was that they privatized one of the hospitals. 
 
But remember, Stockholm, Sweden has a million people in it. It 
has seven or eight major hospitals, and for them to take one 
hospital and experiment with it might be appropriate to their 
situation. But I don’t see in the world how it could apply to 
Saskatchewan’s situation. And that’s what I mean about talking 
about transferring ideas that may work in another jurisdiction 
and might not automatically apply in our situation. 
 
We’ve got to make sure that what we look at is based on 
empirical evidence and it can be transferable, in a positive way, 
to our situation. 
 
In a response to that whole report on February 7 of this year in 
the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, there were some interesting 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

 

comments made by the Premier about the concept of user fees, 
and I want to talk about that today. 
 
And I want to say this, in a direct quote from mister . . . our 
Premier. And I quote: 
 

“We are not at this moment persuaded that user fees add 
any benefit to the health-care system,” (and I quote) Calvert 
told reporters. 

 
He goes on: 
 

“Our fundamental position is, remains and will remain, as 
long as we remain in government, that our access to 
necessary medical services should not be determined by 
what’s in our wallet, but by the medical need.” 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I agree with that — I agree with that 
completely. But let’s make sure that we’re understanding and 
talking about the same concepts. 
 
Mr. Calvert, the Premier, is quoted in here as saying that he 
doesn’t support user fees that take away from people acquiring 
necessary medical services. And the Premier is right. But, Mr. 
Speaker, then how does he square what he’s doing to senior 
citizens today? What is the increase of user fees to access 
long-term care? Is that the user fees he’s talking about? I 
suspect not. 
 
So then how do you square the circle and say to the people of 
this province, if you’re a senior, your user fees are going up by 
40 per cent minimum, because as the Health minister got up in 
question period today and said, they’ve got the money. 
 
Well the Premier said it shouldn’t be based on what’s in your 
wallet; it should be based on your medical need. So how do you 
justify those two irreconcilable positions? And the members 
opposite say to us, what’s our position? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I want to know what theirs is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have said, and the Saskatchewan Party has said, 
that user fees that deter people from acquiring necessary 
medical help are totally unacceptable. We agree completely 
with the quote by the Premier. But his own government . . . his 
own government doesn’t support what he has also said in here. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we understand 
what we’re talking about, you know. And for the government to 
blindly throw accusation at this side of the House is, I think, a 
little bit ingenuous at best. And certainly it’s totally unfair to 
defend their own position. Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to 
increase the envelope for health care in this province, there is no 
other fundamental way that we can do it except to grow the 
economy. 
 
If we’re going to do like the government is and say, we can 
grow the fees by 40 per cent by charging the ill and the elderly, 
that’s unacceptable to the Saskatchewan Party. We would rather 
grow the economy. 
 
If the government’s choice is to increase the amount of money 
people pay for prescription drugs rather than grow the 
economy, that’s unacceptable to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And if the government members want to hurl 
blind accusations at us, they’d better look at their own backyard 
and ask themselves, what are you doing to your people 
yourselves? You are the government and you’re putting 
unbelievable burdens on people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had a phone call this morning from an individual 
here in Regina who said I didn’t mind if I said who he was, but 
I won’t. At 9:15 I logged the call. And he said to me that he was 
an individual who has a disabled wife; she’s had numerous 
strokes over the last four years so she’s had to take only a 
partial pension because of her disability. He’s a retired teacher 
in Regina. 
 
And so the two of them have been, and his words were, “very 
frugal people who managed our funds very well over the years.” 
He also said that he was a long-time NDP and he made a 
solemn pledge that after this long-term care policy change by 
this government, he will never vote for them again. And I will 
certainly privately give his name to the member from Regina 
South — and that’s fine, he knows who it is. He’s willing to 
sort of just ignore people — hopefully in his own constituency 
— because if he keeps doing it, he won’t be in this Chamber 
very much longer, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
His wife is disabled; he’s been the primary health caregiver for 
her for the last four years. He’s tired; he’s disillusioned; he gets 
home care help, but it isn’t enough to keep him going. He gets 
some respite help, but it isn’t enough. 
 
And right now he said he and his wife are getting close to the 
stage where they’ll be at the front of the waiting list for 
long-term care. And because of his portfolio right now, built up 
from years of frugal saving, he will be at the maximum amount 
that is going to be charged for his long-term care. 
 
And he said, this is very interesting because I’m going to be 
paying almost 40,000 or $42,000 a year for each of us — 
$82,000 a year. And he said, the minister’s right — there’s only 
120 of us right now, but there’s soon going to be none of us 
because it won’t take very long and all of our resources are 
going to be gone and we’ll be sitting left with 160 bucks like 
everybody else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has to look at itself in the mirror 
and say, is that what they’re doing to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Is this what user fees mean to this government? 
I’d like the members over there to stand up and say they believe 
it’s okay to charge exorbitant user fees to the seniors of this 
province, and yet they say that they’re not for user fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s because of the hypocrisy of this budget that I 
am unable to accept it or support it, and I am also a believer that 
there is much more than we can be. 
 
This Premier sometimes says that he’s the wee Premier of a wee 
province. Well, Mr. Speaker, this province deserves a great 
premier because it’s a great province. And I can’t support the 
budget because they don’t deliver it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want 



374 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

to let you know at the outset that I’ll be speaking against the 
motion put forward by the Sask Party and wanting to reveal 
some of the fallacies that this motion implies. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to bring to 
everyone’s attention that on May 17, 1995 when the Hon. Mrs. 
MacKinnon was putting forward her Bill No. 62, an Act to 
maintain financial stability and integrity in the administration of 
the finances of this province, the very same folks who were so 
supportive today actually spoke against this Bill. 
 
In fact the member from Kindersley, in speaking of why he was 
against the Bill and the . . . and why he wouldn’t support it, he 
said, and I quote: 
 

The plan was based on reducing spending and 
reorganization of the way . . . (it) does . . . business. 

 
And in saying this he’s referring to the Klein government. He 
says: 
 

The Klein government promised to balance the budget by 
the fiscal year 1995-96 without raising or introducing any 
additional taxes. 

 
And I think he meant that to be an example to us of how to do 
things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the fact of the matter, the member from Kindersley today is 
probably not bragging about the Alberta approach. And I just 
emphasize that this very Bill that they were so in support of 
today in the legislature, they actively debated against in May of 
1995. So I just wanted to set the record straight on that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I do want to under . . . start with a general endorsement of 
the budget put forward by our Minister of Finance. And I want 
to say why I support this budget. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, soon becoming 
Mr. Speaker, a good budget matches the fiscal capacity of a 
community to the public’s needs. And I think that this budget 
has achieved that. 
 
As well, I believe that a good budget provides a stable fiscal 
climate and a competitive tax regime for Saskatchewan 
businesses and families. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this 
budget accomplishes that as well. 
 
And I want to go into a little bit of detail just on the parts of the 
budget that I think I’d like to highlight. For example, Mr. 
Speaker, a leaner government, savings of more than 40 million 
over two years. In health care, a 5.8 per cent increase which 
includes health research, medical equipment, capital 
improvements. In education, a capital expenditure program of 
40 million for K to 12 and 50 million for the two universities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are very important investments that will 
support the attractiveness of our schools and universities to 
young people and will assist us in recruiting people to choose 
our universities as the place where they want to go to school. 
 
Of course, we’re continuing to build better roads. 

One particularly important one I want to highlight, Mr. Speaker, 
is research and technology. 132 million for research and 
development in the areas of agriculture, education, medicine, 
health care, and natural resource extraction and processing. 
 
Now these research investments are very important because 
they not only allow us to attract high-income jobs to 
Saskatchewan, but as well they help to create commercial 
opportunities and value added on the investments that we’re 
already making in education. And I think that to be able to find 
132 million for research in this environment is a very huge 
achievement for the government. 
 
In tax reform I want to point out that 2002 is the fifth 
consecutive year that Saskatchewan residents will see their 
personal income tax rates go down and that an average 
Saskatchewan family will pay one-third less in tax than they did 
in 1993. And we’re not done yet, Mr. Speaker. We have another 
year on the existing plan of tax reform before we will be 
completed this first round of tax reforms. 
 
Now on creating jobs and investment, Mr. Speaker, increasing 
the corporation capital tax exemption to 15 million will be very 
important because as companies grow and amalgamate, that 
means they’ll be able to benefit from this additional room even 
though they’re combining their forces to be perhaps a larger and 
more competitive company. 
 
Building on last year’s small business tax reduction by 
simplifying the tax filing and remittance, this is going to make 
life easier and address one of the concerns that small businesses 
have had about red tape. 
 
And also, effectively eliminating the fuel tax on ethanol 
produced and sold in the province. As we see, Mr. Speaker, just 
in the last few days, there’s been a millions of dollar ethanol 
announcement in the Kindersley area that’s certainly going to 
show that this was the right thing to do. 
 
As far as safe and healthy communities go, there’s an additional 
7.3 million for policing, 10 million more or an 18.2 per cent 
increase in revenue-sharing grants for urban, rural, and northern 
municipalities. And very importantly, a $756,000 program in 
the North for northern health access so Aboriginal people can 
get the professional certification they need to become health 
deliverers in their own communities. And having lived in the 
North for many years, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly happy 
about that one. 
 
But I want to, for a moment, talk a little bit about the whole 
question of growth. You know, part of the essence of the Sask 
Party’s amendment is they’re questioning our projections on 
growth and optimism in the economy. Well I have to say that 
Saskatchewan’s GDP, which is the value of our goods and 
services, grew from 21.2 billion in ’92 to 33.5 billion in 2000. 
And that in January of 2002 over 2001, retail sales were up 8 
per cent, department store sales 7.3 per cent, motor vehicles, an 
expensive item, Mr. Speaker, sales up 12.3 per cent, potash up 
23.3 per cent. 
 
And this is one that I think speaks well and is directly 
connected to our budget as well, Mr. Speaker, that Statistics 
Canada capital investment projections for 2002 projects that 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

 

Saskatchewan will increase by 9.3, the highest percentage 
increase across the nation. I’m going to say that once more. On 
capital investment Saskatchewan will experience the highest 
percentage increase in the nation with new capital investment 
being expected to exceed 6.9 billion in this year. And of course, 
that’s probably quite closely linked to TD (Toronto Dominion) 
Bank’s opinion that Saskatchewan residents will enjoy the 
nation’s largest average increase in personal income growth 
during 2002. 
 
So the growth is clearly there. The optimism is clearly there. It 
may not be there in the members of the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, but the optimism in the growth is clearly there. 
 
And you know, the opposition talks a lot about tax cuts spurring 
growth. Well we maybe don’t have the same dedication to that 
notion that they do but we think it’s an important part of the 
mix. And so, Mr. Speaker, when the business community said 
that the PST (provincial sales tax) was the biggest tax issue 
facing Saskatchewan several years ago, how did we respond? 
We lowered the PST by 33 per cent, to the lowest rate in any 
province with a sales tax in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following that the business folks told the 
government that reforming personal income tax was their 
priority. Our response, Mr. Speaker, the largest reduction in 
personal income tax in the history of the province. 
 
They, as well, suggested we should cut the small business 
corporate income tax rate. And how did we respond, Mr. 
Speaker? We’ve lowered the small business income tax rate by 
40 per cent, and raised the threshold from 200,000 to 300,000. 
 
The same people in the business community asked for 
professional incorporation. And our response, Mr. Speaker? We 
passed this legislation last sitting. 
 
And as well, we’ve increased the threshold for the corporation 
capital tax to encourage investment in job creation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe we’ve done what’s sustainable. And at 
the same time, even though they purport to support tax changes, 
the opposition has done nothing to support these very 
substantial changes to our tax regimen in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I have to say that the Scotiabank, who I think I would trust 
their financial acumen more than that of the opposition and its 
Finance critic. Here’s some quotes from the Scotiabank Group: 
 

The Saskatchewan 2002-3 Budget (is) . . . Challenged, But 
on Track. 
 
Saskatchewan has been a leader among the provinces in 
debt reduction . . . steady gains (and) . . . fiscal flexibility 
have allowed the province to proceed with tax cuts and new 
spending initiatives. 

 
I’d like to quote this one from the Bank of Montreal Nesbitt 
Burns, just to get a different financial firm’s point of view. 
 

Finance Minister Eric Cline was able to proclaim 
Saskatchewan’s ninth consecutive balanced budget . . . 
previously planned personal income tax cuts will proceed 

. . . The Province’s gross borrowing needs will drop 
substantially in the coming year . . . Government debt is 
projected to drop modestly . . . taking the debt/GDP ratio 
down to 21.5% from 22.8. 

 
That’s Nesbitt Burns. And again, these Scotiabank quotes and 
Bank of Montreal Nesbitt Burns quotes are quotes from March 
of this year. 
 
But you know, when you look at what some of their heroes 
have done, Mr. Speaker, I noted the quote from the member 
from Kindersley about the Klein government a little earlier in 
my remarks. 
 
But in Alberta, what has Mr. Klein’s government done? They 
jacked up health care premiums by 30 per cent. Alberta bumped 
other taxes up for a total of 722 million annually. Mr. Speaker, 
any adjustments that we’ve had to make in our budget pale in 
comparison to what happened in Alberta. 
 
As well the Campbell government in BC has done massive 
layoffs. They’ve reduced the budgets of all departments by 25 
per cent and are slashing the jobs of 12,000 civil servants, 
ripping up existing collective bargaining agreements. And 
they’re planning to drastically reduce welfare benefits and, as 
well, increase personal health premiums. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think when you look at what other very large 
and well-to-do provinces have done in this budget, I think the 
Saskatchewan budget stands up very nicely across Canada as an 
example of balance in dealing with budgets. 
 
Now I just want to again — the member from Moose Jaw North 
highlighted this a bit in his remarks — but I want to talk about 
the Saskatchewan Party’s former position on the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund because, of course, one of their, one of their 
contentions in their amendment is that, is that the accounting 
practices aren’t sound and they’re contending that this fund 
doesn’t exist. 
 
And yet what we find is that last year the opposition Finance 
critic wanted a full session of the legislature to debate how to 
spend the money. The Saskatchewan Party called upon the 
Minister of Finance to confirm if he’s indeed sitting on a secret 
bundle of cash and recall the legislature so it can be debated 
how to spend the windfall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know they don’t like it when you bring up what 
they said before but they change what they say so often that 
unless you remind them, they find it very hard to be consistent. 
In fact, their leader, Saskatchewan leader, and I quote: 
 

Leader Elwin Hermanson called Friday for a special 
session to debate how the province’s 370 million oil and 
gas surplus should be spent. 

 
And on and on it goes, Mr. Speaker. But I contend that these 
members can only spend, and I’m going to give you a little 
more information to support that. 
 
When you look at . . . Last year we had combined with the oil 
and gas revenues, the one-time revenues, and the approximately 
300-and-some million from the Liquor and Gaming Fund that 



376 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

was transferred over — again all one-time money, Mr. Speaker 
— they would have spent all of it. They in fact wanted a special 
session of the legislature to spend it. So that was in total, Mr. 
Speaker, $700 million. 
 
I wonder what they would be doing this year if they were the 
government, if they had already spent that $700 million. 
 
On top of that, what else did they want to do, Mr. Speaker? 
They wanted to have even larger tax cuts. Well this year, the tax 
cut that will be flowing through this year is worth 78 million, 
and that’s just the personal income tax cut not the corporate 
income tax cuts. If you add those on, it gets closer to around the 
90, $95 million range. If you are going to go faster than that — 
let’s say they wanted to double that tax cut — we’ll take it to 
160 million because, I mean, faster is faster. So you add the 700 
million that they were going to spend last year to the 160 
million to speed up their tax cuts this year. That’s a $870 
million problem they’ve created for themselves. 
 
And if you add on top of it the fact that they wanted to spend 
the entire 90 million on the education buildings out of current 
year dollars, that would be a $960 million problem, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s not including the Ski-Doo trails and 
everything else. So they have a $1 billion problem that they 
would have had to deal with this year if anybody had followed 
their advice on how to manage the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I have to say that . . . another part of their resolution deals 
with revenue projections for the province. Well I’d like to 
address that for a moment, Mr. Speaker. Because last week the 
member from Canora-Pelly was all worked up about sales tax 
and potash revenue forecasts. And in the debate on the budget 
he made all kinds of wild claims about unrealistic budget 
forecasts. 
 
But as I mentioned earlier today, Mr. Speaker, the journalists, in 
a responsible mode, followed up on this accusation and the 
headline from The Leader-Post: “Potash tax, PST revenue not 
inflated.” Not inflated. What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? It 
means the very premise of their resolution that the revenue 
projections are inaccurate is, in fact, an inaccurate premise for 
their resolution. 
 
The story, Mr. Speaker, went on to say that the potash industry 
anticipates higher royalties and that independent forecasters see 
an increase in retail sales. So, Mr. Speaker, the member should 
just relax and leave the forecasting to the experts. 
 
And further, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just a little bit about the 
Sask Party coming clean with the people of Saskatchewan about 
what they really do support. Because I think people have a right 
to know what a party who’s promising to do so much better is 
actually planning to do. 
 
Mr. Hermanson’s tax cutting scheme alone — oh I see now that 
my earlier figures were much too low — Mr. Hermanson’s tax 
cutting scheme would cost taxpayers $650 million per year. So 
on top of the 700 million they were already going to spend last 
year, their tax-cutting scheme would be an additional 650 
million. I mean, it doesn’t take much to add that up, Mr. 
Speaker, to say that that’s a $1.5 billion problem at minimum. 

Now how does the leader say he’s going to compensate for 
these massive tax cuts? Well he’s going to do it through 
economic development — he apparently has some kind of a 
magic pill here. But the real Saskatchewan Party agenda, we 
know, is a money grab that’s going to be a one-time sell-off of 
assets, that is going to lose head offices in places like SaskTel 
and SaskEnergy and layoffs in rural Saskatchewan in towns like 
Kamsack, Shellbrook, and Muenster. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s over 8,000 people employed by 
the Crowns and half of those work in rural Saskatchewan. So 
how many people would lose their jobs as a result of the Sask 
Party’s plan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
You know I have to say that I don’t believe for a moment that a 
private company who bought these Crowns would do the 
cross-subsidization of rates in rural Saskatchewan. I don’t 
believe they would be worried about protecting jobs in 
Saskatchewan, and I don’t think they would donate to the 
hundreds of events that the Crowns are one of the main 
corporate donors in Saskatchewan that support these things. 
 
So I have to say, Mr. Speaker, their real plan is increased taxes, 
slash programs, massive layoffs, and returns to deficits, because 
even if you sold the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, you would spend the 
money. And it’s like selling your house to go on a holiday — it 
doesn’t get you anywhere, and you come back home; you still 
have to have some place to live. So that’s just a silly notion, and 
obviously the people of Saskatchewan know way better than to 
support that. 
 
And I have to say, you know, normally I get along quite well 
with the member from Lloyd, but I have to say that when he 
says that BC is doing the right thing, and the Sask Party is 
going to do the same. I have to say, Milt — whoops — I have to 
say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I think the member knows why I was 
standing, and I see she corrected herself. The member may 
proceed, but a reminder not to refer to other members except by 
their title or their constituency. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I felt so warm 
and friendly, I got a little too informal there. 
 
Now, you know, last night I had the benefit — I’m going to 
wrap up here, Mr. Speaker, — but last night I had the benefit of 
listening to the Leader of the Opposition on a phone-in radio 
show, and I was very tempted to phone in but he was on a bit of 
a roll there so I thought I wouldn’t interfere. 
 
But when they asked him how he intended to grow the province 
. . . I mean, I can hardly believe this was the answer. But he 
said, well there’s one per cent of economic growth a year, so 
we’ll grow the population by one per cent a year, as if there was 
some kind of a link between those two things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economy of this province could grow by 100 
per cent, and it could all end up in one person’s pocket. There’s 
nothing that guarantees that growth is linked to a broad-based 
benefit unless it’s in your philosophy to ensure that that’s the 
case. And I know it isn’t in their philosophy. So I thought this 
was rather a simplistic answer to that question. 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

 

But we do have a plan and ours is a real plan. And I’ll just 
review it briefly so that the members opposite can mull it over 
because the whole issue of growth was the final premise of their 
amendment to the budget. 
 
And our plan is to encourage capital development and retention. 
Our plan is to simplify tax compliance for small business. Our 
plan is to support research and development in Saskatchewan. 
Our plan is to strengthen the value-added sector of the 
provincial economy, which most financial pundits believe that 
we’ve done quite well. And ours is to assist in the retention and 
attraction of skilled labour to Saskatchewan. 
 
And all of the outside observers believe we’ve done that. So I 
think if the members opposite want to answer the question how, 
I think they should call up the Scotiabank or Nesbitt Burns or 
these other people and see why they have such confidence in 
them. 
 
And just a very last point I want to make, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, when you do a comparison of taxes and household 
charges right across Canada for a single person at a $25,000 
income — so any of you out there who are single and living at a 
$25,000 total income — if you were living in Vancouver, your 
total package of services would cost you 13,667 a year. If you 
were living in — we’ll pick someplace else big — Montreal, 
they’d be 9,986. If you were living in Calgary, they’d be 12,000 
a year. And what are they in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? They 
are $9,624 a year. 
 
We have a very high quality of life in Saskatchewan at a very 
low cost, Mr. Speaker. So I will just have to say that if I’m 
going to put our credibility against their credibility, our 
projections against their projections, our plan to grow 
Saskatchewan against their plan to grow Saskatchewan, I have 
to say, Mr. Speaker, that I have ultimate confidence in the 
Minister of Finance, the Premier, and this government’s plan. 
 
I will be not supporting the amendment by the Sask Party and 
supporting the budget of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really pleased to 
stand today to reply to the budget speech. 
 
Before I get started, I’d like to also welcome the new member 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld. I never had the opportunity to stand 
before and welcome him. I’m sure he’s enjoying his time here 
in the House and is understanding some of the intricacies of 
being a member of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, representing the people of Kelvington-Wadena is 
really the greatest honour that has ever been bestowed upon me. 
My area represents part of the sure-crop area of the province, 
and I’m sure some of the farmers out there are wondering 
whether it’s true or not with the drought conditions. But we 
really did have a fairly decent crop in most of our area. 
 
We also have more industry-related jobs per capita than any 
other place in the province. A lot of the area is involved in 
forestry. Tourism with the provincial parks and many of the 
regional parks is one of the areas of growth that we’re looking 

at. And our farmers are looking at diversification including 
buffalo, sheep, llama, elk, game farms, and we also have a 
number of pulse growers in our area. 
 
And there’s even a lot of our people are interested in the ethanol 
industry because they believe in the potential of this province. 
 
Bringing their voice into the legislature is a privilege, but 
effecting the change that they’re asking for is really a challenge. 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, not just because I’m in opposition but 
because this NDP-Liberal coalition is really an impediment to 
growth — not just to the individuals in the constituency but to 
the province as a whole. 
 
The budget that was presented by the Finance minister is one of 
the many examples of . . . that prove how out of touch the 
government is with the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 
Kelvington-Wadena have many areas that I’d . . . they’d like me 
to talk about. And also in my critic area of education there are 
people that want to hear what the Saskatchewan Party is . . . 
would say about that issue. 
 
But before I get into education I want to touch briefly on some 
of the areas that are of concern to my people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably the most important day of session is the 
day after the budget. That’s the day the government spends 
massive amounts of taxpayers’ dollars trying to convince you 
and I and the media that they’re Wall Street geniuses. And . . . 
(inaudible) . . . that they try and convince everybody they’ve 
figured out the very best way to spend taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the government did not win the people’s 
confidence with this budget. They didn’t win the confidence of 
the people in agriculture or in education or people upset with 
crime. In fact the biggest question the people had is why isn’t 
the government admitting they actually have a deficit budget? 
 
I want to read some of the headlines that were in the paper the 
day after the budget. Bob Hughes in The Leader-Post said, 
“Gov’t blaming everything but itself.” 
 
Bruce Johnstone said, “Cline performed ‘magical’ feat.” 
 
Murray Mandryk on March 23 said the “Fairy tale budget raises 
number of suspicions.” 
 
Randy Burton on March 23 said, “Creative accounting 
unsustainable in the long run.” 
 
Other headlines were, “Farmers fear gov’t (is) ignoring (them) 
. . . ;” “Tough choices for school boards;” “Universities will 
have to make do;” and “NDP fudged books . . .” 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency people are saying why doesn’t 
the government just admit they have a deficit? We know that 
they’re playing fast and loose with the dividends from the 
Crowns. They’re saying there’s going to be $300 million from 
the Crowns put into the General Revenue Fund. There’s only 
once — and that was in 1996-97 — that there was more money 
put . . . that there was larger dividends put from the Crowns into 



378 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

the General Revenue Fund than this year. 
 
We talked about the rainy day fund and the $225 million that 
we’re supposed to be getting from that fund to the General 
Revenue Fund. And we know that that isn’t there. 
 
The government also created an education infrastructure 
funding corporation, a Treasury Board Crown that’s supposed 
to have $90 million. It’s actually adding $90 million to the 
budget without adding to the expense side of the budget, which 
to most people is called creative bookkeeping. 
 
The government is also budgeting for an increase of $50 million 
in sales tax, which is a 6.6 increase. And the budget forecast for 
growth is only 1.6 per cent of retail sales. I don’t know how that 
can work, but that’s what this government is looking at. 
 
The NDP is also counting on a $40 million increase in potash 
revenues, and yet the industry itself is stating that there’s going 
to be minimal growth. We’re counting on a $20 million increase 
in Liquor and Gaming, Liquor and Gaming, and yet the census 
that was just released just a couple of weeks ago showed we 
have 20,000 fewer people in this province. 
 
And this NDP government also failed to acknowledge that 
Ottawa is contributing $1.3 billion to the province this year 
through different transfers. I remember when the former 
Finance minister stated that decreasing the sales tax might be a 
bad thing because it would spur the economy on and then we 
would no longer be a welfare state. I don’t think we have to 
worry about that, Mr. Speaker. That isn’t going to happen. 
 
By far the largest number of calls I get into my constituency is 
about health care. And this budget is . . . talks a lot about health 
care, and yet the two issues that people are going to remember 
the most are the ones that we talked about today in question 
period. 
 
This government has decided they’re going to increase the rates 
for some long-term care residents substantially. Instead of 50 
per cent maximum that it used to cost you, it’s now 90 per cent 
— as high as $3,875 a month. Ninety per cent of every dollar 
over $828 will be given to the government through long-term 
health care. 
 
The Finance minister and his colleagues also decided to remove 
the biyearly deductible for the drug plan of $860. So any family 
that’s making over $50,000 is going to . . . can be paying 
substantially more for drugs. I think only in socialist 
Saskatchewan can we believe that a family that’s making 
$50,000 is rich, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The idea of VLTs (video lottery terminal) is an issue that affects 
a lot of people right across the province. I was looking forward 
to the report that the government was going to put out a while 
ago, and I was hoping that they were going to talk about the 
social economic impact of gambling on the residents of this 
province, but the report barely touched on it. 
 
The only thing this government saw was an excuse to increase 
the number of VLTs in the province by 400. Mr. Speaker, VLTs 
are the crack cocaine of gambling. This government is basically 
using the crack cocaine of gambling to help balance the budget. 

My colleague from Kindersley talked about agriculture and 
crop insurance and the fact that we removed spot loss hail, 
removed the variable rate and increased the premium. The 
premium increases were as much as 200 per cent. But farmers 
are still forced to buy crop insurance if they want to have an 
operating line of credit or a Wheat Board cash advance. 
 
There’s actually two groups of people that were affected by this 
change in the crop insurance: the farmers who are devastated; 
and actually, the crop insurance employees who no longer know 
if they have a job or not. The ones that were employed in hail, 
checking the crops for hail damage, are no longer sure that 
they’re going to have a job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Kindersley also reported that 
because the government has removed spot loss hail from the 
crop insurance premium, they have saved $17,484,799, and the 
federal government has actually saved that much as well. That’s 
$35 million, Mr. Speaker, that farmers are going to lose from 
government, and that’s in a year with probably the worst 
drought since the ’30s. 
 
And when we add to that the $25 million rebate for education 
tax that was taken out of the budget this year, the farmers have 
lost $60 million. It’s no wonder the farmers know that this NDP 
government does not care about the status of farming in this 
province. 
 
The forage program that was talked about was actually . . . The 
rainfall roulette ended on Sunday night because March 31 was 
the last date that farmers could apply for it. That roulette game 
offered farmers a chance to bid on one of 81 stations in 
Saskatchewan or one in Alberta or one in Manitoba. And they 
were gambling that their fellow farmers would reap devastation. 
 
Rural municipal governments were frustrated and disappointed 
with this budget. Removing the property tax rebate, which was 
put into effect two years ago to mitigate the effect of 
reassessment, was actually taken out, and it’s going to have a 
devastating effect on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This government doesn’t seem to realize there’s only one tax 
pair. Everybody knows the importance of education and we 
want to ensure that education is there for our children. Yet how 
can property taxes actually pay for education and pay for the 
infrastructure that we need to keep the province going? 
 
Small towns and villages were looking for help to deal with 
their streets and their water system but there was no help in the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened to rural Saskatchewan in this 
budget can be best summed up in the words of Randy Burton in 
The StarPhoenix who said on budget day when asked the 
question what message is this budget giving to rural 
Saskatchewan? He said, and I quote: 
 

I think the message is that this government wants to carry 
on as best it can to save its urban seats and leave rural seats 
mostly to the Saskatchewan Party. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this budget did more than anything in recent 
history to enlarge the gap between urban and rural people. 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 379 

 

Mr. Speaker, the single largest loser in this budget was 
education, or to borrow the term from this government, we now 
have a Department of Learning. That term was used . . . was 
borrowed from Alberta. I thought the government opposite 
didn’t like anything from Alberta, but we now have a 
Department of Learning. 
 
I believe combining the two departments of Education is a good 
idea. In fact it was a good idea when it was one department just 
a few years ago, it was a good idea when the Saskatchewan 
Party suggested it three years ago, and it’s still a good idea 
today. 
 
I also like the fact that the government has decided that some of 
the funds from the federal government that were given to the 
province for early childhood development is going to go into 
education. My only fear is now that this government is going to 
believe that every issue dealing with children before they enter 
the school system is going to be an education or a learning 
issue, but the departments won’t receive the adequate funding 
to deal with all the problems. 
 
Lack of funding for education was a hallmark of this budget. 
The hoopla surrounding this department was impressive. The 
minister talked about $1.2 billion. There was even a suggestion 
that there was a 7.2 increase over last year of $78.6 million. 
 
But the fact is $90 million of that money was education 
infrastructure funding corporation, a treasury board Crown, and 
it was allocated for education . . . it’s for loans and grants for 
capital work. This money is actually outside the budget. The 
minister has the opportunity to use it when he talks about 
education funding, but it isn’t shown up as an expense on the 
expense side of the sheet. 
 
Our critic for education brought this out very clearly, stating 
that the government is now using a new type of accounting 
which the former minister of Finance strongly objected to, but 
this government and the Liberals with them are saying that this 
is an okay issue. 
 
We also see $8 million from the municipal government for 
libraries. This is added to the amount of money that the 
Minister of Learning states was increased money for Learning. 
But really, they’re expected to take on an additional amount of 
work, so I don’t really understand how we can consider this 
new money for learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in the legislature, in fact everyone in the 
province, is keenly aware of the need for maintenance in our K 
to 12 schools and our universities. Education is one of the main 
keys to growing our economy and as citizens we are responsible 
as elected individuals to ensure our educational facilities are 
adequate. 
 
What this government did wrong was to again hide from the 
public the methodology they’re going to use to ensure these 
funds are spent in an open and accountable manner, and that’s 
through the legislature, through the elected people. 
 
We have to answer to the people who elected us and it is not 
good enough to say to somebody, some way we’ll decide how, 
when, and where we’re going to spend this money, and to who 

the capital funds are going to be allocated. 
 
I believe as citizens they need to know the terms of the 
agreements before they are signed. We need to know the 
decision process, we need to know interest rates, we need to 
know what’s grants, and we need to know the repayment terms. 
 
We as elected people and taxpayers of the province should all 
be aware of how this money is spent before it is spent. It’s not 
good enough to find out six months later when some Crown 
corporation is forced to give the information to the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
Is this new type of accounting procedure opening the door for 
other departments like Health, or infrastructure, or maybe even 
Highways, to do the same thing? When will we get a real true 
picture of what this government is doing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s embarrassing that we’re one of only 
three provinces who believe there is no need for a summary 
financial statement to be given to the citizens of our province. 
The people have a right to know how their money is being spent 
before it’s spent. It’s like a business person going to a bank for 
a line of credit and only telling part of the story. Cash flow 
projections are something that everybody, including 
government, should be dealing with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s really only 31 people in this province who 
know the whole picture, and when I look across the floor I 
really don’t feel confident the future is in the hands of 31 Lee 
Iacoccas. I actually wonder if everyone on the government side 
of the House knows what’s going on. 
 
The Minister of Learning would like to . . . would know all 
about keeping information from people in the province, and 
that’s why he’s no longer the leader of the Liberal Party. It 
worries me greatly that he’s the man in charge of a new system 
that’s a secret from the people who are paying the bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) news release stated that the budget was a signal for 
hard times for boards of education. This government has 
emphasized the importance of education, yet when push came 
to shove they and their minister failed the teachers, they failed 
the students, and they failed the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final figures aren’t in yet but there’s going to 
be at least 17 boards in this province who will receive 
absolutely no funding from the provincial government because 
of this budget. With the increase in the computational mill rates, 
school boards are expected to raise more money locally to fund 
education. And this government is again off-loading onto 
taxpayers. 
 
The increase in the computational mill rate also means there’s 
going to be less money given to other boards as well. The SSTA 
told the government before the budget it’s going to require $25 
million to maintain the status quo. This government in its 
wisdom decided that 14 million out of the 25 was enough. So 
now the boards get to decide if they should cut programs, if 
they should cut staff, if they should close schools, or if they 
should raise the taxes. In some cases, they’re going to have to 
do all four, thanks to this Minister of Learning. 



380 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

The $25 million request didn’t include the money that’s going 
to be required when we carry on the teachers’ negotiations right 
now for their wages. School boards will be faced with the 
prospect of guessing how much of an increase the government’s 
going to give, and then they’re going to have to set their mill 
rate accordingly. 
 
In the next few days, the boards will learn the real impact of the 
budget. In the next few weeks, the taxpayers are going to find 
out how much more money the government expects them to 
pay. School closures, loss of programs, and loss of teachers — 
this is going to be the legacy for the Minister of Learning. The 
budget never mentions school board amalgamations or the 
money the minister promised to set aside to reach the goal that 
he set at the convention last fall. 
 
In the March 7 news release he promised an early commitment 
grant of $15,000 per school division if the motion for 
restructuring occurred before December 31, 2002. The budget 
never mentioned the transition funding for each school division 
on a per student basis up to $450,000, along with a commitment 
to maintain the current status for up to two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve already had calls from school boards who 
wonder if these . . . if the amalgamations are really . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. There should be 
one speaker at a time. The floor belongs to the member for 
Kindersley . . . Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve already had calls from school boards 
who are wondering if these voluntary amalgamations that the 
minister talked about are really voluntary at all, or if they’re 
going to be forced upon school boards because they’re going to 
need the money in order to keep their schools and their 
programs and their teachers. By then, they’ll be hoping there’ll 
be a change in government and perhaps something will actually 
happen when it comes to education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will make education a 
priority. It will not be lip service. Our leader, the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, stated clearly that one of the key steps to 
growing Saskatchewan is recognizing that educated, skilled 
labourers was an integral part of the equation, of growing 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:15) 
 
The Saskatchewan public school board talks about learning for 
life . . . pardon me, the Saskatoon Public School Board talks 
about learning for life. I truly wish this government recognized 
the wisdom of those words. We cannot grow as a province if 
our actions don’t follow our words. 
 
Stating that education is a priority is nothing more than fluff 
and filler if you don’t follow it up with action. Raising property 
taxes, forcing teachers to be fired, cutting programs is not 
placing education as a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are only two other issues that I’d like to 
speak on briefly. First of all, the number of students in the 
province. The minister went into a real tirade the other day 

talking about the number of students in our K to 12 system and 
he said that the number really hasn’t changed since 1989. He 
said that really the number of students in the band schools and 
the number of students in the K to 12 schools was about the 
same. 
 
But if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, that is truly depressing 
because then the reality is that the department is losing 30,000 
students by the end of the decade and that should tell the 
minister there’s something wrong. If the department is losing 
30,000 students, the minister should be asking himself, what’s 
happening? Why are they leaving our system and what can I do 
about it? Instead of talking about, gee there’s nothing we can be 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is something that the minister obviously 
doesn’t talk about because if we had a school system that was 
enticing all of our students to stay in the system it would be 
happening. There’s 30,000 students preferring not to use the K 
to 12 system that this Minister of Learning has decided is the 
right thing for our students — 30,000 students this Minister of 
Education is chasing away from the public school system. 
 
My last point, Mr. Speaker, is the utter neglect, both the budget 
and the Department of Learning’s had for our Aboriginal 
citizens. One of the keys to our economic success our leader 
and our party talks about in our Grow Saskatchewan meetings 
is our growing Aboriginal population. Partnerships between 
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people — social, economic, 
education, and health — they’re all part of the unlimited 
potential we have as a province when we all work together to 
achieve a goal. A bright, positive, and successful future for 
everyone in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech and the budget speech fail to 
put forward a vision or a plan that the citizens of Saskatchewan 
could hold on to. It failed to put forward a plan that the citizens 
could believe they were part of. And more importantly, it failed 
to put forward a plan that were to actually help people fulfill 
their own dreams. 
 
For that reason I will not be supporting the budget speech but I 
will support the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I stand up at this time, of course, 
to support . . . Mr. Speaker, I stand to support the 2002 budget 
as well as to oppose the amendment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be talking, of course, about good news 
items in the budget and I’ll be also mentioning a small aspect in 
relation to the concept of debt as well as dealing with some 
taxation matters. 
 
Now I will move in on the strategy that we had on the balanced 
approach. As we do the balanced approach, one has to look at in 
historical perspective and also at the international level. 
 
We know that the Saskatchewan Party represents the 
conservative, right-wing view in regards to dealing with 
budgets and in regards to dealing with economic and social 
development. But in that view, Mr. Speaker, I challenge, you 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

 

know, the members from across to come out with a more 
reasonable, balanced approach the way this government has 
done over the past many years in terms of balanced budgets as 
well as dealing squarely with the issues of taxation, debt, and 
expenditures. 
 
Now, I’ll therefore start out with the concept of expenditures. 
Now on that idea of dealing with expenditures and dealing with 
it in a balanced way, we have been criticized by the members 
across on our Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Some people will say 
that it’s our rainy day fund and others will talk about it in many 
different ways. But they will not agree with our Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker, basically because they’re part 
of the old right-wing conservative agenda that was very much 
the same as what I heard from Grant Devine. 
 
I’ve been in the legislature now for 16 years and I used to listen 
to the rhetoric of the Grant Devine government and they 
haven’t changed much. It’s exactly the same. There is 
absolutely nothing new. 
 
On the one hand they will say, oh, the member from across says 
something about Janice MacKinnon. I’ll tell you I was in the 
House, Mr. Speaker, in opposition, and I was in the House 
when Janice MacKinnon was the Finance minister. Every year 
that the budget was there, every year with all our Finance 
ministers, including Janice MacKinnon, every single one of 
those members voted against Janice MacKinnon and voiced 
very, very strong words against Janice MacKinnon and the 
budgets that she put forth. 
 
Now they have a little bit of crocodile tears for, you know, the 
former premier, Roy Romanow, and Janice MacKinnon, and 
talking about how great they were, when I know in the past 16 
years everything that we have done they have challenged Janice 
MacKinnon and they had challenged also Roy Romanow every 
step of the way. 
 
So I think as I look at that idea, I’d like to use their own words 
in their arguments. Because it’s always very good to look at not 
only the words that I speak and what the public speaks but also 
the actual words of the members. Now you look at what the 
quote is in regards to the Regina Leader-Post on November 21, 
2000. The quote is . . . On the one hand Saskatchewan Party 
voted against our budget last year when we hired people to take 
care of the water in Battleford and many parts of our 
communities, and we had a $900 million budget on highways 
and we hired extra workers in the highways to make sure our 
roads were safe. 
 
But they voted against all of that, Mr. Speaker, but they got a 
lot of pressure from a lot of people last year and by the fall they 
had changed their minds. Last spring they said, we were not 
going to spend anything at all. By the fall they said, let’s spend, 
spend, spend. Now this is what they say it. The quote is: 
 

Krawetz said he wants a fall session of the legislature to 
debate how to spend the money. 

 
Now listen to this. The quote from The StarPhoenix. The next 
quote is from The StarPhoenix, December 2, 2000. 
 

Saskatchewan Leader Elwin Hermanson called Friday for a 

special session of the legislature to debate how the 
province’s $370 million oil and gas surplus should be 
spent. 

 
So there they go. They saw in the political wind in the 
springtime, they were going to cut those workers in North 
Battleford who were trying to help out on the water situation 
throughout this province and also our workers in the health field 
and our workers in the educational side, and they were busy 
saying cut, cut, cut with that new conservative ideological 
position. By the fall they had changed. They say, spend, spend, 
spend, spend, spend. We’ve got money. Don’t worry about the 
rainy day fund; don’t worry about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund; 
let’s spend, spend, spend. 
 
And when they feel that . . . The ideologues are always that 
way. When they feel that they have to do certain things like 
that, they will change their story. 
 
Therefore I would like to see . . . I would like to look at the 
quote from the Regina Leader-Post which was made here by 
November 22, 2000. This is what the Regina Leader-Post 
editorial had to say: 
 

What must be kept in mind is that these are windfall 
revenues — which, by definition, means that they might be 
no more than a one time spike in revenues that won’t be 
repeated next year if oil and gas prices drop. Thus, it would 
not be prudent to spend this extra cash in a non-sustainable 
fashion. In fact, it would do more harm than good, for 
instance, to use it to increase health care . . . (expenditures) 
this year, (and) only to . . . consider a cut in funding next 
year if oil and gas revenues decline. 

 
So even many people in the finance communities as well as 
editorials will know the folly of the ways of the Saskatchewan 
Party, which is basically the same old Tory strategy that I saw 
when I was in opposition here for five years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re Tories through and through. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — As my friend says from Saskatoon, these are 
old Tories through and through. 
 
So when I look at that idea, it’s not an idea that’s new. When I 
was growing up, people used to say in Cree: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Not to put yourself in an excessive hole. So not to go into a 
great big hole. People knew that from way before in history on 
personal financial management as well as dealing with credit, as 
well as dealing with money. 
 
And they also knew that about governments. They knew that if 
you went for excessive credit and you went into a big hole, only 
the people that you borrow the money . . . or the corporations or 
the finance that you borrow money get rich from it in terms of 
interest payments. They know that from personal experience, 
and also from experiences from governments. 
 
Now the other matter is in regards to the affordable tax cuts. 
The members over there will never want to go for affordable tax 



382 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

cuts. They know from simple right-wing rhetoric that it sounds 
good to cut taxes, but obviously everybody from a experiential 
level will like to have their taxes cut. 
 
But what have we done? Over a three-year period we will have 
the largest tax cut in the history of Saskatchewan going to 
working families on the personal income tax. It’s over $400 
million in peoples’ pockets. That’ll impact our children, that’ll 
impact the seniors, that’ll impact a lot of families. And in that 
sense, that was a very important tax cut. 
 
But we also did a balanced approach and worked with small 
businesses. We cut the small-business tax by 25 per cent. 
 
This year on this budget, if you look at our budget as we 
continue the personal income tax cut, our corporate tax will also 
go down, you know, by 25 per cent and the threshold limit will 
also go up from 200,000 to 300,000. So for me, Mr. Speaker, 
this new corporate tax will be very, very important for business 
development in this province. 
 
As well, it was mentioned in the Throne Speech that there were 
tax exemptions to the agricultural community. And the tax 
exemptions on the agricultural community . . . And I knew from 
debates in the past that there was approximately over $150 
million on the fuel tax, you know, going to the farm families 
that need it. And obviously they need it because of what the 
international situation is, you know, vis-à-vis the huge subsidies 
in Europe and the United States, but also the problems 
elsewhere. 
 
But I think that in that sense when we look at it, our position 
was to help out at that level and there’s $240 million of tax 
exemptions, you know, for the farm community, you know, in 
many areas, whether it is on machinery, etc. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I . . . Because I say this in this regard 
and I know that members got a little bit antsy when I talk about 
the issue of racism and I talk about, you know, the issue of a 
guy . . . for example, that Jimmy Pankiw. I mean, he’s a 
supporter of the right-wing ideology. He supports the Alliance. 
He’ll support this and he supported the Saskatchewan Party as 
well, and he supported the Tories. Jim Pankiw is always a 
conservative. He will always support right-wing parties. 
 
But one of the things I notice about Pankiw is this . . . And he 
always likes getting on the paper. But he’s very, very 
interesting. 
 
On the concept he’s after, is the question of affirmative action, 
employment equity. He’s attacking, he’s attacking people in the 
case of employment equity. But this, Mr. Speaker, is in the 
Canadian Constitution. It’s section 15 of the Canadian 
Constitution and it’s there as a protection because of our 
compassionate nature in history to help people in need who 
have lower income levels, etc. It’s part of the social tradition 
which the right-wing type of ideologues do not like. And 
Pankiw is one of those people. 
 
But it’s very interesting. He only picks on Indian people when 
he talks about employment equity. He will not talk about 
employment equity against women. He will not talk against 
employment equity on disabled people. He picks on Indian and 

Aboriginal people because it is hot button politics for him. And 
that’s exactly the reason why he does it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — You know that you don’t even see a great 
majority of First Nations people in his constituency. There is, 
you know, a couple of the reserves there but in that case he uses 
the hot button politics. 
 
We provide support in regards to the taxation regimes. I know 
that First Nations people have supported us on tens of millions 
of dollars on the corporate taxes they paid. I know First Nations 
people have been, you know, living off-reserve for many years 
and they pay taxes, you know, like everybody else, whether it’s 
municipal taxes over here. But I think that’s very, very 
important to recognize that fact that that hot button politics the 
Saskatchewan Party supporters like Jim Pankiw . . . that’s the 
hot button politics that many people don’t like. 
 
The member of course laughs about it, but I know I hit at the 
truth when I say that. He supported the Conservatives, the Grant 
Devine people, on their hot button tactic on Indian taxation 
before they got wiped out in the last . . . in the election, you 
know, after all their big time expenditures when they ran up that 
huge, most incredible, ridiculous debt in the history of this 
province. 
 
Now I’d like to make a latter-day comment on the expenditure 
side. Out of the $29 million on the budget in regards to health, 
in the North we’re seeing about $600,000 for the health centre 
development in Ile-a-la-Crosse and also on the clinic in relation 
to Buffalo Narrows. And I know that in my constituency, we 
had the La Ronge Health Centre; we also have the centre in 
regards to La Loche and also with Stony Rapids up on the west 
side. 
 
So in that sense we’ve done a fairly good job because I knew 
when I was in opposition the Devine government, the 
right-wing government, really disregarded the North. There was 
about a $60 million cut in expenditures. They also cut a lot of 
First Nations and Métis programming. I mean, they devastated 
that, increased it in other areas. 
 
It was that type of strategy that is reminiscent of many of the 
right-wing history. And in many cases they wonder why a lot of 
First Nations and Métis people don’t vote for them. It’s because 
of the history, the record that they’ve had in completely 
disregarding them. 
 
When I was the minister of Northern Affairs and standing up 
here I never even got one question from the Saskatchewan Party 
— not even one question. The member from Athabasca, the 
member from Athabasca said he hasn’t been asked anything for 
1,000 days. Well I wasn’t even asked for many, many . . . All 
those years I was the minister of . . . and they never asked me 
anything. They didn’t care about the North. The North . . . 
Grant Devine said the North didn’t exist. They said there was 
beautiful lakes and rivers, but no people — that’s what Grant 
Devine said about northern Saskatchewan. 
 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

 

Saskatchewan Party says the same thing by their actions. They 
choose to ignore people in northern Saskatchewan. Now I see 
the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, when I see the member, 
the opposition leader, he scrambles up to Ile-a-la-Crosse over 
one afternoon one day and he figures he can get votes up there. 
But it just doesn’t happen that way. And I think that in many 
ways they’re going to have to do some improvements. 
 
So we’re doing some improvement on health. 
 
We’re doing improvements in relation to education. We got a 
7.2 per cent increase on the budget; a $78.6 million increase on 
education. 
 
We had an issue last year on forestry and we had extra money 
for forestry development, but forestry education. This year we 
have a Health Access Program for $756,000. 
 
And also on municipal, the revenue sharing formula has been 
improved. We’re now getting $797,000 extra — an 18 per cent 
increase. 
 
And we’re also looking at cost sharing at the federal 
government. I’ve always said very publicly that I’d like to see 
more federal cost sharing and roads and infrastructure in the 
North which we don’t have. But at least we’re moving towards 
a strategy and doing that in housing. We’re trying to get this 
budget to work in strong partnerships with the feds on 1,000 
houses in the province and there will be a fair number being 
built in the North from that 1,000. 
 
Now also on the roads side, we’re spending 34 million. I’d like 
to say that I know that the member from Athabasca will talk 
about some of the road improvements in his area. 
 
From the road north of La Ronge going up to Brabant and 
Southend will be improved by over $1 million. And, Mr. 
Speaker, my own community, Cumberland House, will also be 
improved by over $1 million, you know, on the budget, you 
know, thanks to the Minister of Highways and the government 
on this budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I finish off my remark, I’d like to make a 
final little comment on the debate, note from last week, on the 
Throne Speech. But it relates to the budget in this sense, that we 
have a strong support for . . . over the years we are the party 
that supported the Gabriel Dumont Institute and the formation 
of it on SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teacher education 
program), etc. 
 
And we’ve been continuing the support over the years and 
we’ve been doing support on the issue of SIFC (Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College) and NORTEP (northern teacher 
education program) teacher education. And in many ways the 
people know that we work side by side with them to build a 
strong partnership in education. 
 
Now we were debating, of course, The Métis Act, and we 
passed The Métis Act. Now I was listening to the member from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood. He seemed to imply that he was 
supporting The Métis Act on his commentary last week. I 
would like to say this very, very clearly: he did not. The 
member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood, like the vast majority of 

the Saskatchewan Party members — including the member 
from North Battleford — voted against The Métis Act. They 
voted against The Métis Act, Mr. Speaker, not only on second 
reading but also on the third and final reading. 
 
It was very, very interesting to hear his remarks saying that he 
supported it when I know he voted against it, not only on 
second reading but also on third reading. And I think that it’s 
very, very, very, very important for me to point that out. And I 
point out one other thing on the member from North Battleford. 
He voted again . . . he voted with the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The member from North Battleford voted with the 
Saskatchewan Party against The Métis Act. And he voted 
against it, Mr. Speaker, on the second reading. He could have 
come back and had the decency to vote, you know, for The 
Métis Act, on the third, but he did not, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
what the historical record shows that the member from North 
Battleford therefore voted against The Métis Act and voted with 
the Saskatchewan Party against The Métis Act. 
 
I said almost all of them, but to be fair, Mr. Speaker, there was 
two members from the Saskatchewan Party that supported it on 
the voting. But the vast, vast majority of them did not support 
The Métis Act. And it’s that type of thing that causes a lot of 
concern for a lot of people. 
 
And I feel that I would like to make a final closing comment, 
Mr. Speaker, and say thank you to a lot of people from northern 
Saskatchewan who supported me through the years, you know, 
my constituents. 
 
I’d also . . . Last week one of the key persons that work with 
me, a guy by the name of Tony Oscieny, who had worked for 
government in north Saskatchewan for many years, he had a 
stroke. He came back to do some work for me, and he worked 
for me for, you know, some time, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to 
send a special tribute to Tony Oscieny and his wife, Linda, you 
know, in their support for me over the years as I do the support 
for the budget. 
 
Closing comment, Mr. Speaker, a quick commentary in . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to explain the budget. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I support the budget 
and I oppose the amendment by the Sask Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to speak on this year’s budget 
and in doing so, and when I start, Mr. Speaker, I thought maybe 
I’d just reminisce a little bit with some of the media headlines 
and how things have changed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And many of these are dealing with the budget or lead up to it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I just thought I’d go through some of these headlines 
because when Roy Romanow’s government in the past had 
headlines in the paper, I don’t think you ever saw headlines that 
I’m about to read to you about the government of the day. 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

The first one is in the Melville Advance, Mr. Speaker: 
“Economic policy an ongoing disaster.” And what they’re 
talking about is lost jobs, the loss of people to other provinces, 
and deficit budgeting. 
 
Here’s another one by Randy Burton: “Bright future, optical 
illusion. Call an election.” 
 
Another one, Mr. Speaker, Fort Qu’Appelle Times, so it’s all 
over the province: “Government repeats its disastrous economic 
policy.” 
 
I’ll just quote a little bit of Les MacPherson in The StarPhoenix, 
Mr. Speaker. He goes on, and I’m quoting: 
 

Cruel though it is, the drought that grips Saskatchewan is 
not nearly as bad as the continuing evaporation of jobs. 

 
And again he’s talking about the job losses in Saskatchewan. 
 

The drought will end on its own. The evaporation of jobs 
will not. What’s alarming is that the NDP led coalition 
government seems no more likely to deliver jobs than rain. 
Figures released Friday reveal 15,000 fewer people 
working in the province now than there was a year ago. The 
question is, what are we going to do about it? For answers 
we look at the provincial government and look and look. 
The government’s response does not reflect the sense of 
urgency that you might expect when the province is 
bleeding out. Instead of leadership we get excuses. 

 
Another headline, Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix. Can I quote: 
“Calvert’s election call can’t come soon enough.” 
 
This goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. Here we have a quote from 
Lucien Chouinard, editor of the Waterfront Press: 
 

Voodoo economics — have we been misled? Most people 
in the province thought we had a rainy-day fund sitting, 
waiting in case we needed it, waiting for Saskatchewan if 
they ran into problems. Now that the rainy day is here we 
find out that the pot is empty. So, what’s the problem? Now 
they want to use that money and they have to borrow it. 

 
And what he’s going on to say, Mr. Speaker — and he talks 
about in depth here — is that the rainy day fund is actually 
invisible, doesn’t exist, and when they go to use it they have to 
borrow money and actually once again increase the provincial 
debt. Something that Mr. Romanow was so proud of in paying 
down at that time, now we’re seeing this government creating 
more debt and running deficit budgets. 
 
Another headline, Mr. Speaker, “Government needs attitude 
change,” PA (Prince Albert) Herald — I’m sure you’re familiar 
with that, Mr. Speaker. Another one in The StarPhoenix, 
“Calvert stands on quicksand,” and I quote. Another one, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is also StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, “Job losses 
sign of government failure.” 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, with so many headlines like this in 
The StarPhoenix, what this government should do, is this 
government should go and buy The StarPhoenix. The best way 
to put an end to what The StarPhoenix is saying about this 

government is for that government to buy them because they’d 
go broke in a minute with this government’s track record of 
getting into business in the province and investing taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another quote from The StarPhoenix. This quote 
says: 
 

The NDP, in clinging to power in a coalition government 
(the Liberals and the NDP) has become too scared to make 
any moves or take any position lest it offend someone. In 
doing so, it has ended up offering almost everyone who 
cares a whit for Saskatchewan as they watch young 
workers, families, and entrepreneurs whom this province 
badly needs flee for Alberta. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget offends seniors, farmers, bar 
owners, municipal leaders. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on 
and on the things that this budget has done to Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Another headline, Mr. Speaker, “NDP policies create a poor 
business climate.” And the quote is: 
 

When is the NDP provincial government going to show 
some initiative and make a concentrated effort to turn 
Saskatchewan’s economy around? For 11 consecutive 
months, the province has posted job losses. In October, 
there were 16,200 fewer jobs compared with the same 
month last year. 

 
To make matters worse, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 
 

Manitoba, which is also suffering from a weakened farm 
economy, increased their number of jobs by 8,000. 

 
Quite a comparison, Mr. Speaker, when all the resources that 
we have in Saskatchewan, and Manitoba outdoes us. 
 
Another headline, Mr. Speaker, “NDP government decisions 
border on madness.” And it goes on and on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So times have changed, Mr. Speaker, because short of three, 
four years ago you would never see a headline like that about 
the former premier and the government that he ran at the time. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about this budget and 
what it’s done to agriculture and the farmers of Saskatchewan 
because, as we all know, this government for the last 10 years 
has downloaded on farmers. To start off . . . And we all 
remember GRIP when they cancelled that. And then this 
government is famous for blaming the federal government for 
not pulling its load and in many cases we agree with that, Mr. 
Speaker. But an example, when they . . . this government, the 
NDP government cancelled the GRIP program, the federal 
government got to pull back millions upon millions of dollars. 
 
Well what are we seeing again right now, Mr. Speaker, with the 
changes to crop insurance, with the removal of spot loss hail, 
the change to variable rates? We’re seeing an example of the 



April 2, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

 

federal government being able to take back millions of dollars 
— their share that would have gone into crop insurance — at a 
time when there’s a possibility of a tremendous drought in this 
province. And the federal government can pull back some of the 
money that they had designated for crop insurance because this 
government has decided to once again download on its farmers, 
forget them in a time of need, and write farmers off in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to talk just for a second about funding for water 
projects, Mr. Speaker — something the Minister of 
Agriculture’s bragged somewhat about in here. Well those 
programs, when you get into them, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve had 
farmers in my area experience this — the first program in 
conjunction with the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration), when a farmer applied, the money was already 
gone, Mr. Speaker. There was no money left. And many 
farmers ran into this situation. 
 
I had farmers that actually had to give up waiting on this 
money, dig a well on their own, spend thousands and thousands 
of dollars, and then find out there’s another program coming. 
Except the problem being, is this program will not be adequate 
to handle anywheres near the applications, Mr. Speaker, and the 
need that Saskatchewan farmers have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government cancelled GRIP and 
downloaded onto farmers and now it’s doing it once again with 
the changes to crop insurance at a time, as I said before, when 
we need crop insurance the most. 
 
Another thing this government promised for the last 10 years 
when they cancelled GRIP is, well, we’ll replace it with a 
long-term safety net. Well for 10 years, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
heard that being said by this government and to date we still do 
not have a long-term safety net which could cover things like 
the drought we may see in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk for a minute on health care and 
what this government has done to our health care situation in 
this province and what this budget is going to continue to lead 
to, the problems that we have in health care. 
 
Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, the regional hospital in Yorkton — old 
East Central Health District. The same thing we hear day after 
day after there, the calls we get to my office — no beds, no 
beds, no beds. The waiting lists get longer and longer. 
 
We had the experience to lose one of the best pediatricians in 
the province because, Mr. Speaker, there was not adequate beds 
in pediatrics for that doctor to be able to even make an adequate 
living. This is a man who is probably classed as one of the best 
pediatricians in this province — and for that matter, in this 
country — and we lost him on our side of the province because 
of policies that we have in health care in this province. We’re 
losing these specialists, we’re losing nurses, we’re losing all 
kinds of professionals because of policies of this government. 
 
An interesting scenario may be coming about, Mr. Speaker. 
East Central Health District — before they were being 
dissolved as they are now into bigger units — had a $20 million 
debt which still sits there, Mr. Speaker. And it’s going to be 
very curious to see what the Health minister and the 

government of the day is going to do when they join up with the 
North Valley Health District and the Assiniboia Valley Health 
District, in which one had no debt and the other had a very 
small debt, and they’re going to be asked now to join together 
and assume, I presume, this $20 million debt. 
 
Possibly it’s time, Mr. Speaker, for this government to stand up 
and write that debt off —pay it down so that this new health 
district can at least start from zero and provide health care in my 
area on the east side of the province, in the Deputy Premier’s 
area, that we deserve and that residents of Saskatchewan expect, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk for a minute, Mr. Speaker, also about education. 
And a good part of it’s under our current Liberal minister’s 
authority. And a lot of these things have happened under him, 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, and probably are going to 
continue to happen in the years to come if we have the 
misfortune of keeping him as our Education minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at present they’re talking about the Rhein School 
in my area closing. Last year they closed the Bredenbury 
school. Two years ago they closed the MacNutt school. And it’s 
just a sign of the leadership of this government and that 
Education minister — a former Liberal member; I’m not sure 
just what he is now; he was a Liberal at one time, in fact he was 
the leader — sitting with the government. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, should that member be sitting on this 
side, he would have the power to stop school closures, to stop 
the drain of our young people to other provinces. But no, he 
puts his own well-being ahead of what’s good for the province 
— sits on that side and assists in watching in every one of our 
rural ridings, school closures, one after another. 
 
We’ve got kids out there, Mr. Speaker, riding an hour and a half 
on the bus. In fact, with this school closure there’s going to be 
some of them little kids riding more than an hour and a half in 
the morning and an hour and a half at night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much longer can we afford to have this 
government if rural Saskatchewan is going to continue to 
survive? It can’t survive under the leadership of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take a minute and talk about 
municipal funding, something that they’ve been downloaded on 
for 10 years. As a past reeve, in fact, when I ran in ’95, Mr. 
Speaker, that was part of the reason that I ran and got into 
provincial politics was the downloading on municipalities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw this year . . . last year municipalities 
asked . . . urban asked for 20 million increased funding; rural 
municipalities asked for 20 million. And what did we get this 
year finally? We got $10 million to spread right across the 
province. That’s for northern municipal government, urban 
municipal government, and rural municipal government. 
 
Urban municipal government leaders are very disappointed, Mr. 
Speaker. But what they are saying, at least they got a little bit 
out of it. But let’s talk for a minute about rural municipal 
leaders, Mr. Speaker. 
 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2002 

 

Rural municipalities in this province, 297 of them, are being 
asked to share $4.6 million, Mr. Speaker. Now that’s the good 
news, Mr. Speaker. At the same time they got an extra $4.6 
million, the government saw fit to cut $25 million back in the 
education tax rebate that they paid last year and the year before. 
 
So add that up. Rural municipalities, rural taxpayers, and again, 
Mr. Speaker, farmers are shorted another $21 million by the 
government of the day, partly due to that education minister 
that’s making all the noise on the other side, Mr. Speaker. If he 
was that vocal in the room with cabinet making the decisions, 
maybe we wouldn’t have so many problems in education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, municipalities of all kinds, 
urban municipalities have many problems out there right now, 
one being the problem with water and sewer out there. We have 
many communities where the water and sewer systems are 40 
years old. We saw the experience of North Battleford. Perdue 
has a problem now where they’ve applied for infrastructure 
money for three years — turned down. 
 
I believe Elfros is another one now that’s having problems — 
spending $1,000 a day hauling water. They were turned down. 
Where’s the help that this government says they keep giving to 
rural communities? It doesn’t exist, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Policing costs . . . one-time $4 million to help communities pay 
for policing costs, and then what? Something this government’s 
become famous for — you put a little in and then you pull more 
back. They did it again. 
 
Policing costs have increased all over this province and that’s 
not a rural problem, that’s not an urban problem — that’s a 
problem all across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, one thing this budget has hit 
on, and I’m very surprised with this government, is the seniors 
of Saskatchewan. The same people that built this province 
we’re turning to now and dumping on them, Mr. Speaker, 
asking them to pick a larger part of the tab up to help the 
mismanagement that this government has got themselves into. 
They’re helping them bail them out. 
 
And how are they doing it? Well long-term care home fees, Mr. 
Speaker. And let’s talk about the maximum to start with. It’s 
gone from 1,500 to 3,800-and-some dollars. And that’s not the 
worst part, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about the lower-income 
people. Anybody that’s over $994, Mr. Speaker, had an increase 
of 40 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have many people caught in this position 
that don’t have, as the Minister of Health suggested today, $1 
million in the bank. In fact very few people in this province 
would have $1 million left in the bank after this government’s 
been at it for 10 years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, any person out there that is caught in this 
bind and the changes to the costs that they’re paying for 
long-term care, the biggest concern I think that many of us as 

MLAs see out there is that they pay this fee to stay in a 
long-term care home, what do they do to buy their prescription 
drugs? And many of them are saying that they just can’t afford 
to fill all the prescriptions that their doctor says that they should 
be filling. 
 
Now the problem even goes further than that, Mr. Speaker. 
What about our seniors that are trying to stay at home where I 
think all of us will agree we would like them to be able to stay 
as long as they possibly can? Many of my constituents and for 
that matter I believe everywhere in this province, people are 
saying that are low-income people or don’t have millions of 
dollars tucked away as the minister said, I either have to decide 
whether I buy groceries this month or whether I fill my 
prescriptions. 
 
My parents for an example, Mr. Speaker, are in that exact 
position because many of our seniors right now, with the cost of 
drugs, cannot afford to buy the amount of drugs that the doctor 
is prescribing or they have to cut back on groceries. What a 
position to put the seniors of this province in — the same 
people that helped build this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder when history looks back, and what the 
legacy of this government is actually going to be. And I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be for about three things: deficit 
financing the debt, increasing the debt, deficit budgeting, and 
running the Crown debt up. And I think we saw that before. I 
believe we saw in the Blakeney days. It didn’t show on the 
revenue side but it certainly showed through when it was on the 
Crown debt. 
 
But we’re seeing it all over again, every area. And Mr. 
Romanow, Mr. Lingenfelter, Janice MacKinnon, prided 
themselves on not deficit financing. Well we’re seeing it now. 
 
And in fact today the member for Canora-Pelly talked about 
Janice MacKinnon bringing legislation, balanced budget 
legislation forward. Janice MacKinnon, I wish you could write 
another chapter to the book she just finished because I’m 
certain she would write about . . . exactly about what this 
present government is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list just goes on and on and on. And I’d like to 
talk more but I know there’s members on that side would love 
to get up and I know we have many more on this side, Mr. 
Speaker. So at this time I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 


