















































Hansard: June 18, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2129 
 June 18, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
once again today to present petitions on behalf of good citizens 
of our province who would like to see the Humboldt territory 
operations office for Sask Housing Authority remain in 
Humboldt. And their prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Saskatoon and the city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from injured workers are concerned about not being covered by 
WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board). The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizen by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and equitable 
treatment be given to those injured and disabled people and 
their families and be diligent in this most urgent matter. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Gravelbourg, Moose Jaw, 
Glentworth, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition of citizens concerned about the proposed 
closure of the Humboldt territory operations office for 
Saskatchewan Housing Authority. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Muenster, 
and Burr. 
 
I so present. 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 7, 11, 18, 24, 59, 132, 157, 164, and 165. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce a very capable young man in 
your gallery, Mr. Jason Dearborn, the nominated candidate for 
the Saskatchewan Party in the Kindersley constituency. 
 
Mr. Dearborn is looking forward to the time when the Premier 
will call the by-election. I believe he set out as his goal to see if 
he could receive as high a percentage of the vote as his 
predecessor, Mr. Bill Boyd. And of course, the longer the 
Premier delays in calling the by-election, the better chance Mr. 
Dearborn has of reaching that goal. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the House to 
welcome Jason Dearborn here today. And also we’re looking 
forward to the time when the Premier does in fact call the 
by-election. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, I recognize the member for 
Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and to the Assembly, students who are 
seated in the west gallery from W.H. Ford School. There are 47 
grade 8 students today. They’re accompanied by Mr. Holloway 
and Ms. Kruger. 
 
And I would like to welcome them and ask all members to join 
in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the legislature, 16 grade 8 
students from Davin School, just close to the legislature here. 
And they’re seated in the Speaker’s gallery. And they’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Wynne Edwards. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, 28 grade 7 students from St. 
Josephat School in the heart of my constituency. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re accompanied by their teacher Mrs. Jensen; 
chaperones, Mrs. Taylor, Mrs. Beisel, and Mr. Evans. 
 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

And I’d like all of you to welcome this group here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow, June 19, marks the beginning of an annual event that 
has helped to make not only Regina famous, but Saskatchewan 
as well. 
 
Tomorrow marks the beginning of the annual Western Canada 
Farm Progress Show at Regina’s Exhibition Park. This year is 
the 25th anniversary of this premier three-day event here in 
Regina. That’s a significant milestone, Mr. Speaker, because it 
represents 25 years of success and progress in agricultural 
invention and innovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a well-known fact that Saskatchewan’s 
agriculture industry has some of the best innovators in the 
country. And we need look no further than at the vast array of 
products and machinery on display at the Western Canada Farm 
Progress Show. 
 
It’s here, Mr. Speaker, where new inventions are showcased 
and seminars and demonstrations are provided. There are also 
features like the antique truck and tractor display and the 
Outstanding Young Farmer awards which honours individual 
achievements in young producers out of eight regions across the 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that producers across the Prairies are 
preparing to face some of the most difficult challenges yet. 
Therefore it’s important that we recognize the many 
contributions that they make to agriculture over the years. 
 
Congratulations and good luck to all those involved in this 
year’s Western Canada Farm Progress Show. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian National Institute for the Blind 
Volunteer Awards 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend, 
there was a very special event in Regina, the Canadian National 
Institute for the Blind, Saskatchewan Division, had a program 
honouring volunteers. They called it, Sharing our Vision, the 
CNIB Saskatchewan Awards for Excellence in Volunteering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were five particular volunteers honoured for 
their outstanding contributions in service of the blind and 
visually impaired. But I should say at the beginning, as did the 
CNIB (Canadian National Institute for the Blind), that there are 
many volunteers from all walks and professions including our 
own, the hon. member for Regina Victoria, who offered their 
time, their labour, their encouragement, and their ideas. This 
gathering was to recognize all of their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new division-wide awards this year honoured 
the following individuals especially: Andy Hartung from 

Regina was given the CNIB volunteer pin for his work 
maintaining the building on Broad Street, and for other 
services; Elaine Parr of Yorkton for 25 years of service in her 
community; Bob Jansen of Shamrock for fundraising initiatives 
in rural Saskatchewan; my good buddy Ron Filleul of Regina 
for eight years on the board, three as Chair; and Herb Essenburg 
of Saskatoon for overall achievement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t say it often enough, volunteers are the 
arms and legs and eyes of our community. I congratulate these 
five and all CNIB volunteers for their well-deserved 
recognition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hafford Youth Wins Kickboxing Trophy 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Fourteen-year-old Jessica Reid of Hafford was 
a trophy winner at a kick-boxing competition at Schanks 
Athletic Club in Calgary. The tournament was sponsored by 
Schanks Athletic Club, The Calgary Sun, and the National 
Kickboxing and Muay Thai Club, and was sanctioned by the 
World Kickboxing Association. 
 
Jessica was just starting her second year of full contact 
kick-boxing and Aurora Karate and kick-boxing instructor 
Wolfgang Manicke felt that she was ready to compete. As the 
youngest fighter at the tournament, Reid was determined to 
match her 15-year-old competitor. 
 
The three, two-minute rounds were full of excitement, 
adrenaline, and blood as Jessica focused her attention on 
defeating her opponent. And defeat her she did. 
 
Jessica’s mother, Allison Reid, says Jessica took an instant 
liking to kick-boxing. She has a natural ability to seek out the 
weak areas in her opponent. Her determination and dedication 
are definite advantages to her select sport. 
 
“Once I am in the ring, I become totally focussed,” says Reid, 
“I can’t hear anyone but Wolfgang.” Although she remains 
calm when discussing the event, Jessica’s eyes reflect an inner 
excitement. It is apparent that her dedication, determination, 
and love for the sport will take her far. 
 
The patrons, my colleagues, and the management of Poverino’s, 
a great restaurant in Regina, would like to join in and 
congratulate Jessica on her achievements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Reducing Fly Ash Emissions at the Boundary Dam 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to inform members of the Assembly about 
an important environmental investment being made by 
SaskPower, one that will have a particularly important impact 
when it comes to helping preserve our province’s air quality. 
 
SaskPower is investing another $9 million in a project that will 
virtually eliminate fly ash emissions at the Boundary dam 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

 

power station near Estevan. This new investment comes on top 
of a five-year, $62 million initiative that has already reduced fly 
ash emissions from the power station. Fly ash, Mr. Speaker, is a 
fine ash that is produced when coal is burned at our thermal 
power stations. 
 
SaskPower’s new $9 million investment will be used to upgrade 
the electrostatic precipitator on unit 6 at the station which 
collects and traps the fly ash. By the time the project is 
complete next summer, about 30,000 person-hours of 
construction work will have been created, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The scope of this investment at the Boundary dam power 
station — now totally $71 million for the fly ash removal 
project — is an excellent example of the steps that SaskPower 
and our government is taking to meet the growing electricity 
needs of our provincial population, while at the same time 
reducing the environmental impacts of its operations. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Barb Byers Goes to Canadian Labour Congress 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
long list of MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 
NDP (New Democratic Party) high-ranking supporters leaving 
the province continues to grow. 
 
In the past we’ve seen the likes of Doug Anguish and Dwain 
Lingenfelter move out, along with several other of their 
compatriots. And now, Mr. Speaker, another NDPer — 
high-profile NDPer, Mr. Speaker — is leaving as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Barb Byers is leaving the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour to work within the ranks of the Canadian 
Labour Congress. Mr. Speaker, Ms. Byers leaves behind a 
union organization that under her leadership has been set back 
many years. We want to ensure the people of Saskatchewan 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party 
understands the importance of and the relevance that unions 
serve. 
 
It is our hope on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour selects a new president that 
is more willing to work with business in Saskatchewan and be 
more open to discussion instead of marching forward without 
understanding their consequences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this may be one of the few times that a person’s 
exit from Saskatchewan may actually be a net gain for our 
province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

President of Greystone Management Honoured 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
member from Meadow Lake praised a constituent who was 
named one of the quote “top forty under forty” achievers in 

Canada by the Globe and Mail’s Report on Business Magazine. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to announce to the Assembly that 
I too have a constituent who has been named to this illustrious 
group. You may have noticed in yesterday’s Leader-Post that 
Rob Vanderhooft was named to the top 40 and there are a 
number of significant reasons why he was chosen. 
 
(13:45) 
 
The highlight of this would be that Mr. Vanderhooft is the 
president and chief investment officer of Greystone 
Management Investments of Regina — an investment company 
that manages $13 billion in assets right here in Regina. A firm, 
Mr. Speaker, that consistently beats the “pants off Bay Street 
money managers,” according to Bruce Johnstone of the 
Leader-Post. 
 
In his brief time as president, Greystone has had a five-year 
average return on Canadian equities of 16.3 per cent, which 
puts it among the top 4 per cent of Canadian money managers, 
and about 10 per cent better than the Toronto Stock Exchange. 
 
Ten years ago, there were 25 Saskatchewan based clients, now 
there are more than 700 from across North America, with 
satellite offices in Edmonton and Winnipeg. 
 
One more significant detail, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vanderhooft 
came to Regina from Winnipeg, and he brings with him a 
family with three children under five. 
 
All this is good news, and I congratulate Rob Vanderhooft for 
his success, for his recognition, and for his wise choice of a 
home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Appreciation for Highway Road Crews 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as many of you have probably noticed, highway 
construction and repair is occurring at a feverish pace 
throughout the province. 
 
The province has 7,200 kilometres of thin-membrane highways 
that require maintenance. Crews were out in full force early this 
spring hoping to fix more of the roads. So far department crews 
have sprayed 2.34 million litres of asphalt, placed 5,300 tonnes 
of coat mix, and coated 1.48 million square metres of sealed 
coat patching to repair the roads. Crews have worked more than 
32,000 hours to repair spring road damage on thin-membrane 
surfaces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 87 crews, with 290 trucks, along with 456 other 
pieces of highway equipment like packers, graders, and oil 
distributors are ready to repair the roads, as are the numerous 
men and women hired last year as part of government’s 
commitment to road repair and rural revitalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government greatly appreciates the work and 
effort of these people and hopes that they understand how 
valuable they are to our province’s infrastructure. 
 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also hope that the people of this province will 
have the patience and slow down when passing road crews this 
summer. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
now received over 2,500 postcards slamming this NDP 
government for cancelling the property tax rebate and cutting 
the crop insurance coverage. 
 
These cards are being sent in response to an open letter to the 
Premier, a letter that blasts the Premier for his weak leadership 
on farm issues. It says, and I quote: 
 

These actions come at a time when our producers have 
been severely impacted by subsidies in other countries and 
by federal agricultural policies. The province does not need 
to add to these difficulties, and yet that is exactly what you 
have done. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how can anyone take this Premier seriously on 
farm issues when his own policies are attacking the farm 
families of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, just a couple of days ago, I 
tabled for this Assembly a series of reports of which this 
government has been involved in, in providing the work that 
we’ve done for farmers over the last couple of years, Mr. 
Speaker. And it goes back to a variety of different presentations 
that we’ve made regarding the work that we’ve done for 
Saskatchewan farmers and also for Canadian farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I asked the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, 
I asked him to table for us the work that he has done for 
Saskatchewan farmers in the last three years of which he’s been 
the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. And do you know 
what the Leader of the Opposition has done for Saskatchewan 
farmers, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. The member has to have 
the opportunity to respond and to be heard while he’s 
responding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, to date now . . . it’s been 
about five days since I tabled that report and I asked the 
opposition leader to table the work that he’s done for 
Saskatchewan farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I 
have yet to receive a scrap of paper from him to show us what 
he has done for Saskatchewan farmers. Because there is no plan 
for agriculture over there, there’s been no engagement on 
agriculture over there, and they’re completely bankrupt, Mr. 
Speaker, of any ideas regarding this issue at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, if all of these NDP agriculture 
policies are working out so well, then why are we receiving, 
along with that government, over 2,500 postcards complaining 
about their policies for agriculture? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — These are not exactly fan mail, Mr. Speaker. 
And here’s some things that they that have to say. From Tyvan: 
 

It sure would be nice to have a government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order, please. I 
invite the member for Watrous to continue. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From Tyvan, he 
wrote: 
 

It sure would be nice to have a government behind us, but 
we know they are not. 

 
A postcard from Maidstone: 
 

You are destroying agriculture, not helping it. 
 
A postcard from Asquith: 
 

We are not being heard by our NDP government. 
 

A postcard from Marchwell: 
 

These program changes cost our farm nearly $22,000. This 
is not acceptable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier attacking the farm families in 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It’s just been, Mr. Speaker, in the last three 
weeks that the Saskatchewan Party has woke up and found out 
that there is an agricultural issue in Saskatchewan at all, Mr. 
Speaker. They woke up and discovered that there is something 
happening in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because there 
hasn’t been any kind of involvement by the Saskatchewan Party 
at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the Saskatchewan Party, don’t get involved in 
agriculture because every time you get involved you destroy the 
work that’s being done in Saskatchewan. The Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is the guy who said we should be 
supporting the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) 
program in Saskatchewan. What do we get? We got an AIDA 
program for Canada and Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s also, Mr. Speaker, the same Leader of the Opposition who 
was in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, while he was a member of the 
Canadian Alliance. And he said, Mr. Speaker, that we shouldn’t 
be supporting farmers today who are being abused by the 
subsidies of the US (United States). 
 
And now that the Leader of the Opposition has done a 180, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re happy about that. But I bet you in the next 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

 

couple of weeks we’re going to see that guy hightail out of this 
province for farmers as quick as it could happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting to 
hear that minister talk about people hightailing it out of the 
province, when his former Agriculture minister was in Mexico 
when AIDA was being . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — According to the open letter, the NDP 
Agriculture minister has stated that crop insurance and 
education taxes are not a priority to farmers. It says, and I 
quote: 
 

If you disagree with Mr. Serby, please mail these postcards. 
 
Well the Saskatchewan Party has received over 2,500 postcards 
from people who disagree with that Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Here are a few more. From Ogema, it says: 
 

If this government is committed to help agriculture, why 
are they taking away programs that help farmers? 

 
From Eastend: 
 

Crop insurance is of no value without spot loss hail. 
 
Lashburn: 
 

Farmers in Saskatchewan have been struggling for years 
with little or no help from their provincial government. 
What is it going to take to make agriculture a priority? 
Premier Calvert and company are backing away from their 
responsibilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is this NDP government and this Premier 
attacking the farm families of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to set the record 
straight because the member has now been on her feet on a 
couple of occasions talking about what’s happened with crop 
insurance in the province. And I want to just set the record 
straight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, last year, in the year 
2001, there were 34,307 farmers that signed the crop insurance 
program last year, Mr. Speaker. And this year we have, have 
signed the crop insurance program, 34,754, Mr. Speaker. We 
have more contracts this year, Mr. Speaker, than we had last 
year, Mr. Speaker. Last year in the forage rainfall program, Mr. 
Speaker, we had just under 200,000 acres insured, Mr. Speaker. 
This year we have almost 4 million acres of forage land insured 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So while the member’s on her feet, Mr. Speaker, abusing the 
crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker, there are more people 
participating in the crop insurance program this year than there 

were last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
might interest the minister to know that this is the worst drought 
in history. So therefore it’s not surprising that farmers are 
buying even an inadequate program. 
 
Obviously the Premier is not listening to this message nor is his 
minister. So I guess I’ll read some more farm fan mail from 
Saskatchewan producers. From Glenavon it says: 
 

If the government had their priorities correct, they’d be 
improving crop insurance instead of dismantling it. 

 
From Perdue: 
 
Crop insurance is a complete joke. 
 
From Lafleche, to the NDP: 
 

How come the rural areas don’t vote for you? You cheated 
the farmer out of the GRIP program, now you increase our 
land taxes. Got any other monkeys you would like to throw 
on our backs? 

 
Mr. Speaker, why isn’t the Premier and his Agriculture minister 
listening? Why did he pick this year, of all years, to attack the 
farm families of this province? What does the Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. One of the procedures, one of 
the traditions of the Assembly is not to do something indirectly 
that you cannot do directly. And I would ask the member to be 
very cautious in reading — order — and I would ask the 
member to be very cautious in what she wishes to read into the 
record so it would not infuse . . . impugn any motives that 
would be dishonourable to this legislature. 
 
Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this Assembly knows and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan know and farm leaders in this 
province know the work that this government has been doing in 
building a strong farm agricultural policy for this country, Mr. 
Speaker, of which we’ve been leading the way on many fronts, 
Mr. Speaker. And soon we’ll see in Canada, Mr. Speaker, a 
brand new agricultural policy framework of which this 
government has been leading the parade in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we know that there hasn’t been satisfactory support, Mr. 
Speaker, for the crop insurance program or for the CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program) program. But we’ve stood 
up, Mr. Speaker, for Canadian and Saskatchewan farmers and 
said, front and centre, that we need to change those policies, 
and that’s what we’re working at changing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the members opposite to date, Mr. Speaker, have not on one 
occasion put forward one idea about what Canadian agriculture, 
Saskatchewan policy should look like. Not one. And day after 
day they stand in their places, Mr. Speaker, and criticize what 
we have, which is an easy process to do, but they haven’t put 
forward one idea, Mr. Speaker. 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

Because you know why, Mr. Speaker? That leader is bankrupt 
of ideas, Mr. Speaker. That leader and that party has no 
credibility. And, Mr. Speaker, that leader will be replaced, Mr. 
Speaker, before the next general election in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Answers to Opposition Questions 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in the 
House we saw a pathetic sight. The Premier was upset because 
the Saskatchewan Party was focusing on his bumbling 
leadership. First he tried to wiggle out of his responsibility and 
then he begged us to change the subject and ask about 
something else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is that the Saskatchewan Party has been 
asking questions all session, but we either get the wrong 
answers or we get no answers whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a result of weak leadership. In fact, there are 
76 questions on the order paper that the NDP refuses to answer 
— questions on Crown investments, waiting lists, education, 
safe water. The list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are asking a lot of questions but the NDP 
government is refusing to answer them. 
 
Is this any kind of a Premier? Is this any kind of a government? 
Will the Premier stand in this House today and order his 
ministers to start answering the questions we’re asking? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — This is a question. Yesterday I suggested 
. . . Mr. Speaker, if the member from Rosthern could just calm 
down, just calm down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think in the tirade, Mr. Speaker, I heard 
a question from the Leader of the Opposition which was to the 
effect, would the ministers of the Crown answer the questions 
that the opposition brings to this House? The answer is yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well that’s very good news, Mr. Speaker. Very 
good news indeed. Because my question, Mr. Speaker, is for the 
Premier. 
 
Earlier this session I asked the minister responsible for Crown 
Investments Corporation a series of written questions. I 
specifically asked the minister to provide a breakdown of 
SaskTel investments return for the years 1992 through 2001, 
including their cumulative profit or loss. 
 
The minister is the one who likes to say that SaskTel’s record of 
investment internationally is a good one. He has actually 
affixed a number to it. So we asked him, Mr. Speaker, for a 

breakdown. We asked him in written questions, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’ve also asked him in this House privately. And we have 
not received that breakdown all these weeks later. 
 
So the question to the Premier is this: will the Premier order the 
minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) to answer these questions today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if I might take the 
liberty as House Leader and answer on behalf . . . 
 
The Speaker: — A little order please, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as the Government 
House Leader, on behalf of the government, I’d be very pleased 
to answer this question. 
 
You know, every day in this session the members of the 
opposition have been asking questions of the government of 
which now total something in the neighbourhood of 350-plus 
questions. And, Mr. Speaker, we have answered the vast 
majority of them. I can tell you that there have been more 
questions answered from that opposition than there has been in 
any session since I’ve been here, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 
considerable period of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to 
say is the government will continue to answer the questions. We 
will continue to put hundreds of civil servants to work every 
day compiling information, some of which they should be 
asking in Crown Corporations Committee instead of asking 
through written questions in this House, Mr. Speaker. But in 
spite of that, we’ll answer them. 
 
But I ask members opposite to find some new questions for a 
change. We’re sick of answering the same questions day after 
day after day after . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 
just heard clear evidence that this government is neither 
responsible or accountable to the people of this province. Once 
again, that minister neglected to answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this session I asked the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs a written question. I asked specifically what 
the total sum of provincial funding provided to the Métis Nation 
of Saskatchewan, including Métis organizations and agencies, 
was for the year 2000-2001. I also asked the minister to provide 
a breakdown of this funding. But as in other cases, the minister 
refused to answer this question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a difficult question to answer and it is of 
interest to all taxpayers, including Métis people, who want to 
know how much funding the government does contribute to 
these organizations and what it is used for. Why did the 
minister refuse to provide that information? 
 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Premier order the minister responsible for 
Aboriginal Affairs to answer this question today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, again I’d be pleased 
to respond on behalf of government. What you have witnessed 
here is another way of asking the same question. 
 
That member knows full well that written questions will be 
answered during the course of the session and at the end of the 
session. It hasn’t changed; this process has gone on in this place 
for many, many decades. Even before those members, any of 
them, came to this House, Mr. Speaker, that’s been the process. 
 
What I would like to ask members opposite, would they please 
scour their membership lists around this province, try and find 
some competent staff to prepare them to come in here with 
some new questions because we’re really getting tired of 
answering the same questions day after day after day after day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
same old, same old — ask a question, get no answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this session the member from North 
Battleford asked the Minister of Health a question: how many 
patients per day on average were added to the waiting lists of 
MRIs (magnetic resonance imaging) in the year 2001; and how 
many patients per day on average received an MRI in the same 
year? A very simple . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order, members. 
Order. Order. Order. Would the member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood continue, please. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question, Mr. 
Speaker, is very interesting to all people of Saskatchewan. And 
it’s a very simple question. 
 
The minister . . . How long will it take to bring waiting lists to 
within a four-year waiting time? The question was converted, 
Mr. Speaker. Why would the Minister of Health not provide 
this information? Or is he afraid of the information that would 
reflect badly on the NDP Party? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier order the Minister of Health to 
answer the question today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I think I understood 
what’s happened now. You see, what has happened is there’s 
been something called answer overload. You see, we put so 
much paper in the form of written questions back to their staff 
that they’re reading day and night and they don’t have time to 
think up new questions. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, the 353 questions plus has kept that 
staff so busy and caucus funds as they will know are limited, 
which is unfortunate, because I think we’ll answer so many 
questions their staff will be busy through the summer and into 

the fall compiling all the information they got. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, I would bet you that 350 written questions is a record 
in one session of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
the Premier was accusing the opposition of not asking questions 
of different departments. And today we hear the minister telling 
. . . saying that we’re asking too many questions. And the facts 
are, Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked . . . facts are, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
asked questions of numerous ministers which over the past 
number of months, Mr. Speaker, have . . . we haven’t received 
answers for. So, Mr. Speaker, we will ask these questions today. 
And we ask the Premier if indeed he wants us to get an answer, 
then ask his ministers to respond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this session we asked the Minister of 
Learning to provide the name of each published departmental 
policy report, study, review, or consultant’s report undertaken 
by his department and the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education from the years 1992 to 2001. We asked the minister 
to indicate the cost of each report to the department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this information is valuable to the public to 
determine what information is available regarding the education 
curriculum and system in Saskatchewan. Yet, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister refused to provide this information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier order the Minister of Learning to 
answer this question today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, here we are again. 
They’re referring back to questions they’ve already asked. And 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, of 353 questions, we have converted 
76. There have been 277 answered . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And, Mr. Speaker, the rest will be 
answered as they are . . . as a matter of practice in this House. 
 
But while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’m somewhat curious 
as well. I want to know if the Leader of the Opposition supports 
loan guarantees for proponents of ethanol. 
 
I want to know if he supports investment in ethanol. I want to 
know where his agriculture policy is. And I want to know if Bill 
Boyd took it home to Kindersley with him, if the Leader of the 
Opposition would simply get on the phone and ask Bill Boyd to 
mail it back to him because . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, those members on that side of the 
House want to know when we’re going to answer the questions, 
and I’ll tell him when we’re going to answer the questions — 
right after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

Mr. Hart: — And there’ll be a few of them sitting over here 
and they can ask all the questions they want and they will 
receive answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. The people living 
in resort communities around Last Mountain Lake are very 
unhappy with this NDP’s . . . government’s decision to allow 
Regina sewage effluent being pumped into Last Mountain Lake 
all last winter. Many residents are noticing an unusual number 
of dead birds and fish on the lakeshore. And many suspect that 
this may be due to the increased levels of Regina sewage 
effluent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week I asked the Minister of the Environment 
a very simple question, but the minister refused to answer. So 
today I will ask that question again. 
 
To the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how many communities have 
permits to pump sewage effluent or raw sewage into provincial 
lakes, creeks, rivers, and any other water body? Mr. Speaker, 
will the Premier instruct his new Minister of the Environment to 
answer that question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, they are so interested 
in the answer that they had to get up and re-ask it again. And I 
think that’s fair. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this opposition 
has asked more questions of this government than has happened 
in any session in, I think, recent memory — 353, to which they 
have received 277 written answers; 76 have been converted 
which will be turned back to them in answered form, in written 
form, and they know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to know, I want to know why members on 
that opposition side have lost sight of the fact that the job 
numbers have turned around and forget to mention it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it rained and the drought went away on them, so 
they ran out of questions in that regard. I want to know where 
the Agriculture critic’s request for $10 million for drought 
assistance went, Mr. Speaker. Because, you know what, one 
weekend it rained; Monday morning she came in here and she 
didn’t have a question to ask. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, we ask some questions, we 
get no answers. We write written questions, we get no answers. 
 
Now a few weeks ago we learned that the NDP government 
used $50 million from the Saskatchewan Government Growth 
Fund. This was to finance acquisition for government cars, 
computers, buildings. 
 
We also learned that the NDP made those $50,000 . . . those 
acquisitions to two companies very close to the NDP without 
. . . with untendered lease contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve recently acquired . . . the NDP have recently 
acquired a new airplane though the lease deal involving SGGF 
(Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund Ltd.) and other 
private companies. When asked about these details both in this 

House and in written, the NDP refused to answer so we’re 
going to ask it again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the NDP table the full details of the airplane lease, and 
table the cost analysis of the cost of using this method against 
chartered aircraft? Will the Premier order the minister 
responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) to answer these questions today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have to admit that 
I’m somewhat disappointed in the member’s memory, because I 
recall days here when in the rotunda the media had the 
opportunity to ask the minister responsible as it related to the 
lease of the aircraft, how it was done, through whom it was 
done. And those answers were all given. 
 
But the memories of that member is clearly failing, Mr. 
Speaker, because today he gets up and asks again a question 
that was answered, I thought in detail and quite eloquently, by 
the minister responsible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we will do, Mr. Speaker, is the question has been in 
written form as well, and we will provide him the answers. It’s 
one of the questions that were converted, and as he knows, the 
answers will be forthcoming and he should not worry about 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out of 353 questions, 277 answered — but that’s 
not good enough for them. But, Mr. Speaker, you ask those 
people one question about policy, their policy, and they won’t 
respond. 
 
His economic development policy . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition disappeared about three days after he was 
questioned on how he’s going to finance it. And do you want to 
know something, Mr. Speaker? Nobody’s asked him a question 
about it since, and he won’t talk about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 205 — The Protection of Persons in Care Act 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of Bill 
No. 205, The Protection of Persons in Care Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 207 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2002 (Set Election Dates) 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
move first reading of Bill No. 207, The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Amendment Act, 2002 (Set Election 
Dates). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

 

MESSAGE FROM 
HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly. Members, I have a 
message from the Queen of Canada, Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II, which I wish now to read into the record and I 
would ask the members to please rise. 
 

BUCKINGHAM PALACE 
 

The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
 
I was pleased to receive your kind message of loyal 
greetings sent on behalf of the Members of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan for my Golden Jubilee. Prince 
Philip and I have been deeply touched by the many kind 
messages. We acknowledge with gratitude the loyalty and 
support which we have received since I came to the throne 
as Queen of Canada in 1952, and thank you for the work 
that you do to help others through public service. 
 
I was glad that your Province had proclaimed a Golden 
Jubilee Week from 14th to 20th May, and pleased that the 
Golden Jubilee observance by the Legislature on 14th May 
and the Victoria Day celebrations on 20th May had both 
been so enjoyable. I hope that these celebrations were not 
simply an occasion to be nostalgic about the past. I believe 
that, young or old, we have as much to look forward to with 
confidence and hope as we have to look back on with pride. 
 
I send my best wishes to all those assembled and my thanks 
to the People of Saskatchewan for their loyalty. 
 

ELIZABETH R. 
 

30th May 2002 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to convert 
for debates returnable questions 348, 349, 350, and 353 . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — . . . table questions 351 and 352. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I would ask the member to 
repeat the numbers. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To convert for debates 
returnable, no. 348, 349, 350, and 353, and table no. 351 and 
352. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Converted, 348, 349, 350, and 353. 
Responded to, 351 and 352. 
 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 14 — Funding for Post-Secondary Institutions 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to debate the lack of commitment that this NDP 
government has to post-secondary education and that they’ve 
demonstrated their lack of commitment through their 
underfunding over the past number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education is a broad term that has 
many aspects to it and affects a large part of our society and our 
economic activity, Mr. Speaker. The early pioneers of this 
province recognized the importance and placed a high value on 
education and post-secondary education. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
is demonstrated by . . . in many communities and rural areas in 
early Saskatchewan when one of the first buildings that our 
early pioneers drew together would put up country schools and 
schools in our towns and our cities. 
 
And shortly after Saskatchewan became a province, Mr. 
Speaker, in fact two years after, the citizens of this great 
province realized the importance of post-secondary education 
and constructed the first building on the University of 
Saskatchewan campus, that being the College Building, in the 
year 1907, Mr. Speaker. And from that time forward more 
buildings were added, more programs were added, and so on. 
And sometime down the road, the University of Regina was 
established and our technical institutes and so on, indicating the 
need and the importance of educating our . . . not only our 
young people, Mr. Speaker, but all people of our province. 
 
And this is a trend that we see even more so today. If one 
attends convocation ceremonies, Mr. Speaker, you will see that 
we have an increasing number of adult students who are 
graduating from our post-secondary education institutions, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is certainly a welcome trend. It fits in with the 
so-called slogan of lifelong learning. We all realize that as our 
. . . as things evolve and more information is available and 
trends change in society, that there is a need for continuing and 
ongoing education. 
 
And so it’s of utmost important, Mr. Speaker, that we . . . that 
there is a public commitment on behalf of government to 
post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I might just outline a few of the roles and the purposes of 
post-secondary education, and as I’ve already mentioned, and 
the one that certainly comes to mind when post-secondary 
education is mentioned is of course the educational aspect of 
higher learning. 
 
However, also a second and equally important activity of our 
universities and other post-secondary institutions is research — 
research that leads to many new inventions, a cure for diseases, 
technological advances, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And from that research there are economic spinoffs that will 
develop — not from every research project, as you can well 
imagine, because there are hundreds and thousands of research 
projects that take place across this country. And certainly not 
every one of them leads to a new finding and a worthwhile 
invention or economic activity that can be taken on and 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

developed by private industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But many of the advances — in fact, most of the technological 
advances, whether it be in the medical field or in the 
engineering field or in the field of business — quite often if you 
trace the history and find where that first idea came from, it’ll 
come from someone who was either at a post-secondary 
education institute or a graduate of a university, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the more prominent . . . and oftentimes universities in 
particular play a very prominent role in that whole area of 
taking the pure, basic research and moving it forward through 
the various steps until it becomes a commercial . . . of 
commercial value — a commercial idea that private industry 
can then take and create jobs and produce real value. 
 
And a couple of prime examples, Mr. Speaker, are . . . you 
might well look south of the border into the US. And that whole 
area of Silicon Valley started, Mr. Speaker, many years ago by 
some of the good work that were . . . that was done by a couple 
of staff members at one of the universities in that area. 
 
There was a staff member by the name of Professor Hewlett and 
a Dr. Packard. And they worked together and the university saw 
the value in their work and provided them with a little . . . with 
a bit of aid in the form of some research money and, in fact, 
later on some land. And there was then private developers 
moved in and caught hold of the idea and from that sprung the 
Silicon Valley, and of course the company that is known to 
many people who are familiar with computers and the 
information technology, Hewlett-Packard. But that all started, 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of work done at a university in the 
United States. 
 
Another area of economic activity, a cluster of economic 
activity, that is spun off of a post-secondary educational 
institution is in the Boston area. A large number of economic 
development activities are the spinoffs . . . are the result of 
research that was being done at the MIT (Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology) in Boston. 
 
We have some success stories right here in our own province, 
Mr. Speaker. One needs only to look at the U of S (University 
of Saskatchewan) and Innovation Place and all the things that 
are happening there, whether it be biotechnology in which we 
are a world leader of VIDO (Veterinarian Infectious Disease 
Organization) infectious diseases in animals, work that 
originated at the university and has then been taken and 
commercialized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there are some smaller examples at the U of R (University 
of Regina) . . . at the U of S, I should say, in international road 
dynamics and other technologies in the transportation area. The 
U of R currently has some research taking place that hopefully 
will lead one day to commercialization with its Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre and the Greenhouse Gas 
Technology Centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are some of the areas that . . . besides the basic and 
foremost purpose of post-secondary education is the educational 
component, but also research is an equally important aspect of 
university activity, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time in our province, we are 
presented with a huge opportunity. And that opportunity is the 
Canadian Light Source that is currently being constructed at the 
University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said on many times before in this Assembly, it is a 
world-class facility that is being constructed. It is the fourth 
largest . . . fourth most intense light beam that will be in 
operation on the face of the earth. And it can present this 
province with some huge advantages, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
There are huge opportunities in the health and pharmaceutical 
area, in environmental engineering and waste management, and 
the opportunities that this scientific facility presents are 
unlimited. They’re only limited by one’s imagination, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Recently I was . . . I read an article, Mr. Speaker, that dealt with 
the greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide, and how it is related to 
the Canadian Light Source. There are scientists that feel that 
through the use of a synchrotron they can develop methods 
where they can tie up carbon, which has been released into our 
atmosphere, and tie it up for an indefinite period of time. These 
carbon atoms have been stored in the earth’s . . . below the 
earth’s surface for hundreds of millions of years. And now we 
are releasing them through the use of fossil fuels and other 
industrial activities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we are seeing the effects of climate change. One only has 
to look at the bizarre weather patterns that we’ve had in, in 
these past few months to realize that we are in the midst of 
climate change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the scientists are telling us that through, through 
synchrotron science they are hopeful they can develop methods 
where they could take these carbon atoms from the atmosphere 
and tie them to elements such as magnesium and permanently 
return them to the . . . below the earth’s surface so that they are 
no longer causing problems in . . . as far as greenhouse gases 
and climate change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those opportunities exist. And what we need to do in this 
province is we have make . . . we need to make sure that the 
resources are in place at our universities so that we can take 
advantage of these opportunities, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
where I think, Mr. Speaker, and I know that this government 
has certainly not stepped up to the plate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The universities have consistently told this NDP government 
that in order to just maintain the status quo, they need an . . . 
over the last two or three years, they’ve needed an annual 
increase in operational grant funding of 5 per cent. And that is 
just to pay for contract settlements, the new salary schedules, 
the increase in utility fees, things like increases in operating a 
. . . new facilities that are coming on stream, increased activity 
in their libraries, and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what have we seen? What is the record of this government, 
Mr. Speaker? Well the record is, is not, certainly not one . . . a 
record that one would have hoped that a government that says 
it’s committed to education and post-secondary education 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

 

would be proud to tell the people about. If we look at the 
funding increases or new money over the last two years that this 
government has made available to our universities and at 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), to our post-secondary education, it doesn’t even 
match the new money that the universities were forced to ask 
the students to pay in the form of increased tuition fees. 
 
What has happened, Mr. Speaker, is that this . . . that . . . 
particularly our universities, and to a lesser extent SIAST, have 
decided that they can no longer wait on this government to 
come forth with an increased commitment, with a new 
commitment to post-secondary education. 
 
So the universities have done it themselves. They’ve said look, 
if we’re going to be world-class universities, if we’re going to 
be able to compete in the marketplace to replace the faculty that 
is retiring, we’ve got to have the resources to be able to do that. 
 
If we’re going to do research and play at the world level, and be 
competitive with other universities, not only in Canada, not 
only in North America, but around the world, because we do 
live in a global village, Mr. Speaker, then we’re going to have 
to step up to the plate ourselves. 
 
So what have they done? By and large, universities have . . . 
their major sources of funding are tuition fees and grants from 
governments. They have a varied . . . other sources but those are 
their two major sources of income. 
 
So if the government is not stepping up to the plate then the 
only other solution that universities have is to ask the students 
to step up to the plate. So what have we seen then. We’ve seen 
an increase last year at the U of S of a 15 per cent increase in 
tuition fees. The U of R had a 9 per cent increase in tuition fees. 
 
That new money that those tuition fees generated was $7.3 
million from the students — that’s new money. And what new 
money did the government put in place at the universities — 
4.7, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t even a dollar for dollar; the students 
outdid, outdid this NDP government in new money. 
 
And this year, again we’re seeing some massive increases in 
tuition fees, and particularly in some of the colleges at the U of 
S, an across-the-board increase of 8.8 per cent at the U of R, 
Mr. Speaker. And that money has . . . is generating $8.6 million 
of new money that the students, through increased tuition fees, 
are providing to our universities. 
 
And what is the government’s record? It’s $5.8 million for 
operating grants, Mr. Speaker. Again, the students have far 
outdone the government, and that is shameful, as the member 
from North Battleford says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So why do our universities find themselves in this situation? 
Why is this government not able to provide more money? What 
is the reason, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government likes to brag that they’re 
committed to education, whether it be in the K to 12 system or 
the post-secondary education system. But certainly their 
commitment is not matched by the fiscal resources that are 
needed. 

And why is that, Mr. Speaker? Well, frankly it’s a very . . . the 
question . . . the answer is very simple. They simply don’t have 
the money. We’ve seen that in this year’s budget, a paltry 
supposedly $45,000 surplus which is no surplus at all. If you 
ask anyone in the province, I think they’ll all tell that that’s 
fiction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason that this government doesn’t have the money to 
provide to education and other areas of responsibility that the 
government has — whether it be health, whether it be 
highways, whether it be agriculture, whether it be policing, all 
those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker — is because of their failed 
economic development policies. 
 
They’ve created an environment in this province which is not 
conducive to outside investment or even investment from 
within the province because of their overuse and their heavy 
reliance on Crown corporations, where business people in this 
province find themselves competing with Crown corporations. 
And instead of attracting investment and thereby creating more 
economic activity, more jobs, more people living in the 
province, more taxpayers so that you have those tax dollars to 
do . . . to provide for things like education, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve had the opposite effect. 
 
One only has to look at the Maclean’s magazine issue that was 
on the newsstands shortly after Statistics Canada released the 
results of the last census to see the results of these failed 
economic policies. There was — I wish I would’ve brought it 
with me, Mr. Speaker, I have it in my office — there’s a map in 
that issue of Maclean’s magazine that shows population growth 
across Canada. And once again, Saskatchewan stands out. 
 
Saskatchewan stands out but for all the wrong reasons. It stands 
out because it was the only province in Western Canada, and 
probably I believe if my memory serves me correctly, one of 
only two provinces all across Canada that had population 
decline — a decline of the number of the people living in their 
provinces. 
 
All the other provinces, including Manitoba . . . We often talk 
about Alberta and the people opposite say well we can’t 
compare Saskatchewan to Alberta because they’ve got so many 
other . . . so many advantages. Well let’s compare ourselves 
with Manitoba. Even Manitoba had a population growth and 
Saskatchewan had a negative population growth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, that recently which Saskatchewan 
stood out — and again for all the wrong reasons — and again it 
had to do with information released by Statistics Canada, was 
an economic growth for the year 2001. Saskatchewan being I 
believe the only province across Canada to experience negative 
economic growth in 2001. 
 
And so what is the impact of that? People will say . . . the 
members of the opposite side of the House will say well what’s 
the big deal? Well it is a big deal because that impacts on things 
like education and health and all those sorts of things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So when we criticize their economic development policy they 
stand up and they defend it rigorously and that sort of thing. But 
the question is, Mr. Speaker, to them is how is it working? And 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

the answer is it’s not working very well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what are some of the effects, Mr. Speaker, that we see as a 
result of this underfunding that this government has perpetually 
passed on to our post-secondary education institutions and 
particularly our universities? What are some of the effects of 
this underfunding? Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already said, the 
most immediate effect is the large increases in tuition fees that 
we’ve seen over the last two years. 
 
Again Saskatchewan is in the news in that area but again for all 
the wrong reasons. Saskatchewan over the last two years has 
had the highest percentage increase in tuition fees of any other 
province across Canada, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that’s 
something that this government should be proud of because I 
know on this side of the House we certainly aren’t proud of a 
record like that. 
 
We’re seeing reduced research activities, Mr. Speaker. In order 
to . . . As I mentioned earlier, we have this tremendous 
opportunity right on our doorstep and I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, 
that we may not be able to take full advantage of that 
opportunity for a number of reasons. Because if the dollars 
aren’t there for research activities, you don’t have the grad 
students there to support those research activities. If there are 
dollars for student aid, Mr. Speaker, that impacts on the number 
of grad students and we certainly are seeing those effects. 
 
The large tuition . . . or large increases in tuition fees, Mr. 
Speaker, have a couple of effects at least and probably more. 
We have, obviously, we have higher student debt. If you have 
to pay higher tuition fees, Mr. Speaker, many students rely on 
student loans and of course, they’re going to have to take larger 
student loans and end up at the completion of their studies with 
a larger student debt. We see students now seriously 
questioning whether they should attend the universities in 
Regina or in Saskatoon or look elsewhere outside our province, 
Mr. Speaker, because of the high increase in tuition fees. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, and this is probably one of the most 
serious effects of larger tuition fees, is the reduced access for 
some of our students. Those students who don’t have the 
financial resources and their families don’t have the financial 
resources and, if you’re looking at higher tuition fees, some of 
these students may not be able to attend university. 
 
I talked to some of the student body representatives recently, 
Mr. Speaker, and one of their concerns is that tuition fees are 
rising but the cap on student loans hasn’t changed. So that’s 
really putting students in a difficult position, particularly 
single-parent families. And, as I said earlier, we’re seeing more 
mature students graduate from university. And many of those 
students have families and so it’s making it increasingly 
difficult with the increased costs for those students to attend our 
universities and SIAST, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another effect of the underfunding as we’re hearing from both 
of our universities is that there’s a developing backlog of capital 
improvements that each . . . and it’s building at each university. 
If the dollars aren’t there to replace or renovate and do the 
major repairs to some of the facilities at the universities, they 
get put on hold and that account continues to build. 
 

The University of Saskatchewan recently — about a year or so 
— indicated that they have a capital backlog of some $100 
million. The University of Regina because it is a newer 
university, a somewhat smaller university, not quite as research 
intensive, their backlog isn’t quite as great but they too are 
developing a backlog in capital improvements. And this is 
having some very serious effects. 
 
And probably this effect is best illustrated by the sad state of 
repairs of the College Building on the University of 
Saskatchewan campus, the very first building that was built at 
the university. This was the building that the pioneers back in 
1906, 1907 when the university was first created said we’re 
going to build this building and this is where . . . will be the 
centre of activity at the university and it was for many, many 
years. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, it is no longer in use. In fact, it is in 
danger of crumbling. The university is doing its best. It’s 
monitoring the deterioration of the building. They are looking 
in every . . . at every aspect of how they could preserve that 
building. They are searching desperately for dollars to at least 
stabilize the building and I’m hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that they 
will be successful. 
 
(14:45) 
 
This government has made a token gesture towards that 
building but it’s certainly not enough to ensure the viability of 
that building, Mr. Speaker. And it would be a provincial shame, 
Mr. Speaker, if that building were to . . . would have to be 
demolished because we in this province can’t find the dollars to 
preserve a national heritage site, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Minister of Finance, again, the Minister of Finance 
chirps from his seat that if it’s a national project the federal 
government should involve itself. Well the federal . . . It seems 
that this province of Saskatchewan is continually asking the 
federal government for . . . if it isn’t for education, it’s for 
health, it’s for something else. Isn’t it time that this province 
stood up on its own two feet and looked after some of our own 
needs, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This College Building, it’s not large dollars. I’m told that it’s 
some $20 million. The university doesn’t expect government to 
provide all that money, they have some of the money of their 
own, Mr. Speaker. And I think this would be a certainly, as I 
said earlier, it would be quite a disaster if that building would 
have to be demolished, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only . . . The members opposite may feel 
that it’s only the opposition that feels this way; that the public at 
large is quite happy with their efforts in post-secondary 
education. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just run through a few 
headlines in some of the papers, Mr. Speaker, from the last two 
years that will indicate how the . . . what the people of this 
province think of their commitment to post-secondary 
education. 
 
I have a headline, Mr. Speaker, from April 11, The StarPhoenix, 
and this is the article that I had indicated earlier where the 
University of Saskatchewan indicated that they . . . And the 
headline reads: “U of S $100 million behind in building 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

 

repairs.” And of course the College Building, as I had indicated, 
is one of those buildings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another headline from The StarPhoenix, April 20: 
“Saskatchewan paying price for neglect to health research, an 
official says.” That’s an area that I didn’t even touch on, Mr. 
Speaker, the impact of underfunding and the negative impact of 
health research. 
 
And we all know of the woes and the trouble that we’ve . . . at 
the College of Medicine and the loss of some of the faculty 
there, Mr. Speaker, and the continuing concerns. In fact, it 
wasn’t so long ago that the very existence of that college was in 
jeopardy, Mr. Speaker. I understand through the efforts of the 
university that at least there has been some stability there but 
we don’t know for how long. 
 
Another headline, Mr. Speaker, in The StarPhoenix, April 19 of 
last year, “Programs pressed for cash, university review shows.” 
Well what that headline is all about is that the university has 
undertaken an intensive review of all their programs that they 
are offering, and one of the overwhelming results that they 
found when they reviewed some 29 programs — and they have 
many more programs to review but when they were reporting 
after the review of 29 — is that one of the largest problems to 
offering quality programs, Mr. Speaker, is the lack of cash. And 
that’s indicated in this article, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And an item again from The StarPhoenix dated May 8. And it’s 
entitled “Double-digit tuition hike forecast.” And of course that 
came true; 15 per cent increase in the U of S last year. 
 
And as I’d indicated, because of the lack of funding, it makes 
the university’s job so much more difficult when they’re 
recruiting quality faculty. And they, as many other businesses, 
governments and so on, are finding that they’re in the process 
of faculty renewal. The baby boomers are retiring and they have 
to attract new faculty, and their job is being made increasingly 
difficult due to the increased demands by new staff. 
 
Many staff, particularly if you’re a research orientated 
university, they want to know that they will have an opportunity 
and there is capacity to do some research. And if that capacity 
isn’t there, they at least would like to know when it will be 
there and if there can be a commitment made. And if they know 
that in a year or two down the road there will be some capacity 
for research, then they are willing to look at coming to our great 
province. 
 
Because we don’t necessarily have to compete on salary alone. 
We have many things to offer. And I’ve heard this from some 
of the faculty people who have made the decision to come to 
Saskatchewan, whether it be here at the university here in 
Regina or the university in Saskatoon. They look at our quality 
of life, at the safety of our communities, among . . . are some of 
the top things that they will mention when they make that 
decision to come to this province. 
 
But also high on their list of priorities is their professional 
development. And oftentimes that is research capacity and 
oftentimes the answer is, well it’s not the greatest or we don’t 
have any. And that certainly is a deterring factor in attracting 
quality faculty. 

And quality faculty, Mr. Speaker, leads to quality education. 
And if there’s one thing in this province that we must stress and 
we must never sacrifice is the quality of education that we 
provide to our young people and to all those, to the students that 
attend our post- secondary education, Mr. Speaker. And of 
course then there are more headlines dealing with tuition fee 
increases and so on. 
 
There’s a headline I think, Mr. Speaker, that certainly addresses 
this topic. And this is in the March 25 issue of the Leader Post. 
The headline reads, “Universities in need of public 
commitment.” And the article goes on to talk about the things 
that I’ve discussed, Mr. Speaker — the lack of commitment by 
this government to the universities. 
 
They’ve done a job of making sure that not too many of the 
buildings fall down, although some are in danger of crumbling. 
Another building that comes to mind — and I keep referring to 
the U of S because the U of S is an older institution, has older 
buildings. — the Education Building has fences around it 
because some of the exterior is falling off, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
crumbling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the headlines that I read were mostly from 
2001 newspaper articles. There are an equal amount from 2002. 
I have one here, “Students hit with tuition hike,” again talking 
about the 8 per cent increase at the U of R. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think to . . . a newspaper article that really 
sums up and crystallizes the problem was an editorial in the 
Leader-Post dated May 31. And, Mr. Speaker, I think I would 
like to read into the record this editorial because I think in my 
opinion it certainly crystallizes the argument. And I’m quoting, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Selling the virtues of studying at one of Saskatchewan’s 
universities to an increasingly skeptical audience has 
become an urgent assignment in the wake of recent sizeable 
tuition increases. 
 
There’s no doubt that Saskatchewan students planning their 
post-secondary education here will take a . . . (sombre) 
second look at their choices in the wake of tuition hikes of 
up to 27 per cent at the University of Saskatchewan . . . and 
8.8 per cent at the University of Regina . . . The higher 
tuition fees could also dampen recruitment of international 
students. 
 
The U of S had a 15 per cent tuition hike last year and with 
this new increase, medical students will now pay (and get 
this Mr. Speaker, they will now pay) . . . $9,205 a year (in 
tuition fees). 

 
The article goes on, Mr. Speaker, and I continue to quote: 
 

U of S Students’ . . . president Craig Stehr says it is “really 
distressing” that potential doctors and lawyers will 
increasingly have to come from wealthy backgrounds. 
 
The U of R had an almost nine-per-cent tuition increase last 
spring and . . . (a) new hike will add . . . $309 to fees for 
two semesters for . . . (the) typical full-time arts student. 
 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

Both universities have done an excellent job in growing 
their campuses and raising standards . . . (They) clearly, 
getting a university education in Saskatchewan remains the 
cheapest option for (those) students still living at home in 
Regina and Saskatoon. But an increasing number will now 
look at bigger institutions outside the province with 
comparable tuition and be prepared to pay the extra for 
accommodation and living costs for a degree perceived to 
carry more weight. 
 
Others won’t be so lucky. Many from less well-off 
backgrounds in the province simply won’t be able to afford 
to get a university education. 
 
Ultimately, insufficient government funding from the two 
universities is to blame for tuition hikes of at least four 
times the rate of inflation. 
 
We suggest the government — which lost $28 million in 
(its) . . . recent ill-advised attempt to grow potatoes — . . . 
(reinvest) its priorities and make an investment in the future 
of its young people. Their education guarantees solid 
returns for years to come. 

 
Mr. Speaker. I think, as I said, Mr. Speaker, I think this editorial 
certainly crystallizes the argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And interestingly, there is an article just in last week’s paper — 
or I believe it was in perhaps in yesterday’s paper — dealing 
with Saskatchewan’s rate of inflation, again a publication from 
Statistics Canada. And one of the causes . . . or the causes of the 
higher inflation rate in Saskatchewan — which by the way, led 
the nation, again; Saskatchewan was first, but for all the wrong 
reasons, Mr. Speaker — is, and get this, these are the reasons as 
indicated by this article: 2.7 per cent inflation rate when the 
national average was 1.5, I believe it was. And the reasons were 
increased utility rates, property taxes, tobacco taxes, and tuition 
fees. Can you believe that — tuition fees — Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the article goes on to say that these are all items that are in 
the realm of government control. What really caught my eye, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the increase in tuition fees is one of the 
reasons why we have a higher inflation rate in this province 
then all across the country. I mean, this is unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, therefore I would like to move the following 
motion, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the member from 
Redberry Lake: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the provincial government 
for its failure to provide post-secondary institutions in this 
province with stable long-term funding resulting in large 
increases in tuition fees for students. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great privilege 
and honour to second this motion condemning the government 
for its failure to provide post-secondary institutions in the 
province with stable, long-term funding, resulting in large 
increases in tuition for students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a serious concern that has been developing 
for many years and the government has failed to address this 

situation. In its annual report on university tuition fees released 
August last year, StatsCanada said that for the second 
consecutive year the largest average increase in tuition fees 
were in Saskatchewan, at a whopping 12.4 per cent increase. 
 
In the last two years, Mr. Speaker, tuition fees in Saskatchewan 
have increased by more than 20 per cent. This means another 
dubious distinction award for this province as this increase 
represents the fastest growing tuition fees in the country. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the last decade according to 
StatsCanada, tuition fees have more than doubled in this 
province — more than doubled, Mr. Speaker. Year over year 
from 1991 to 2001, Saskatchewan students saw tuition fees 
increase by more than 100 per cent. In the past five years alone 
tuition fees have been hiked by more than 40 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this in fact is proof that the NDP government has 
been offloading its fiscal mismanagement onto the backs of 
students. One needs to look no further than the significant 
increases in tuition fees. 
 
In the recent . . . The recently ousted minister . . . Environment 
minister had the gall to tell students during her very short term 
as Post-Secondary Education minister that she had no problem 
with students existing on a diet of Spam and Kraft Dinner as 
she was able to make do when she went to university in the 
1960s and ’70s. 
 
Based on this and other comments from the members opposite, 
it’s obvious that the NDP has absolutely no idea about the 
reality of post-secondary education in this province. Not only is 
there a lack of access to health care, there’s also a lack of access 
to post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in case it’s lost on the members opposite, we feel 
it’s important to point out that the tuition fees do not cover the 
full cost of educating students. There are many other so-called 
costs involved as well. For example, we all know that a good 
portion of the students who may be attending a university or a 
technical institute are from a rural or remote area, meaning that 
when they relocate they have also . . . have to cover other costs 
as well, such as accommodations and food. 
 
(15:00) 
 
It’s not unusual, Mr. Speaker, to hear of student loan debts 
topping 30 or $40,000 or more after the completion of the 
four-year program, even more for extended periods of study, 
Mr. Speaker. The fact is that once these students are done their 
post-secondary education, that money has to be paid back fairly 
quickly. So these students go to where there’s some promise of 
growth of income. These students go to where the jobs are and 
now we know they are not staying here. They are leaving the 
province for other jurisdictions. 
 
Frankly, all of Saskatchewan has had enough of the NDP 
government offloading its responsibilities of providing adequate 
funding to the universities and colleges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we speak of the huge debt that many 
university students have had to take to get through university, 
I’d just like to quote from, actually it’s a CBC (Canadian 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

 

Broadcasting Corporation) news item on August 2000. It says, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Months after graduating from post-secondary institute of 
their choice, young people encounter one of the most 
unwelcome truths of adulthood: (deep) debt sucks. These 
are young people who received student loans, 5,000 . . . 
10,000 . . . $40,000 — and must start repaying them. For 
some it’s like a mugging in a dark alley. 
 
The loan doubtless enables more young people to attend 
universities and colleges and technical schools, but the 
burden of youth debt — amounts many homeowners owed 
on the mortgages 20 years ago — raises questions of the 
efficiency of the student loan program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the students consider it’s like a mugging in a dark 
alley how the province of Saskatchewan is treating their 
university students. 
 

The Canadian Alliance of Student Associations (CASA), a 
coalition of student governments from universities across 
the country, says, “student brains have been taken hostage.” 
(Says the national director.) . . . national director, says a 
study on student debt is “long overdue.” 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we see, the government is not addressing 
this concern at all. As my very able colleague, the critic for 
post-secondary education has pointed out in his comments in 
the last few minutes that the government has really let down the 
students and the young people of Saskatchewan, have not 
helped them out, instead they have raised tuition costs. 
 
And it’s not only it’s raising tuition costs, raising the cost of the 
. . . to the student and to the student’s family. That is bad 
enough in itself. But we’re also seeing the universities, 
especially University of Saskatchewan, buildings crumbling. 
There’s some of the buildings are actually in such disrepair that 
they’ve been . . . had to be cordoned off, they are actually 
dangerous to enter. There’s a lack of seating and room for 
classes. 
 
And the whole point of our motion is that the provincial 
government needs to put in place the stable, long-term funding 
which means that the universities will have some plan in place 
so they can continue to begin to build and repair the structures 
in the university and have some ability and knowledge of their 
funding so that they can make some long-term plans as far as 
hiring future faculty, not only the repairing of the buildings but 
just improve the access of university to students in the province. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, it’s just not the cost of the tuition. It’s 
also . . . the students have to bear a considerable cost in 
accommodation, food, and travel. As we know, many students 
come from many areas of Saskatchewan and many have to 
travel many hundreds of miles. And in particular the Native 
community, the Native students who . . . it is very important 
that they have access to a university education, have . . . Many 
of them have to come from a great distance away in order to 
take university classes and this is becoming quite burdensome 
on them and their families as well. 
 
Obviously things cannot continue as they are. The 

government’s policies are not sustainable as they are and things 
have to change. Now whenever we talk about increased funding 
for anything the government always trots out numbers that they 
can’t afford it. They always don’t have money for many things, 
but they never take the steps in order to turn the economy 
around. 
 
As we have seen in many other jurisdictions, in particular the 
. . . in Ireland, the Irish experience, they took . . . they were in a 
very similar situation as Saskatchewan is today, 10 and 15 years 
ago. They were an agriculture based economy. They had a . . . 
they had their over-regulated, burdensome labour laws, 
overtaxed, and they also had something that’s very similar to 
Saskatchewan. They had on their horizon a huge number of 
young people that were coming . . . going to be coming into the 
workforce over the next 10 and 15, 20 years. 
 
And the politicians in Ireland decided a few basic things that 
they had to do. First they had to sit down and develop a social 
contract with everyone in the country. That included 
agriculture, the universities, labour, business, and sat down at a 
round table you might say — like the government has 
announced many times which has never taken place — and 
actually struck a deal on how to deal with some very serious 
problems in Ireland. 
 
And the problems again are very similar to what Saskatchewan 
had. The young people in Ireland, as in Saskatchewan, were 
growing up and leaving their country as they do leave 
Saskatchewan and go elsewhere to make a living and to live and 
find jobs. 
 
In Ireland they decided, through their social contract, that they 
would reduce taxes, they would put incentives out for 
businesses — both local businesses, European businesses, and 
multinational companies from around the world including many 
from North America — inviting them to their country to build 
factories, to start their businesses or their sub-businesses that 
they have in other parts of the world. 
 
But any business or industry needs a very stable, highly trained 
workforce, and the Irish government of the day decided that 
regardless of the outcome of their experiment, they needed and 
were going to educate their students. Even if they were going to 
leave home and go elsewhere, they wanted their students to 
enter the workforce and enter the world trained and educated to 
the best possible means so that they would have the best 
chances in the world wherever they went. 
 
So they set about . . . actually in many cases free tuition to 
university students and encouraged their students and young 
people to go to university and get a proper education. As this 
process was going on — it was very successful — they also 
through their tax reductions and their deregulation of labour 
laws and regulations and red tape and promoting their economy 
and their country around the world, and also because of their 
social contract they developed with all the stakeholders, were 
able to turn their economy around. 
 
They had a unique position in Europe as being an 
English-speaking country in the European economy, as is 
Saskatchewan; has many similarities. We have a great 
opportunity. We have an access into the North American 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

economy, the US economy where we have free trade 
agreements with Mexico and the United States. And so we have 
many parallels where we can compare to Ireland and their 
experience. 
 
Everything came together for the Irish people. They did 
encourage companies from around the world to set up in 
Ireland. These companies did come, they did create jobs, and as 
the young people in Ireland came out of school, they had a very 
reliable and well-trained, highly trained workforce to work in 
these new jobs that were developed in the high-tech industry in 
Ireland. And as we all know, it’s known around the world as the 
Irish miracle. 
 
And there was many things that we must take notice in the Irish 
experience and the Irish miracle so we can copy and emulate 
many of the things that they’ve done here in Saskatchewan, so 
we can also keep our students, keep our . . . to train our 
students, to educate our students to stay in Saskatchewan to find 
well-paying jobs in Saskatchewan, create the jobs and the 
economy in Saskatchewan to keep our students here and to 
broaden the tax base. And when we broaden the tax base, we 
know that the economy is growing. We ultimately have more 
taxes for the government to spend on the critical areas in the 
economy: health and education and welfare. 
 
And as we have pointed out many times, the Saskatchewan 
Party has a plan to grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in 10 
years. And many of our plans in the Grow Saskatchewan plan is 
based on the Irish miracle, the Irish experiment. And we believe 
that we can emulate the Irish experience here in Saskatchewan 
through co-operation, common sense, and really the desire to 
improve this province, get the economy going so that we can 
develop the economy and the jobs for Saskatchewan students 
and people in this province. 
 
As the member across has pointed out, the EC (European 
Commission) also has a system of transfers like we have in our 
federation in Canada. We also rely on the transfers of funds 
from the provinces to Ottawa. The have provinces transfer 
funds to Ottawa and Ottawa in turn divvies it out to provinces 
that are have-not provinces and Saskatchewan is a have-not 
province. And we, like Ireland, should take that money, take 
that money and use it to grow Saskatchewan so that 
Saskatchewan becomes a have province and not continue to be 
a have-not province. 
 
So we have many parallels like Ireland also has. We have to 
take advantage of all the things that we have at our disposal. 
And we have our natural advantages, our natural resources and 
mining uranium, possible diamond mines, gold mines that we 
must develop. We must encourage more development in the oil 
and gas industry to grow the province to give our students, 
when they come out of university, a very high-paying, good job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but here we are in a situation where we have 
crumbling universities. We are leaving our students and our 
young people with burdensome debt once they are done 
university. And it’s only natural if you have a $40,000 loan, if 
they can’t get a job in Saskatchewan, what are they going to do. 
They’re going to go where the jobs are, and that’s generally 
speaking, in Alberta, but not just Alberta. That means going 
into the United States, or going into other parts of Canada and 

the world to earn the money they need to pay off their debt and 
start plans for families and for their retirement in the future. 
And it’s very critical that we put in place the resources to keep 
these people in Saskatchewan and to grow the province. 
 
And it’s not only . . . In Ireland they not only educated the 
young people, but at the same time they also set in a process of 
inviting back Irish people who had left the country and invited 
them back, to come back to Ireland to take advantage of the 
new reality in Ireland. And there was an overwhelming success, 
where people from all over the world came back to their home 
country, back to Ireland to work and live in their native land — 
much the same as many people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Wherever I have travelled in this country, I talk to people that 
was born and raised in the province. They wish they could 
come back to the province of Saskatchewan, they love this 
province but they are unable to, because they can’t make a 
decent living. So I believe that the government has a . . . must 
take the steps to ensure that our young people, after they have a 
university education, that they’re able to come back to a 
well-paying job in the province and live and work in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, as I said, I would like to second the 
motion. And at this time I would like to say to the members 
opposite that it is still not too late, it’s coming a very critical 
point in the history of Saskatchewan, but we must turn this 
province around and get Saskatchewan growing again. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to enter this debate today, to try and set a little bit of 
light on the situation, and reality. 
 
At the end of my remarks, I’m going to be moving the 
following amendment. My amendment will be that we remove 
all words after Assembly and replace with: 
 

express its support for the groundbreaking effort made by 
the provincial government increasing access to 
post-secondary education for Saskatchewan people and 
working with universities and SIAST to provide stable 
funding. 

 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I assume we debate both the main . . . the motion 
and the amendment concurrently. And I want to point out the 
motion deals with, it says we need long-term, stable funding. 
And the opposition would have the people of Saskatchewan 
believe that there’s no such thing as long-term, stable funding in 
post-secondary. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just start to put an end to that little 
mistruth. I have before me the historic operating grants to 
universities and federated colleges. 1994-95, universities got 
$162.663 million. And that number — that’s ’94-95, ’95-96, 
’96-97, and so on — the number every single year between then 
and now has either stayed the same or increased. It was, 
remember I said, 162 million. It’s now 206.92 million for the 
year 2002-2003. And that’s up from 197,870. That’s for 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

 

universities alone. For federated colleges, the number went 
from 5.161 million to 8.41 million in that ensuing time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I simply draw those numbers out right now to 
point out that there has been ongoing, steady, dependable 
funding from the provincial government. The federal 
government funds, the provincial government funds, but we 
have been steady and growing and we’re very, very proud of 
what we’ve done with post-secondary education here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Redberry talks a bit about 
Ireland and he speaks in fine words about bringing people 
together. Sounds wonderful to bring people together. I just 
don’t know how in the world it is that day after day in question 
period, we’ll have opposition members taking runs at urban 
Saskatchewan, taking a run at Regina. They did it again today, 
misrepresenting . . . misrepresenting what’s going on with 
Wascana Creek, misrepresenting completely what’s happening 
in terms of Regina and so on. 
 
This is a group that hasn’t learned a lesson from the ’80s. The 
opposition haven’t learned — even though some of them were 
around then — they haven’t learned from the ’80s, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re still following the Grant Devine belief and that is you 
pit one group against another. You have rural and you have 
urban. And if we can just keep that rural support solid, we’ll be 
all right. That’s their belief; divide, divide, and divide. But you 
know what, they think it’s divide and conquer, Mr. Speaker. 
What it really is, is divide and lose. 
 
All of Saskatchewan wants education funding, they want our 
post-secondary education system to continue to grow, to 
continue to expand, to continue to be inclusive. 
 
What I want is for my family, many of whom are in rural 
Saskatchewan, to be able to access either of our two very fine 
universities or our SIAST institutions or our exceptionally fine 
regional college system in Saskatchewan. What I need 
throughout . . . What we need throughout all of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, is to work together because it is in our interest to 
make sure that we grow our universities, that we improve our 
SIAST, that we improve our regional college system. 
 
And that’s what this administration has been all about, Mr. 
Speaker. I went through the numbers; I’m not going try and 
beat the numbers to death. But I am going to say that on this 
side of the legislature, on the government side of the legislature, 
we believe in inclusivity, we believe in working with people, 
we believe, Mr. Speaker, that education is critically important 
to Saskatchewan. And that’s exactly why we increase funding. 
Well increase . . . Post-secondary funding went up seventeen 
and a half million dollars this year alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a good story we have here. We believe in working together. 
We believe that we can make it better. 
 
I want to contrast that a little bit, a little bit, Mr. Speaker. We 
run on a policy. We ran our last election and education was one 
of the major planks of our election platform, one that we’re 
very, very proud of, Mr. Speaker. We’re very, very proud of it. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Watrous on her 

feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the east gallery I would like to introduce 10 grade 7 and 8 
students from Simpson. They’re accompanied with their teacher 
Travis Edwards, and with chaperones, Rob Garner, Joanne 
Gingrich, and Anita Richardson. 
 
And I hope they enjoy the proceedings and we will meet with 
you shortly. So if everyone would welcome them here please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 14 — Funding for Post-Secondary Institutions 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was talking about 
inclusivity and about the belief of government members that we 
need to have just an excellent post-secondary system, whether it 
be university, SIAST, or regional college. 
 
I have been talking, Mr. Speaker, about our commitment to 
steadily increasing the budget, the tools, giving the tools to 
post-secondary institutions. We’ve done that through some 
very, very trying times. We’ve done it again this year, 
increasing the post-secondary budget, the total of which is now 
five hundred and eleven and a half million dollars. It’s a 
substantial budget for post-secondary education. I won’t, won’t 
stand here and say that it’s everything that everyone would 
dream for. But I am standing here proudly saying it’s five 
hundred and eleven and a half million dollars. 
 
And I want to contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the members’ 
opposite election platform. You may recall the election platform 
of the Saskatchewan Party dated October 31, 1998 titled The 
Way Up, Mr. Speaker, and I have a copy of that in my hands. 
The Way Up, they call it. 
 
And I looked through it as I was preparing for this debate. And 
I’m looking through it right now. The Way Up, the summary, 
there is some tax cuts, some work first plan; there’s — well, 2, 
4, 6, 8, 10 — 11 major planks here. I read, I looked at it very 
carefully, couldn’t see anything about education — not a thing. 
 
So I thought well, it’ll be on the next page. Well, no, the next 
page is about tax cuts. Well the next page. No, the next page is 
about highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I thought it might be on the next . . . No, the next page is 
about welfare, work for welfare. Then I thought it might be on 
the next page. Well no, Mr. Speaker, it’s not on the next page of 
the members’ platform because there they talked about jobs. 
 
Then the next page is agriculture. The next page is Crown 
corporations. The next page is health care. 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

I think you’re getting the idea, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know, 
there’s half a dozen or eight more pages here roughly and then 
we get education. That’s where it fits in members opposite’s 
election platform. That where post-secondary education fit. 
 
And then they have the gall to stand up in private members’ and 
piously pronounce that they’re all in favour of increased 
funding. They’re all in favour of looking after our universities 
and our SIASTs and our regional colleges. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you read their page on education. I defy 
anybody to find a single word in there that says there is going to 
be any increased funding. It’s just missing, Mr. Speaker — it’s 
missing. 
 
What do they promise? They promise a freeze. Zap, you’re 
frozen. Frozen, Mr. Speaker. Contrast that with what we have 
been able to do, even as I pointed out a little bit earlier in my 
speech, in some very trying economic times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a real commitment to working with our 
education system. We have a commitment to making an 
education system that is absolutely the very finest that we 
possibly can for our province, for our people, and we are going 
to continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe in commonality; we believe in working 
together, inclusiveness. We do not believe in divide. And I 
know that the theory is divide and conquer — it doesn’t work. 
 
And in fact I predict that when the time comes, the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to recognize the divide and conquer 
strategy that the Saskatchewan Party is employing and what it 
will be, they’ll try and divide and they will be divided, and the 
people of Saskatchewan will conquer and there will be a 
government in the government benches. I predict it will be led 
by the current Premier, and I predict that the government . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I believe that’s going to happen. I believe that’s 
going to happen because the people of Saskatchewan want to be 
part of the future. They want their education system to continue 
to grow. They want to see funding continue to increase, as we 
can and as we can afford it, and there are many other demands 
for the treasury dollars, Mr. Speaker, but education funding is 
going to continue to be a major part of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of why we want to make sure that our funding 
stays . . . continues to grow . . . I want to talk a little about 
research and development because I know the hon. member for 
Arm River spoke a little bit about research and development. I 
want to say that the investments and grants to the universities 
for research and development is increasing — these grants are 
increasing, these investments are increasing. 
 
There are more than 60 patents and 16 licensed technologies 
that have been produced by the University of Saskatchewan. 
There are 33 spinoff companies that have been created by the 
University of Saskatchewan Technologies Inc., and these 33 
spinoff companies, Mr. Speaker, employ about 1,400 people — 
significant employment, significant job growth led by our 
post-secondary institutions right here in the province. The 

combined revenues, incidentally, of these spinoff companies are 
estimated to be about $190 million annually, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
very, very impressive performance and one that they and we are 
very proud of. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about SIAST, the Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology. And I want to point out that there 
were just over 47,000 students that attended SIAST — 36,000 
were part-time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a remarkable, remarkable number of students 
that SIAST has been able to help. And part of why they have so 
many students attending is that things like when they check, 96 
per cent of the students rate their overall program quality as 
good to excellent; 92 per cent of labour force graduates are 
employed; 93 per cent of the labour force graduates responding 
— those who responded — were employed in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s just remarkable what SIAST is doing. It’s 
remarkable what’s happening in post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is very much more that I could say about this 
but I know that I want to leave . . . Well I shouldn’t say I want 
to leave. I know that my colleague, the member for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld has a fair amount that he wishes to say on this. 
 
I want to simply sum up what I’m saying. What I’m saying 
today is that we on the government side have been very, very 
proud that we have increased the post-secondary budget year 
after year after year. At the same time, we provided year after 
year after year a balanced surplus budgets for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re increasing the post-secondary budget at a 
rate that exceeds inflation. We’re very proud of our 
commitment. It has been a long-term commitment to 
post-secondary education. It has been solid. 
 
Our partners in the universities, at SIAST, and in the regional 
colleges all know just what commitment there is on this side of 
the House. They know how committed we are to working 
together. They know that it’s real. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have that commitment. On the other side they 
ran on a program of freezing education — zero, zero increase 
— that was the program. That was the program. The member 
from Watrous says rate of inflation, which has been running 
about one, one and a half, some years two per cent rate of 
inflation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is astounding, it is astounding that even now 
that members opposite will heckle that their commitment to 
post-secondary education is oh, rate of inflation for increase. 
Mr. Speaker, and then they have the audacity to come with a 
motion that says that they have a commitment to long-term 
stable funding. 
 
Well maybe they do, Mr. Speaker, maybe they do have a 
commitment to stable long-term funding. Their idea of stable 
long-term funding for post-secondary education is freeze it and 
watch it continue to diminish and diminish and diminish in 
importance. Watch it serve ever fewer students. Watch it serve 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

 

the people of Saskatchewan in an ever diminished way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You cannot have a healthy and a vibrant post-secondary 
education system if you’re going to starve it to death. You 
cannot do it. You just can’t starve it to death. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we are proud of it. I think at that 
stage . . . at this stage I’m going to take my place by moving the 
amendment that removes all words after the Assembly and 
replace with the following: 
 

express its support for the groundbreaking effort made by 
the provincial government in increasing access to 
post-secondary education for Saskatchewan people and 
working with universities and SIAST to provide stable 
funding. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the hon. member from 
Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very honoured to 
speak on this very important topic. It’s one that I’ve dealt with 
in my professional career as a teacher, as I see students go off to 
university and SIAST, and I think it’s very, very important. 
 
I want to talk just a minute about the motion that was moved by 
the member of Last Mountain-Touchwood and the weaknesses 
in the thinking of this, and in a minute you’ll see what I mean. 
He talks about condemning the provincial government for its 
failure to provide post-secondary institutions in this province 
with stable, long-term funding plans, resulting in large increases 
in tuition for students. 
 
So what is our history? What has it been for the last five years? 
In 1998-99, it was a 5 per cent basic increase. In ’99-2000, it 
was a 5.2 per cent increase. In 2001, it was a 2.5 increase. In 
2001-02, it’s 3.5 per cent. And this year, 2002-03, it will be 2.3. 
 
Now just on that fact alone, that would say this motion is faulty 
and is poorly thought out. But there’s something that he really 
misses, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is the beauty of the 
amendment. Because what is the purpose of post-secondary 
education? The purpose is to allow our citizens to have access 
to a good, strong post-secondary education. And that’s what it’s 
really all about — is access. 
 
All right. Now times are kind of tough, and we wish that 
tuitions could be almost free. Maybe that would be a wonderful 
goal. But what we really want, in real terms, is access. Access is 
the key to a well-educated citizenry. And that’s what I think it’s 
all about. And while we work really hard to keep tuition fees 
down and provide stable funding — and I think we do that, and 
the facts speak for themselves — the key is access. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about what are the facts around 
. . . what kind of students . . . what is our population here? How 
many kids actually do take advantage of our post-secondary 
education? Well Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of 

youth, in the 18 to 24 years of age bracket, enrolled full-time in 
university of all the Western provinces. Our 23 per cent of 
youth are enrolled, and this is above the national average of 20 
per cent. 
 
And as my colleague said, Saskatchewan is investing more than 
$4 million this year to assist post-secondary institutions in using 
technology for students on and off campus. 
 
Now what is the success of our universities? It is reflected in 
the annual Maclean’s magazine ratings and the progress report 
on universities revitalization. So what is our ranking here in 
Saskatchewan? Well according to Maclean’s, University of 
Saskatchewan jumped from 15, number 15 to 11 this year — 
pretty good in one year. 
 
Now what are they saying? What are some of the things that 
they are saying about the University of Saskatchewan? Well of 
course they talk a little bit about the Canadian Light Source 
synchrotron. And they say: 
 

It is perhaps the strongest symbol of Saskatchewan’s new 
vigour in its drive to boost research capacity. The $173.5 
million device is due for completion in 2003 and ranks as 
one of the country’s premier science projects. 

 
Now it goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I quote: 
 

The university is already a research leader in chemistry, 
physics, geology, and agriculture. 

 
Now, what about this? And as I’ve talked about earlier about 
access, and I’m not sure if the members opposite and the 
Saskatchewan Party are so concerned about equity and access, 
but we are. We think this is a critical thing. Maclean’s says, and 
I quote: 
 

(Saskatchewan) University of Saskatchewan has also 
identified improved access for Aboriginal students as a 
major priority. The number of Native students has more 
than doubled in the past 10 years to roughly 2,000 students 
today. 
 

And I think that’s pretty worthwhile. That’s a laudable goal. 
 
Now what does the president of the University of Saskatchewan 
has to say? Well he was quoted in Maclean’s magazine as 
saying this . . . this is, and I quote: 
 

“This is a very attractive place to go to university for all 
kind of reasons,” says MacKinnon, noting that the lower 
cost of living is an asset for cash-strapped students. 

 
Well there you go. It’s a little cheaper to live in this province 
and it’s a good university to go to, and I think that’s 
worthwhile. But, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what twigged 
me . . . what occurred to me while I was reading this was, what 
about minimum wage? That’s another way of providing access 
or resources for supports for the youth in this province. 
 
Now we had that debate and we passed that. And where was the 
Saskatchewan Party on minimum wage and a way of improving 
access to post-secondary education? Where were they on that? I 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

think they were silent on that issue. There are all sorts of ways 
of supporting the youth and they weren’t there on that issue, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What about the University of Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
How were they ranking in the Maclean’s standings? Well last 
year, they were 11, this year they are number 7. And what are 
they saying about the University of Regina? 
 
Well here, and I quote: 
 

And university officials are justifiably proud of their 
six-year-old scholarship program, which covers first-year 
tuition for the (top graduates) top graduate of every high 
school in the province, and tuition for subsequent years if 
the student maintains the requisite grade point average. 
Clearly, Regina is determined to attract the best. “We 
provide high-quality, traditional liberal education,” says 
president David Barnard, “with an emphasis on relevance 
to the real world.” 

 
And I think that’s important, that we’re looking to attract the 
best — very, very important. Now this may be, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a kind of a thorn in the side of the Sask Party, but 
Maclean’s goes on. It talks about some of the strong traditions 
that the U of R has taken some pride in. 
 
And I want to talk about this one because I’m a graduate of the 
U of R, and also a graduate of the U of S. I think both fine 
universities. But here, given that . . . and I quote: 
 

Given that Saskatchewan is the birthplace of the 
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, the forerunner of 
the NDP, is not surprising that the . . . 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. If the member for 
Regina Dewdney and the member for Swift Current have a 
conversation that they’d like to take, please take it behind the 
bar. It’s distracting to the speaker and the acting . . . the Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. I’d like to start that over again 
because I think this is important. And I quote: 
 

Given that Saskatchewan is the birthplace of the 
Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, the forerunner of 
the NDP, it is not surprising that the university has a history 
of solid research into social issues. Its school of human 
justice, unique in Canada, and its faculty of social work, 
both founded in the 1970s, were . . . (responses) to (the) 
grassroots demands. The Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College, located at three campuses, and operating at more 
than a dozen off-campus sites, is the only First 
Nations-controlled university college in Canada. And next 
year, the federated college’s administration will be 
consolidated under one roof in a new facility designed by 
the renowned architect Douglas Cardinale. 

 
I think again a strong signal that our province prides itself on 
access; very, very important. 
 
Now what’s hot? Maclean’s has this very interesting column 
called “What’s Hot” in each campus. And what’s hot at the 

University of Regina — one student/one loan. A provincial 
agreement with the federal government amalgamates student 
loans and extends interest relief. So we are providing access. 
And I think that’s really, really important. 
 
Now what about SIAST? It’s really important to think about 
SIAST. Not only universities but also the other post-secondary 
institutes. Now in 2000, the year 2000, the graduate survey had 
indicated the following: 92 per cent of the labour force 
graduates, those working or looking for work responded, were 
employed, all right; 93 per cent of the labour force graduates 
who were employed were in Saskatchewan; 82 per cent of the 
labour force graduates responding were employed in a training 
related occupation. So they’re getting an education and they’re 
staying here. And that’s really, really critical. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now what is SIAST doing about equity and the 
whole topic of access to those who probably most need access 
to post-secondary education so they can improve their role in 
our society? All right? SIAST has experienced impressive 
results in many of its programs across all campuses in the year 
2000-2001 — for example, Aboriginal ancestry. Wascana 
Campus noted an increase from . . . to 2.7 per cent from 8.4 per 
cent in ’98-99. And Aboriginal graduates increased by 1.3 per 
cent. So things are on the move. They’re growing well. 
 
What about students with disabilities? The enrolment rate of 
students with disabilities in programs has increased 
significantly at Palliser and Woodland campuses. Palliser 
Campus enrolment increased to 4 per cent from 2.9 per cent one 
year earlier. And in the same time, Woodland Campus 
enrolments increased to 5.7 per cent. 
 
And what about visible minorities? Enrolments in visible 
minorities increased as well at Wascana. 
 
And what about women? Woodland Campus enrolment, 
percentages for women in predominantly male programs 
increased in industrial training from 3.4 per cent to 5.7 per cent. 
And graduates in technology increased from 16.4 per cent to 
18.8 per cent. This is very, very important. And as well, women 
account for 55 — over 55 — per cent of all students enrolled at 
SIAST. So a critical thing. 
 
Now the other thing that’s very interesting is when you’re 
dealing with equity and access, you just can’t make a blanket 
policy that one size fits all. You have to think of the different 
barriers that block people from full access to post-secondary 
education. So what are some of these issues? 
 
Well one is, what about the rural students compared to urban 
students? Now what are some of the ways that we’re lessening 
their barriers? Well we have a higher away-from-home living 
allowance, so folks who have to live away from home in the 
city have a higher allowance to provide for that. All right? Now 
they’re away from home, we provide for return transportation 
allowance based on one . . . on the cost of one return trip to 
their family home each semester. So we’re thinking about that 
as well, those kind of expenses. Okay? 
 
(15:45) 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

 

And as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, upon request, students who 
must move away from home to go to school are allowed 
relocation expenses to a maximum of $600. So again providing 
access for those who need to move away from home. This is a 
very, very important thing. 
 
What about single parents? Again, another group who needs 
access to post-secondary education. This is very, very 
important. All right? 
 
Last year, in the loan year, we . . . they indicate that there was 
over 2,700 single parents who will receive over $30 million in 
assistance. A very, very important project . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh no. I think this is critical. 
 
So what are some of the . . . Now we’ve talked about student 
loans and what are some of the positive things about student 
loans. Well Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in Canada that 
provides monthly assistance to students. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can speak to this because I know 
students who have had that, have had student loans, and they 
appreciate that monthly allowance. They don’t get it all at the 
beginning and you know how some may have a hard time 
budgeting. They appreciate the monthly allowance — very, 
very important. All right? 
 
Saskatchewan’s program, maximum assistance levels, and 
contributions to debt management are among the most generous 
in Canada. So we pride ourselves on that. 
 
And we also have special programs for special incentive 
students — non-status Indian, Métis, northerners, and single 
parents — they’re allowed additional debt relief in the form of 
remission to further allow . . . to lower their debt load. Very, 
very important programs. 
 
So Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in the top three 
provinces with respect to the weekly maximum loan amounts 
allowable. And currently Saskatchewan’s the only province 
with a graduate tax credit program that’s specifically targeted to 
the graduate student. Very, very important things. 
 
So what kind of things have happened especially now . . . Now 
let’s move away, let’s talk about something that encourages 
excellence in education. What kind of scholarships, those kind 
of programs, are we providing for? Well last year the tuition 
scholarship program provided over 300 program . . . or 325 
scholarships equivalent to first-year tuition. Very important 
signals to students in grade 12 that we are thinking of them. It’s 
very important for them to do their very best. 
 
We are also thinking about students with disabilities. What 
about students with disabilities? They need access as well. All 
right? So persons with disabilities are provided with supports 
for disability-related costs associated with employment and 
training. And we provided over $5 million for that. Last year 
changes to the Saskatchewan student loan program improved 
interest relief and debt reduction benefits, ensuring an effective 
safety net for persons with disabilities who rely on student loans 
to access post-secondary education. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I wind up my remarks, I want 

to tell you about a new initiative that I think is very, very 
important to increase access right across this province, and that 
is Campus Saskatchewan. 
 
We are looking at all sorts of innovative ways or approaches to 
improve our student . . . or our citizens’ access to 
post-secondary education. We know it’s not just young people. 
We know it’s all sorts of people who need improved access to 
post-secondary education for their chances to have a good 
quality life in Saskatchewan. 
 
So last year we thought of this project, and so we’re talking 
about enhancing access to learning through information and 
communication technologies to the tune of $4.2 million. This is 
very, very important . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 4.2 and 
that’s just very important. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how are we meeting the needs of 
individuals and communities? This is very important. What 
kind of people, how many people are accessing our 
post-secondary programs in Saskatchewan? 
 
Well there’s over 28,000 students enrolled in degree programs. 
There are over 6,700 people enrolled in diploma/certificate 
programs. There are over 6,600 people enrolled in 
apprenticeship programs. And there are over 4,800 enrolled in 
basic education programs. 
 
This is critical to the success of our province. The regional 
college system has approximately 34,000 enrolments and there 
were an estimated 2,100 enrolments through technology 
enhanced or Web-based programs. 
 
Now as I talked about some of the sectors of our society that 
need access, what about Aboriginal enrolments? In the year 
2001 at the university, universities, they estimate about 10 per 
cent of students at the universities were of Aboriginal descent 
— very, very important. SIAST was over 17 per cent, and in the 
apprenticeship programs there was just about 6 per cent; basic 
education, 50 per cent; JobStart/Future Skills, 20 per cent; and 
Career Employment Services, 20 per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we take this very serious, the access to post-secondary 
education — very, very important. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this is critical that we think 
about the . . . what does it really mean when we talk about 
tuition fee increases. We take this very seriously. We would 
love to see, well, a situation different than it was in January 
when we talked about the difficulties facing the budget and 
some of the challenges in terms of lower revenues from 
resources, the September 11 tragedy, all that, how that 
impacted. 
 
If we could change the world, of course we would. And we 
know that one of the basic things would . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, no Sask Party would be a good start, 
would be a very good start. But we know we have to make 
some difficult choices. And so what we do is we think about 
access and how important access is, especially for those who 
have challenges and find it difficult to enrol in programs in 
post-secondary education. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I second the amendment and I will go 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

on record as being opposed to the main motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments regarding the motion that’s before this 
Assembly and the funding of post-secondary education in this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . or Deputy Speaker, I find it very fitting 
that we’re debating this motion at this time, as most grade 12 
students currently are . . . either have begun their final exams or 
are preparing to, and within the next day or so will be entering 
into their final exam process and will be writing those exams, 
looking forward to the end of this month — which is about 10 
days away — and their graduation from grade 12. And then 
looking beyond that time period of when they’ve completed 
their high school education and looking forward to an 
opportunity of post . . . in most cases, a post-secondary 
education. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about post-secondary 
education, I think it’s important that we keep in mind that not 
everyone need attend a university. Now I know the directors 
and the boards of universities may not take that very well 
because most universities would like to see students come to 
their colleges because, of course, they’re looking for enrolment 
numbers and they’re looking for those numbers in order to 
access the tuition fees that are necessary for their colleges to 
move forward. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s keep in mind that there’s more 
to the world that revolves around us than just having a 
university degree. There are needs in other fields of education 
and fields of opportunity for young people as they look to 
careers for their future, whether it’s in the heavy-duty 
mechanical field, whether it’s in the technical industry, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, whatever the case may be. And I know we 
have, and I believe the member from Idylwyld made mention 
of, our colleges and our SIAST institutions and the other 
avenues of post-secondary education. 
 
However the motion before us talks about the fact of the 
universities in our province, and over the last some 10 years — 
almost 10 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker — we have seen a 
government that has off-loaded as they have suggested that 
they’re doing this to balance the budget and they’ve made . . . 
they’ve accused other governments of leaving a horrendous 
debt at their feet. Or they’ve accused the federal government of 
off-loading responsibilities onto them and the realities are that 
there’s responsibility at every level. 
 
In fact we heard just recently . . . I just read an article recently, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as Mr. Martin left the federal financial 
post, and everyone was giving him accolades for how well he 
balanced the budget. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure the 
Minister of Finance in the province of Saskatchewan would say 
well yes, Mr. Martin balanced his budget but look what he did 
to us. And we have the member from Melville I’m sure would 
agree with that, that we have as a result of one government 
trying to balance its budget, passing it on to the next and then 
on to the other levels of government. 
 

And what we have in this motion here today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it all comes down to the fact that at the end of the day, 
as taxpayers, we have to pay those bills, whether it’s putting . . . 
helping our sons and our daughters receive their post-secondary 
education. 
 
And as a result the universities in our province face the same 
problems that other universities do. And the fact that in order to 
provide the services that they would like to provide, to provide 
the access to the colleges that they would like to meet, they 
need the funding and they need a long . . . they need a long-term 
commitment. 
 
Just an annual commitment or waiting for an annual budget to 
come forward to find out what they’re going to receive to 
determine whether or not they’re going to be able to meet their 
fiscal responsibilities isn’t good enough. And the government at 
times has given hints that we need to start looking at the long 
term. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can look at certainly the 
Department of Highways has begun to look beyond just the 
immediate annual expenditure and started to project and bring 
forward ideas as to how they are going to put proposals forward 
in regarding . . . as to how they’re going to meet the ongoing 
demands of upgrading our highways and maintaining our 
current highway structure. 
 
And so the Department of Highways has come forward with a 
three- or a four-year plan in regards to expenditures. And it’s a 
plan that certainly the Saskatchewan Party caucus has brought 
forward, and we went into the last provincial election with a 
plan. At that time it was a four-year commitment and an 
ongoing commitment to maintain a certain level of funding in 
order to address the crumbling road system in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we have the same thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
education. And when it comes to post-secondary education, 
universities need to know more than beyond where they are 
today. They need to know what’s the vision for the future in 
regarding . . . regards to funding for their institutions so that 
they can maintain the infrastructure that is necessary to continue 
to provide the programming that our post-secondary education, 
post-secondary students are looking for. 
 
And as I mentioned a moment ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
grade 12 students that are currently trying to put their minds to 
their final exams and as they prepare for final exams, and they 
don’t really want to have to be worried about the fact that they 
may have applied to a university and find that as they’ve 
applied and finally are accepted into the program, find that the 
tuition has increased since they’ve applied as the universities sit 
down and address their budgets. 
 
And so this motion before us, while it condemns the provincial 
government, basically calls on the provincial government as 
well to put in place a long-term commitment, to make a firm 
commitment to our post-secondary institutions and colleges so 
that the funding will be there and they will be able to then come 
up with a long-term plan that keeps a reasonable tuition fee in 
place so that our young people, as they graduate from high 
school, will then be able to look forward to moving on to that 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

 

post-secondary education, receiving the training in the field that 
they have a vision that they would like to work in or that they 
would like to be involved in, and knowing that when they begin 
their program, their tuition fee will at least be level or there’ll 
be minimal increases rather than substantial increases which 
may in some cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And my colleagues 
and I, I think have faced it on many occasions, students coming 
to us and finding that the tuition fee increases have been 
substantial enough that with the minimum wage level increases 
that the member from Regina Idylwyld talked about, just do not 
give them the opportunity to provide the funding or even to 
provide . . . put aside adequate funds to allow them to continue 
their education. 
 
(16:00) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, I believe this motion is an 
important motion. It’s an important motion because it really 
addresses the need for governments to look long term rather 
than short term when it comes to funding for our 
post-secondary institutions and colleges and universities, in 
order that our young people have the opportunity to access the 
education and the tools that are necessary to build and to move 
forward in the economy of the 2000s and as we look forward to 
building our province and growing our province, and it’s 
important that we address this issue. 
 
And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel it’s important that 
we address this issue and we speak to the issue and I feel it was 
important as well that each and every one of us take the time 
that is necessary to bring forward the arguments and the points 
so the government is aware of the concerns that are out there. 
 
And I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I of course will be 
supporting the amendment and go against the motion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in regards to post-secondary education in 
this province we have a very, very proud record. As I looked at 
the fact you know overall from K to 12 and also 
post-secondary, the budgeting, which is the topic of the debate, 
you know, has improved even though we are in challenging 
times. And, Mr. Speaker, we had a record budget this year at 
$1.2 billion. 
 
And I was listening to the debate by the member from 
Moosomin and I was quite surprised in regards to his earlier 
comments you know vis-à-vis the idea of the universities versus 
the idea of the colleges. He seemed to be implying, you know, 
something of a division in that regard and I thought that was 
just quite unfortunate. Maybe it’s the policy of the 
Saskatchewan Party which plays a dividing role, you know, 
from the urban to the rural and to the North, and plays a 
dividing role between the colleges and the universities. But I 
thought it was quite unfortunate in terms of the way he was 
wording his commentary. 
 
But I would like to just put it on the record what we do have 
you know vis-à-vis, you know, the technical institutes and the 
colleges and also the universities because for us on this side of 
the House, for the coalition government, we are very, very 
proud of our strong universities and strong colleges and strong 

technical institutes. And also a very, very strong aspect in 
regards to Aboriginal institutions in this province. 
 
I would say that these are the facts from . . . and he was talking 
about a long-term program, so I’ll give you the facts on funding 
increases from 1998 to this year, 2001-02. And in relation to the 
universities, the funding has increased in those years by 15.3 
per cent which is $28.2 million. If it had been inflation, it would 
have increased by only 10.7 million, but we’ve improved it by 
28.2 million. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party position has always been to increase it 
by inflation. And that’s what the provincial position was. So 
their increase would have been over $18 million less for the 
universities if they had put their policy into place, you know, 
during this period of time. 
 
When I looked at the SIAST funding, that has increased by 
$16.7 million — I mean, 16.7 per cent, pardon me. And that’s 
$10.9 million. Now if the funding had been provided according 
to the Saskatchewan Party plan, it would have been $3.8 
million. That would have been $7 million less than what we 
provided as a coalition government. 
 
The other thing is that on the regional colleges, we increased 
the amount by 35 per cent which is $3.4 million. Now if the 
Saskatchewan Party followed their policy on inflation, it would 
have been $563,000. Again it would have been $3 million, 
approximately $3 million less. 
 
So when you’re looking at the Saskatchewan Party over there, 
sounding as if they’re going to increase tuitions and all of that, I 
just have to look back at the record I have in here, The Sheaf, 
March 17, 2002. And when he was being interviewed by the 
students, by The Sheaf, this is what the quote that says in the 
paper. It says: 
 

. . . Hermanson (feels tuition fee) feels tuition is still 
competitive and that Saskatchewan schools are at the 
middle of the pack. 

 
You know, they sound as if they would increase tuition in their 
debates today but this is what their leader says. This is March 
17, 2002 in The Sheaf, in Regina, this year. Hermanson, quote: 
 

. . . Hermanson feels tuition is still competitive and that 
Saskatchewan schools are in the middle of the pack. 

 
On scholarships and bursaries . . . (he said) . . . (it is) “more 
of a university and . . . private sector initiative, rather than a 
government initiative.” 

 
And that is what the Leader of the Opposition, that says, 
contrary to a lot of the statements, you know, being made by the 
members over there, who would think that they would be 
including . . . would be improving the tuition. 
 
So those are the facts that we do have. And I’ll look at some of 
the facts as well on the grants to the universities and federated 
colleges. 
 
Just after the Grant Devine era, their buddies over there, of 
course with the Devine fiasco, they had to change their name to 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And this is what the amount was in regards to the operating 
grants: there were $178,296 . . . one hundred and seventy-eight 
million two hundred and ninety-six. And it is now two hundred 
and fifteen million three hundred and thirty in 2002 and ’03. 
Again you will see the increase, even though that they were in 
trying times. 
 
Of course they’re cringing over there because I talk about Grant 
Devine, and the reason why of course they changed their name 
from the Progressive Conservatives to the Sask Party. 
 
And it is one thing that I know from the historical record, that 
indeed when the Tories were around, it was a shameful record, 
of course. And the record was such that the interest payments 
on the debt were larger than all the money we had spent in 
schools, in elementary schools, more money than we spent in 
universities, in the technical institutes, etc. The Grant Devine 
debt, the Grant Devine interest payments on the debt were 
larger than all the money we spent in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that was the shameful record of the Tories, 
who were the same right wing friends as the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Of course they were a little bit shameful about the Progressive 
Conservative record, so they changed their name to 
Saskatchewan Party. But it’s the same policy, the same . . . it’s 
the same practice. 
 
And that’s what they do; they try to deny that and they cringe 
on . . . (inaudible) . . . and they shake a little bit, but indeed they 
know that’s quite true — that the policies are quite the same 
whether you look at the . . . When I listened to Grant Devine in 
his speeches back in when I was in opposition in ’86 to ’91 
period, I listened to them at that time and they sound the same. 
Not very much difference. They will choose a few little 
different words, but essentially and fundamentally they were the 
same. 
 
And when I listened to the member as well, he was talking 
about the idea of not only the fact that they would increase 
tuition, but how would it be possible because their policy in the 
last election was to freeze everything. You know, they would 
freeze . . . And I mentioned how much you would lose in the 
universities, SIAST, and the colleges because of that freeze. 
 
And again for the record, the universities today, in the past three 
years received an extra $28.2 million, and inflation would be 
10.7. So that would be $18 million less, is what they would get. 
Just imagine how high the tuition fees would be if indeed there 
was $18 million less in the universities. 
 
And also in SIAST, they had an increase of $10.9 million. With 
the Saskatchewan Party policy, it would have been 3.8 — again, 
that’s $7 million. You would have seen also a larger increase in 
tuition payments in regards to the SIAST system. 
 
So what you’re seeing in the colleges as well is $3.4 million. 
Under the fact of the Saskatchewan Party freeze idea, only by 
inflation, it would have been 563,000 — again, close to $3 
million less. And that amounts to quite a bit in regards to not 
only the excellence in programming that we do have in this 

province and also for student support, but also in regards to 
other things that we put in the budget. 
 
This year on the budget, the Saskatchewan Party was criticizing 
us when we put more money in capital. And they were talking 
about this fudge-it budget idea. You know, they were mad at us 
because we were giving extra money in regards to the 
university programming. And they were mad basically because 
we were putting, you know, quite a decent amount of money in 
regards to the capital side of the picture. And we were, overall 
in K-12 and post-secondary, we were putting $90 million. At 
post-sec the amount was 50 million and at K-12 we were at 40 
million. 
 
As a matter of fact we had some other enhancements in the 
Centenary Fund for $10 million. So what we were looking at is 
quite a budget in terms of capital at around $100 million. And 
it’s something that was very, very positive in this province. 
 
But I was very, very surprised when the Saskatchewan Party 
chose to attack that idea. They said that it was, you know, 
playing around with how you do accounting and all of that. 
They were trying to play the old politics because they knew that 
the idea of accountability was bad in regards to their old 
friends, the PCs (Progressive Conservatives) from whence they 
changed their name. They knew that the PCs had a very, very 
bad name on the question of accountability. 
 
So all of a sudden, they were trying to tab us with this idea that 
we were not accountable. And basically, of course, we were 
above board in regards to accountability. We utilized a brand 
new system that our universities appreciate and that the extra 
$100 million we put on capital is something to be proud of, not 
to be negative. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party chooses to be on the negative mood all 
the time. The doom and gloom scenario. They are not proud of 
what the universities do. 
 
And I’ll give you a little bit of an example. University of 
Regina . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member asked me 
who wrote that speech for me. Of course I wrote it myself. 
Because I know that when they talk they have extremely bad 
research numbers from that side. So I wouldn’t rely on their 
researchers. 
 
But I do my own research and I do my own level of 
information, and of course, our excellent staff provided me with 
these excellent information that I do provide for you. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will continue. The U of R this year, in 
terms of quality programming, they’ve got a new Bachelor of 
Arts in police studies. It’s actually the first one where you have 
— in Canada — where you have Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College working in conjunction with the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police); a tremendous program. 
 
Again, you have a Master of Aboriginal Social Work — the 
first of its kind anywhere in North America. And also a 
Bachelor of Science in, actuarial science, you know, trying to 
look at math, stats, and bring it all together to make sure that 
there is accountability in systems, etc. 
 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

 

(16:15) 
 
And then we’re looking at the aspect of a research park where 
in both Saskatoon and Regina, both top-notch. At the U of S it’s 
pretty amazing overall on the research . . . (inaudible) . . . they 
get about . . . over $100 million worth of research funding. Of 
that, approximately, over, approximately 30 per cent, over 30 
per cent comes from the province; actually, it’s $31.6 million. 
And it is something where we have a first-class institution in 
research on both universities on the petroleum side over here 
and also in Saskatchewan, which we knew of in a very many 
areas of research, from the Research Park. And when I used to 
be in SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), we 
used to get all the nitty-gritty reports on it and I was very, very 
proud of those developments. 
 
But the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t have any time to talk about 
these new developments, these new positive developments. And 
I look at the capital programming they’ll have in Saskatoon: a 
new kinesiology building, Thorvaldson, the Spinks addition, 
you know, after one of the presidents, you know, of the 
universities there. You will have the College Building being 
improved. They’ll have the College of Agriculture— will have 
a new sixth floor over there. And also the STM (St. Thomas 
More College) at half a million dollars. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, the members from across don’t know 
how to be proud of their universities. They don’t know how to 
be proud of the different colleges. They don’t know actually 
how to be proud of the fact that a lot of the buildings are going 
up. And they don’t know how to be proud of the profs of this 
province who access not only public sector money, but private 
sector money in regards to getting the top level research that is 
very important for this province and this land. 
 
And I think that . . . the other thing I did notice about the debate 
is that when I listen to the members vis-à-vis the issue on 
Aboriginal people and education, I find that passage strange 
that indeed the only time that they raise Aboriginal issues, when 
it’s negative. They will only raise issues on Aboriginal people 
in the House, the Saskatchewan Party, when everything is 
always in the negative. 
 
You know, they’ll raise the question about . . . they feel guilty 
about their old friends the Tories who put us in this debt by $15 
billion and interest payments, etc., from way behind. And they 
feel that they have to pound away at somebody on 
accountability, so they go at SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority) and Aboriginal people, First Nations people 
all the time. 
 
You know what? Ninety per cent of their questions in the House 
have been on the question of accountabilities. Maybe they are 
so, so guilty about being old Tories that indeed they have this 
gumption to attack somebody on the issue of accountability. 
 
But that’s one thing that I have noticed about their idea. They 
don’t know how to be proud of Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College. The best institution in, not only in North America but 
in the world, in regards to getting Aboriginal people to be true, 
strong partners in post-secondary education. You’re seeing a 
brand new building going up in this province here in Regina, a 
tremendous building, and it’s moving up with many different 

programming. 
 
In Saskatoon, you’re seeing the history that was made, you 
know, vis-à-vis the Indian and northern education program, the 
ITEP program, Indian teacher education program, the native . . . 
(inaudible) . . . program that was there — 80 per cent of the 
grads, you know, from all over Canada have gone through that 
program. 
 
And also the fact that you have a program, an M.B.A. (Master 
of Business Administration) program, dealing with First 
Nations people at that university. You also have a nursing 
program you know to be very, very proud of; strong 
partnerships between the university, First Nations, Métis people 
on Gabriel Dumont Institute, and also in regards to the Gabriel 
Dumont college idea. 
 
And you’re seeing also the same dimension with the technical 
institutes. Dumont Technical Institute and Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies — again first-class institutions. 
Something to be very, very proud of, something to be very 
positive. 
 
What does the Saskatchewan Party say? Zero. Absolutely 
nothing. You know, I sit in day in and day out in this House 
waiting for them to come out for one time to say something 
positive about Aboriginal people. But they keep saying only the 
negative stuff. 
 
So that is why I chose to enter the debate to make sure that we 
stand up here to say that we are proud of the educators in our 
province, proud of the universities, proud of SIAST, proud of 
the community colleges, the regional colleges, proud of the 
institutions by First Nations and Métis people. To say that the 
capital development are there. 
 
And I think that in that sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I felt pretty 
good to come out and say these things because I see the 
negative doom and gloom by the Sask Party; the fact that they 
will try and use trick words in regard to tuition when their 
leader said otherwise. And also the fact that when it comes 
down to education they would freeze everything, and that 
indeed the amount that they would be good would be a way 
million million dollars less than what we do provide today. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be . . . with the support 
in regards to the amendment, I move to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Motion No. 15 — Co-generation of Electricity 
and Wind Power 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter into debate this afternoon on 
a subject that is near and dear to my heart, namely work that our 
government is doing with respect to renewable energy 
development in the province of Saskatchewan, and my hope, 
Mr. Speaker, that we will do even more in the months and years 
ahead on this file. 
 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

And at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be 
moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and applaud SaskPower’s 
and the government’s commitment to environmental 
responsibility and stewardship through its development of 
cogeneration of electricity and wind power, and urge 
continued expansion in these two important areas. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of remarks that I want to 
make on this matter. And I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by 
saying that it’s my dream that over the course of the next 50 
years, Saskatchewan will move to a renewable energy 
economy; an economy, Mr. Speaker, that ultimately won’t rely 
on fossil fuels. 
 
Now these steps, Mr. Speaker, many small steps are needed to 
accomplish this very large goal. But before I speak directly to 
the question of wind power and cogeneration of electricity, and 
the significant progress that we’ve made in the last three years 
on this file, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about energy 
conservation. Because I believe a renewable energy economy 
cannot be achieved in any industrialized country in the world 
without a sound energy conservation program. 
 
We’re not going to be able to move to a renewable energy 
economy if we keep using more and more and more energy, Mr. 
Speaker. We have to level out our energy demand and use 
energy more efficiently. And that is the prerequisite to 
ultimately achieving a renewable energy economy. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what our Saskatchewan government is 
moving forward on is a file in which we’re trying to make 
progress on energy conservation, wind power development, and 
cogeneration of electricity all simultaneously. And I think it’s 
this work across these various forms of energy development, 
Mr. Speaker, that is ultimately going to get us to where we . . . 
the dream that I ultimately am hoping the province of 
Saskatchewan will achieve. 
 
So let me say just a word about conservation first, Mr. Speaker. 
This government in the last several months has launched several 
new exciting energy conservation initiatives. Just yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the minister responsible for Crown 
Investments Corporation, and myself were at a news conference 
at Gregg’s Plumbing & Heating in Saskatoon where we 
announced an extension of the prime rate loan program for 
residents of this province to be able to borrow money over a 
five-year period to upgrade their furnaces and other natural gas 
appliances and install energy efficient equipment in their 
homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I might say that residents who are listening to the 
television broadcast may want to consider a furnace upgrade 
because SaskEnergy now makes available to all residents of the 
province a five-year loan at prime rate. And that prime rate 
stays in effect, Mr. Speaker, at the same rate of prime as the 
date that the loan is taken out for the full five years. And people 
can borrow up to $10,000 to upgrade their furnaces, their hot 
water heaters, and other natural gas appliances in their home 
and achieve through this upgrading, Mr. Speaker, very 
significant efficiencies. 
 

For instance, if somebody chooses to upgrade their furnace to a 
mid-efficiency furnace, they can be looking at savings of $200 a 
year; to a high-efficiency, 95 per cent efficiency furnace, 
savings of over $300 a year, Mr. Speaker. And we’re the only 
province in Canada, I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that has this 
kind of a program available. 
 
Well over a number of years, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that there 
are significant savings, not only for residents in terms of their 
energy costs but also in terms of reduced greenhouse gas 
emissions. Every one of these upgraded furnaces, Mr. Speaker, 
on average for a homeowner, will result in carbon dioxide 
emission reductions of 2.2 tonnes per year, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
just one of our initiatives. 
 
We’re also, Mr. Speaker, upgrading the 11,000 senior citizens 
housing units in the province of Saskatchewan. And we’re 
going to see there, Mr. Speaker, reduced energy demand over a 
five-year period that’s in the 10 per cent range. So a 10 per cent 
reduction in energy use in the 11,000 senior citizens housing 
units in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the good news there is that again the 
economics of this are very positive for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. It’s the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
that pay the energy bills on our 11,000 senior citizens housing 
units. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re investing $1 million a year there for 
each of the next five years. The work is already underway. And, 
Mr. Speaker, in year seven, two years after that investment of 
$1 million a year for five years, two years later all of the money 
will have been fully recouped for the people of Saskatchewan 
through energy savings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in year seven, the $5 million is fully recovered and after that, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s all savings for the taxpayers of this province 
and it’s again a significant reduction of CO2 emissions for our 
province. 
 
Let me just give you one more example, Mr. Speaker, of an 
important energy conservation initiative that we’re taking in the 
province. The minister for CIC and myself were recently — and 
the Premier — were recently in attendance at the Warman High 
School, Mr. Speaker, this spring. And there were about 400 
students who were gathered in the assembly and senior officials 
from the Saskatchewan Valley School Division, and we 
announced, Mr. Speaker, a major energy conservation initiative 
for Sask Valley School Division in which they’ll be upgrading 
energy efficiency in 18 of their schools, Mr. Speaker, with a 
total investment, Mr. Speaker, of $2.5 million. Again all paid 
for through energy savings, Mr. Speaker, with a significant 
reduction again in carbon dioxide emissions and savings in 
terms of fuel bills for local ratepayers in that school division. 
 
Well I just use this, Mr. Speaker, as three examples of energy 
conservation initiatives that the province has taken that lay the 
foundation for the transition to a renewable energy economy 
and we will need to undertake dozens and dozens of these kind 
of energy conservation projects to truly lay that foundation, Mr. 
Speaker. But the work has started and it’s started in a 
substantial way. 
 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, complementing this work then — and 
speaking directly to the motion — is the work that has begun 
with respect to wind power, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation is moving with GreenPower on a number of fronts. 
 
But for me, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most exciting is the work 
that’s being done in the area of wind power. And in this regard, 
Mr. Speaker, we have launched two very important projects: 
one of which is already operational and the other of which is 
under construction this summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Already we have completed construction on an important 11 
megawatt wind power station at Gull Lake that has been 
developed by the SunBridge Corporation in conjunction with 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and with assistance from the 
Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact the federal government is contributing to this 
project in a way that’s very positive and in a way that our 
government very much appreciates, Mr. Speaker. Because they 
are making a commitment to purchase power for federal 
government buildings in the province of Saskatchewan and 
through those purchases are contributing to help make this 
project at Gull Lake a possibility, Mr. Speaker. So it’s a very 
good example of co-operation between the federal and 
provincial government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that completion of this 
project is now very near at hand, and in fact, later this month 
members of the Assembly are being invited out to Gull Lake to 
participate in the official opening of the project. So here, Mr. 
Speaker, we have 17 turbines that are completed and will . . . 
and are now fully operational. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, in this budget that we just 
brought down this spring, in March of this year, we announced 
the start of a second wind power project in the province of 
Saskatchewan — this time fully the responsibility of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again, we’re using government facilities to 
help make this project viable because the province . . . 
provincial government buildings are supplying 15 per cent of 
their power needs by purchasing power from this second wind 
power project, which is again going to be in the Gull Lake area. 
And we’re in the early stages of construction, Mr. Speaker, on 
that project. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we are going to finance part of that 
project by making available a GreenPower purchase option to 
industrial customers and business customers in this province, 
and to all residential consumers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And those listening to the broadcast this afternoon will soon 
receive in their SaskPower mailings, Mr. Speaker, an invitation 
to participate by purchasing GreenPower from these wind 
turbines. And if there’s a lot of interest by consumers in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we’ll be able to build more turbines, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

But these . . . the purchase of GreenPower for provincial 
residents is available in blocks that are 100 kilowatt hours, Mr. 
Speaker, and which roughly works out to an additional monthly 
purchase of $3.50. 
 
And let me just say, Mr. Speaker, a word about what can be 
purchased when you buy 100 kilowatt hours of GreenPower. 
It’s enough electricity, Mr. Speaker, for five computers and a 
printer for eight hours a day, all month long. Or, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s the equivalent of 20 loads of laundry. Or it’s the equivalent 
of two high-pressure sodium farmyard lights burning every 
night for a month. So that’s what you can purchase with 100 
kilowatt hours of GreenPower. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for those who are in a position to afford it, I 
want to encourage residents of the province to buy a block of 
GreenPower and add it to their power bill and make a 
contribution toward Saskatchewan moving more quickly to 
expanding wind power in our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are the steps that we’ve made so far 
with respect to wind power. And these two projects, Mr. 
Speaker, when they’re fully operational — which will be by this 
fall — will give us the third largest wind power capacity in all 
of Canada right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s just the start, Mr. Speaker, because what the motion 
talks about is urging our government to expand in the area of 
wind power even further, Mr. Speaker. Because I believe 
there’s ultimately no reason why we can’t look at not just 17 
megawatts of wind power but — which is the third largest in 
Canada — but that we could go to 150 or 200 megawatts of 
wind power in this province. That’s ultimately, Mr. Speaker, 
where I believe we should be heading. 
 
There is not a reason in . . . not a reason, Mr. Speaker, why 
Saskatchewan can’t ultimately have the largest wind power 
capacity of any province in Canada, and certainly in terms of 
the percentage of wind power in our total grid, the highest 
percentage of wind power of any province in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — That’s the objective that I ultimately want to 
see us heading towards, and we’ve made an excellent start, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last two years. 
 
And that’s just the beginning, Mr. Speaker. If the people of 
Saskatchewan re-elect this government, which I’m confident 
they will, just watch us in terms of moving forward on 
GreenPower, Mr. Speaker. Just watch us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the resolution, the motion 
before us, also talks about cogeneration of electricity. And I do, 
before I conclude my remarks, want to say a few words about 
cogeneration because there are some very exciting things 
happening on this front as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for those who are listening to the broadcast, Mr. Speaker, 
some may not be familiar with cogeneration. So let me just say 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

that cogeneration of electricity is basically the simultaneous 
production of electricity and steam from a single fuel source, 
Mr. Speaker. So essentially what’s happening is that that single 
fuel source is generating electricity for our power grid, and 
steam usually for industrial purposes, at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the purpose. 
 
So rather than just using the fuel source to generate electricity, 
one has the advantage of getting both steam for industrial 
purposes and electricity for the grid at the same time. And 
usually, Mr. Speaker, this process uses combustion gas turbines, 
heat recovery steam generators, and steam turbine technology 
— all being used on the same site. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that we now have one 
cogeneration project in the province that is complete and that 
has been functioning for a couple of years, and we have two 
other important cogeneration projects that are underway; in fact, 
one is very near completion, Mr. Speaker, at the Queen 
Elizabeth power station. A second should be completed by the 
end of 2002 at the Cory potash mine, and a third project, Mr. 
Speaker, is already complete and it’s the Meridian cogeneration 
plant in Lloydminster. So, Mr. Speaker, three exciting projects 
that the province of Saskatchewan has invested in. 
 
And let me say again, Mr. Speaker, that the direction on 
cogeneration has been made possible by the election of a New 
Democratic Party government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And I’m convinced that these kind of projects wouldn’t be 
happening if the NDP was not in government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let me just say a word about the Meridian cogeneration plant 
in Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, because this is a project that was 
. . . that began . . . production at this plant, Mr. Speaker, began 
in December of 1999. And the plant, Mr. Speaker, uses two gas 
turbines burning natural gas to generate electricity. And the 
waste heat from the gas turbines creates steam that drives a 
single-steam turbine to generate additional power, Mr. Speaker. 
So this was our first initiative, located in Lloydminster. 
 
Since then, Mr. Speaker, we’ve gone on to start two other 
projects. One, Mr. Speaker, is the project that I was making 
reference to at the Queen Elizabeth power station. And this is, 
Mr. Speaker, a retrofit of the power station in my home 
community of Saskatoon. 
 
And essentially what our government has done, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we’ve installed six 25-megawatt gas turbines and we’re 
capturing the exhaust gases to produce electricity. And we’re — 
as a result of this work, Mr. Speaker — we’re increasing the 
efficiency at the Queen Elizabeth power station from the 
previous 30 per cent up to 45 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that what this is going to do is mean 
that we’re generating more electricity and at the same time 
reducing the CO2 emissions that go into the atmosphere from 
each unit of electricity that is produced. 
 
So this is a win-win situation for the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s another example of how SaskPower is 
doing it’s part to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the 
province of Saskatchewan through this kind of a very good 
investment. 

The total investment, Mr. Speaker, by the people of 
Saskatchewan through SaskPower Corporation, is $140 million. 
And I’m very pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that this new 
retrofitted plant is soon going to be opening and I’m very 
excited about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to touch on one other cogeneration project, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s the project at the Cory mine site. We’re constructing 
a 228-megawatt cogeneration station that should be completed 
by this November. And this, Mr. Speaker, is a joint venture that 
combines the skills of SaskPower with ATCO Power of 
Alberta, and of course with the Cory potash mine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And SaskPower is going to be purchasing the electricity 
generated by the power station and the thermal energy, at the 
same time, will be sold to the Cory mine site for its use. So, Mr. 
Speaker, here we have a third example of a situation in which 
we’re generating power to meet the needs of SaskPower 
electrical customers, and at the same time we’re contributing, 
Mr. Speaker, to providing the industrial steam that’s needed for 
a major industrial project, in this case the Cory potash mine, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So instead of the Cory mine needing a fuel source for its own 
industrial use, it simply is able to take advantage, Mr. Speaker, 
of the electrical generation that will take place on-site, that will 
be fed into the larger grid, and at the same time, its steam needs 
for the Cory potash mine are being met directly through the 
project, Mr. Speaker. So it’s another win/win situation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me sum up by saying that the motion 
before us speaks to first of all the accomplishments of this 
government in the last two years with respect to wind power 
and cogeneration of electricity. And what we’ve managed to do, 
Mr. Speaker, since the beginning of this term in government, in 
just three years, Mr. Speaker, is launch three major 
cogeneration projects, three major projects for the cogeneration 
of electricity, one in Lloydminster and two in the Saskatoon 
area. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, on the wind power 
front, we have launched Saskatchewan’s first two wind power 
projects, both in the southwest corner of the province, in the 
Gull Lake area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By the end of this year, all of those projects will be complete. 
And they will make, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to make 
Saskatchewan a major leader, Mr. Speaker, on both wind power 
and cogeneration of electricity. And this is just the beginning, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I urge . . . in conclusion I urge that the 
Government of Saskatchewan not look back for a moment but 
only look forward with respect to expanding work on both wind 
power and cogeneration of electricity, so that we become 
Canadian leaders, North American leaders, and I ultimately 
hope, Mr. Speaker, world leaders on both these fronts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m very excited about the direction that our New Democratic 
Party-Liberal coalition government is going on these files, Mr. 
Speaker. And this coalition government is going to continue 
work throughout this term. And we’re going to, Mr. Speaker, if 
we’re re-elected, continue work on this file for many years to 
come. 



June 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — So in conclusion, I want to move, Mr. 
Speaker, the following motion — and I should have stopped 
talking about one minute earlier — but I move: 
 

That this Assembly recognize and applaud SaskPower and 
the government’s commitment to environmental 
responsibility and stewardship through its development of 
co-generation of electricity and wind power, and urge 
continued expansion in these two important areas. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And that’ll be seconded, Mr. Speaker, by the 
hon. member for Regina Elphinstone. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to take 
part in this debate. And it’s a particular honour to take part in 
this debate as the seconder to this motion given the mover of 
this motion. 
 
The mover of this motion, of course, is the member from 
Greystone. You know, here we have an individual who’s 
dedicated decades of his life to the cause of the environment, to 
the cause of making sure that mother nature is there for our 
children and our children’s children and generations on. And, 
you know, it’s perhaps a measure of his commitment and his 
passion in this debate that he was nearly moved to 
speechlessness at the end of his comments. 
 
But quite seriously, Mr. Speaker, it is a real privilege to follow 
after the member from Greystone in this debate because he has 
been a tireless defender and promoter of causes that work for 
the betterment of our environment and for the conservation of 
our environment. And on this side of the House, he’s been the 
man fighting for the green plan and he’s been the man putting 
the green plan into action. 
 
And it’s a tremendous achievement and, as a younger MLA on 
this side, I can only hope to see more of it in the days and 
months and years to come. So it’s a real honour, Mr. Speaker, 
to take part in this debate coming after the member from 
Greystone. It’s also a little daunting giving the member’s 
considerable knowledge and experience on this file. But I’ll 
give it a try anyway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when it comes to wind power and it comes to hot air, of 
course, when people have, you know, their elected 
representatives holding forth on these two subjects, they figure, 
well at least they’re speaking of that which they know, Mr. 
Speaker. But we’ve only recently begin . . . begun to turn the 
wind into power and to use the hot air to good advantage 
instead of the perhaps more frustrating ends to which it is put in 
this place. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, on April 22, SaskPower began 
offering GreenPower . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Cypress Hills is so excited about this he can’t wait to share 

about the hot air. And the wind power. He’s looking to get in 
the debate I guess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, April 22, SaskPower began offering GreenPower 
to its customers. Now don’t take my word for what the people 
had to say about GreenPower being available. Here is what Ann 
Coxworth, program coordinator of the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Society, said: 
 

We’ve been looking forward to this day for a long time. 
Wind energy is an environmentally appropriate choice for 
Saskatchewan. 

 
You know, truer words were never spoken in this land where 
we’re famous for W.O. Mitchell’s Who Has Seen The Wind. 
Well we’ve seen the wind, Mr. Speaker, and we’re turning it 
into power for the conservation of this planet. 
 
Jim Maddin, mayor of Saskatoon — the members opposite are 
quite interested in Saskatoon; perhaps they’ll be interested in 
what the good mayor of that city had to say — the mayor of 
Saskatoon, Jim Maddin, quote: 
 

Saskatoon continues to show innovations in protecting the 
environment. We fully support the GreenPower initiative 
and are proud to offer its benefits to our customers in 
Saskatoon. 

 
End quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, the member from Greystone had made mention of 
how initiatives like this are innovative, they’re cutting edge, and 
they’re going to be what plays a big part in this government 
being returned with a strong majority. And I think that’s borne 
out in the comments of the mayor of Saskatoon. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks I’ll be touching on some 
of the things that the member from Greystone had said, given 
his encyclopedic knowledge on this file, so you’ll have to bear 
with me if I repeat a few things. But as with good information 
sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it bears repeating. 
 
Anyhow, in terms of the GreenPower that’s available for three 
fifty, for $3.50, you can buy a block of 100 kilowatts of 
GreenPower. Now that’s enough electricity for five computers 
and a printer to run eight hours a day for a month. That’s also 
enough, Mr. Speaker, to run 20 loads of laundry or to power 
two high pressure sodium farmyard lights every night for a 
month. 
 
Now if you were to buy 100 kilowatts of GreenPower each 
month for a year, it would reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 
90 kilograms, which is the same offset that comes from planting 
about 240 full-grown trees or driving a mid-size car 3,200 fewer 
kilometres per year. That’s tremendous — that’s tremendous — 
progress, Mr. Speaker. There’s no other word for it, that this 
advantage, that this option, is available to the people of this 
province, I think is wonderful. And I think in the year to come 
we’ll see the people taking us up on this offer. 
 
You know initiatives like this don’t come into practice just by 
wishful thinking of course, Mr. Speaker, they come in place 
because there are commitments made such as the commitment 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2002 

 

that was made last June when the Government of Saskatchewan 
made a 10-year commitment to purchase GreenPower to meet 
16 per cent of electrical needs in provincial government 
facilities. 
 
You know it’s often said, Mr. Speaker, that it should all start in 
your own backyard, and certainly the Government of 
Saskatchewan is proving that. The Government of Canada is 
also another strong supporter, with a long-term commitment to 
purchase GreenPower for federal facilities in this province. 
 
SaskPower itself, their head office, will use GreenPower to 
meet the needs of the Regina head office beginning this fall. 
The city of Saskatoon I’d alluded to . . . or I had mentioned the 
comments of Mayor Maddin earlier, they’re very excited about 
GreenPower. 
 
And in terms of commercial and industrial product, as of March 
6, 2002 commercial and industrial business customers were able 
to purchase GreenPower, wherein the University of Regina’s 
greenhouse gas technology centre was the first industrial 
customer for GreenPower, agreeing to purchase $20,000 of 
GreenPower per year. 
 
GreenPower for industrial customers can be purchased in 
annual blocks at a base price of $3.50 per 100-kilowatt block. 
Now negotiated contracts are available for the purchases above 
$100,000, so again, Mr. Speaker, it’s on a reasonably 
cost-effective basis. 
 
Now the member from Greystone had touched on the projects 
that are ongoing in wind power. Again, tremendous 
developments. And he’d also had a bit to say about the projects 
that are ongoing in terms of co-generation. But I just wanted to 
get into some of the specifics around one of the projects at 
Boundary dam. 
 
Now from 1998 to 2002 SaskPower invested an estimated $66 
million to reduce fly ash emissions at Boundary dam power 
station through the installation of electrostatic precipitators. 
Now when this was completed, Mr. Speaker, Boundary dam 
power station will meet current guidelines for coal-fired 
generating plants. 
 
The electrostatic precipitators will remove 99 per cent of fly ash 
from the stacks, reducing emissions to within the federal 
government guidelines for new power stations. Now you think 
of the ’70s when these concerns again were just coming on 
stream, and you think about the big plumes of smoke that were 
going up from those stacks. You know hopefully some day, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll reduce those plumes right down to nothing. 
 
Other things going on at Boundary dam. You’ve got the 
Boundary dam boiler and turbine optimization. You’ve got the 
Boundary dam induced draft fans. You’ve got turbine upgrade 
on Boundary dam unit 6. You’ve got primary air heater 
upgrades on Boundary dam unit 6 as well. You know again, Mr. 
Speaker, some tremendous initiatives underway, doing some 
tremendous things. 
 
There are a number of things to touch on, Mr. Speaker, and the 
member from Greystone had made some mention of the 
conservation projects that are part of this whole green plan 

initiative and in terms of GreenPower. And I just wanted to 
briefly touch on a contract that was recently signed between the 
SaskPower and Saskatchewan Valley School Division No. 49. 
 
They’ve signed a $2.5 million energy performance and 
maintenance contract to upgrade 18 schools and administrative 
facilities. And here’s what the Chair of the school division, 
Harold Klassen, had to say: 
 

This energy management project coupled with the 
Destination Conservation program, (another excellent 
program I might add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker) will be a 
great learning experience for all of us. 
 
Not only will we have upgraded systems but also enhanced 
comfort for teachers and students. And because of the 
retrofitting will take place on weekends, evenings, and 
summer months, there will be no interruption to our 4,600 
students and teachers. 

 
And they’re going to save a lot of money doing it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given that I’m sure a number of others would like 
to participate in this debate at a later date, I will now move 
adjournment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to go to 
government business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it now being 5 o’clock I 
think it would be appropriate to recess until 7 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


