















































Hansard: April 22, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 877 
 April 22, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
stand and read a petition from residents who are concerned 
about long-term care rate increases. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Archerwill, Wadena, Naicam, Spalding, and Elfros. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of people from my constituency concerned about the 
long-term care fee increases. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition are from the communities of Tisdale, 
Zenon Park, and Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well, to present a 
petition regarding long-term care fees, and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition I present is signed by the people from the good 
community of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with fee increases for 
long-term care services, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from the community of 
Rose Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition on behalf of citizens regarding the problems in 
long-term care in this province, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is a long lineup here of people that have 
signed from the city of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on behalf 
of concerned Saskatchewan residents on the issue of long-term 
care fees and the hikes imposed by the current government. The 
prayer . . . the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today come from the great 
community of Rose Valley, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I have a petition here with citizens concerned 
about the petition . . . the crop insurance and premium hikes. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon signed by residents of Saskatchewan who are in 
long-term care homes and are already on very limited and 
restricted incomes. Mr. Speaker, the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of Prince 
Albert. 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about increased 
long-term care home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Rose Valley and Quill Lake. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition with citizens concerned about the increase in long-term 
care homes. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners are all from the city of Yorkton, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise in this 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned 
about . . . with the exorbitant increase in long-term care fees. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Dysart and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly also to bring forth a petition regarding our 
seniors and the exorbitant fees that’s been imposed on them by 
this government. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Chitek Lake, Victoire, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell Lake, and 
Holbein. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Peters: —Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed by citizens 
of the province that are concerned about the hike in the 
long-term care homes. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the folks of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today with a petition from citizens of the province who are 
very upset with the long-term care fees. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
no. 17, 18, 22, and 31. 
 
Clerk: — According to order and pursuant to rule 12(7) the 
following petitions for private Bills were read and received: 
 

The Conference of Mennonites of Saskatchewan in the 
province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend its 
Act of incorporation and to change its name; and 
 
The Sunnyside Nursing Home in the province praying for 
an Act to amend its Act of incorporation and to change its 
name; and 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities in 
the province praying for an Act to amend its Act of 
incorporation. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, The Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome Awareness Day Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
many accidents involving Department of Highways 
vehicles and equipment occurred in the year 2001; and 
further to that, how many of these accidents were the result 
of department vehicles or equipment being rear-ended by 
other drivers? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the year 2000 and 
the calendar year 1999. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 31 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: can the 
minister please provide a detailed breakdown of the costs 
involved, including labour, for the 236,578 it cost to fix 
two culverts west of Spiritwood on Highway No. 3 in the 
2001 year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow, April 23, is Canada Book Day. And in recognition of 
that day and also in celebration of their 10th anniversary, the 
Saskatchewan Book Awards is hosting a display in the rotunda 
of award-winning books by Saskatchewan authors and 
publishers. 
 
The members are invited to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Is there . . . Is there . . . Is there 
an introduction coming? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — There is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. The member may proceed. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — There is an introduction. The members 
are invited to stop by and discover the wonderful variety of 
books. And should they have any questions, Mr. Speaker, they 
are encouraged to direct those questions to a person I should 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly. And that person is the executive director 
of the Saskatchewan Book Awards which, Mr. Speaker, Quill & 
Quire Magazine says is arguably the best run writers’ event 
outside of Toronto’s Giller Prize. And I would ask all members 
to welcome the executive director, Joyce Wells. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’d like to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
legislature, two very important people from Regina 
Elphinstone. One is my father, Douglas McCall, and the other is 
my constituency assistant Colleen Smith. 
 
Now it’s often remarked upon in this place the importance of 
family and staff in terms of, you know, keeping us sane and 
serving the people that have elected us to represent them in this 
place. And I’d certainly echo that sentiment, Mr. Speaker. 

Anyway, if we could please give them a warm welcome. They 
follow it on television quite often, but here they are, live and in 
concert. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a trade union brother of mine, a 
constituent of the Premier’s. 
 
And Danny and I have — his name is Danny Wirl — and 
Danny and I have worked on many committees together, not the 
least of which have been many election campaigns. And in my 
opinion he is the best campaign manager in all of 
Saskatchewan, bar none. 
 
I introduce you to Danny Wirl. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Rocanville Business Community 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Friday I had the pleasure of joining the Rocanville business 
community and many of its residents in the official opening of 
the . . . and grand reopening of three businesses in the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Hair Company and Julie’s Bakery, Deli, and 
Cafe officially opened their doors for business, while Donna 
Jack’s Gallery and Gift Shop reopened their doors in a much 
expanded premises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve all heard about the community of 
Rocanville — just a few businesses that have worked so 
diligently to really enhance their business community and their 
main street. And these three businesses, Mr. Speaker, just add 
to the main street, the official opening. And what they do, Mr. 
Speaker, is they add to the vibrancy of that community. 
 
And as I was talking to many of the residents, they talked about 
what a tremendous job the business community has done for 
their town, certainly their main street, and how they’ve 
enhanced it. 
 

Earth Day 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, as well I would like to take a 
moment to recognize Earth Day. It’s important that we 
recognize the volatility of the environment we live in and the 
ongoing need to remind people of the importance of protecting 
our environment for future generations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Leroy Agra-Pork Co-op 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

Saturday I was very pleased to speak at the official grand 
opening of the new state-of-the-art $40 million hog 
development near the town of Leroy, a co-operative venture 
between Leroy Stomp Pork Farm Limited and the Leroy 
Agra-Pork Co-op. 
 
The 100 members of the Leroy co-op is the first new generation 
co-op to be involved in the pork production in Western Canada. 
And this is a very significant development indeed, Mr. Speaker. 
The community raised in excess of $2 million in less than 48 
hours, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Four feeder barns are being built to complement the sow 
farrow-to-nurse barn operation. When fully operational later 
this year, the facility will be capable of producing up to 130 
hogs . . . 130,000 hogs a year. 
 
I was one of 600 people attending, Mr. Speaker, along with the 
member from Watrous. Mr. Ivan Stomp of Stomp Farms and 
Mr. John Cales of the co-op informed the crowd of the 100 jobs 
that were created during the construction period, Mr. Speaker, 
and the 50 full-time jobs that will be required during the daily 
operations when the barns are fully operational. 
 
A new constructed feed mill will take delivery of over 3 million 
bushels of grain produced in the local co-op members. And the 
spin-off benefits to local economy goes without saying, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As we say on this side of the House, this is more good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I want to congratulate the partners 
for this exciting venture, and for further proof, Mr. Speaker, 
that the province is an opportunity, a great place to invest and 
do business and to grow our agricultural economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bob Rae Criticizes New Democratic Party 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 
more good news not only for Saskatchewan but all of Canada. 
That news, Mr. Speaker, is that there is one less member of the 
NDP. It seems a former premier of Ontario, an NDP (New 
Democratic Party) mainstay, has finally seen the light. 
 
In a letter to the editor in last week’s National Post, Bob Rae 
said he has had enough. Like many people around 
Saskatchewan and across Canada, Bob Rae says the NDP is not 
worthy of his vote any more. 
 
In the letter, Rae states that the NDP policy is not a vision of 
social democracy worth of any support. This truly should not 
come as any real surprise, Mr. Speaker. In the last federal 
election the NDP was lower in voter percentage than the margin 
of error. We saw what happened in British Columbia to the 
NDP and the long downhill slide the New Democrats in 
Saskatchewan started in the 1999 provincial election — the 
story which will be concluded, Mr. Speaker, in the next 
election. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP now a national party of irrelevance, 
and threatening with becoming irrelevant in Saskatchewan, we 
can only wonder that after Bob Rae has quit . . . And we look 

across the floor and ask ourselves who’s next. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Volunteer Week 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
I’m next to speak today. 
 
The week of April 21-27 is National Volunteer Week and I 
want to recognize the value of all Saskatchewan volunteers by 
informing the House of a particular example of volunteerism in 
our hometown of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Friday night our Premier joined us at a fundraiser for the 10th 
National Summer Special Olympic Games to be held in Prince 
Albert from July 8 to July 14. We expect over 1,300 athletes, 
coaches, and supporters in 21 different sports to participate in 
the games. 
 
And I want to say this was an excellent way to kick off our 
preparations. First, Mr. Speaker, the Premier volunteered his 
time at a dinner normally used as a party fundraiser, for the 
Special Olympics. We raised $8,000 and that’s not a bad start 
— not a bad volunteer. We also heard the new theme song for 
the games written by Barry Mihilewicz and sung by Heidi 
Munro-Scarrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Special Olympics, itself a 
volunteer, non-profit society — its provincial representatives in 
the Prince Albert community deserve our respect and our 
undivided support for the work they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members will join me in encouraging 
our Chair, Phil Fredette, as well, Crystal LaVallee — who by 
the way, Mr. Speaker, is my favourite volunteer — and the 
many dedicated volunteers who sponsor and who will make this 
the best Olympics in Canada yet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also would like to rise, along with the Minister of Industry and 
Resources, to recognize National Volunteer Week, April 21 
through 27. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our volunteer sector has made Saskatchewan the 
envy of every other province. In fact on a province-by-province 
comparison, Saskatchewan boasts the highest volunteer rate in 
the country — an astounding 42 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this 42 per cent is a very important number, not 
only because it represents thousands of volunteers from all ages 
and walks of life who on a regular basis willingly give of their 
time and efforts to many worthwhile causes, but it also speaks 
volumes about the compassionate and dedicated nature of 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for this year’s National Volunteer Week 
is Experience Matters and this highlights the important role that 
volunteering can play in our lives. We are all aware that by 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

 

volunteering, and no matter what age we might be, we gain 
valuable experience and insight. For older adults, their lifetime 
of knowledge and skills is put to good use in the volunteer 
sector. For young people, working in the volunteer sector 
represents an ideal opportunity to gain experience and to 
develop a network of close friends and contacts. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in a recent survey, 78 per cent of youth 
looking for work felt that volunteering would help them get a 
job. This ties in very nicely, Mr. Speaker, with Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan to grow the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we encourage all levels of government to support 
opportunities for young people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Earth Day 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
Earth Day — what many consider the world’s largest 
environmental event. 
 
Earth Day was established and launched in 1970 by the 
governor of Wisconsin of the day, Gaylord Nelson. The first 
Earth Day celebration involved 20 million people who took part 
in various projects that addressed decades of environmental 
pollution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year the number of people participating in 
Earth Day grows and people in Saskatchewan are doing their 
part. In Saskatoon the celebration includes clean-up week where 
volunteers register to clean up parts of the city. This is all 
sponsored by the Meewasin Valley Authority and the Saskatoon 
Credit Union. On the other side of Saskatoon, the South Nutana 
Park Community Association is holding its second reuse fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Earth Advocates, a non-profit 
organization, held its third annual Earth Day celebration 
yesterday. There was a march from the city hall to Kinsmen 
Park in the city. 
 
In Regina, the Royal Saskatchewan Museum began its Earth 
Day celebrations yesterday with activities including an Earth 
Day trivia contest for people of all ages and a presentation on 
burrowing owls. 
 
Finally the Moose Jaw Museum & Art Gallery is hosting earth 
. . . an Earth Day poster competition for all children in the city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Earth Day is for everyone. It’s a time when we 
can celebrate . . . we can all join in celebrating the wonders of 
our precious home, mother earth. And it is our hope that this 
celebration will not be restricted to just this day but all 
throughout the year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North Battleford Heritage Christian School Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I had the 
pleasure of attending a fundraiser for the North Battleford 
Heritage Christian School. The purpose of the society is to 

promote and provide Christian education based upon the word 
of God and upon their stated philosophy and goals. 
 
Dedicated parents and staff have overcome many obstacles and 
challenges to continue offering a Christian education to their 
children. I would like to congratulate board members, parents, 
and staff on another successful year and a very successful 
fundraiser 
 
Many thanks must go, Mr. Speaker, to a number of people 
including chairman, Rob Bargen; vice-chair, Janice Whitbread; 
treasurer, Rodney Cox; secretary, Darcy Umpherville; board 
members, Brian McGifford, Leo Roussel, and David Stade; 
staff members, Peter Halvorsen and Marilyn Updike and 
Marian Litke; parent association chairperson, Cheryl Glass; 
vice-chair, Ramona Bargen, and secretary, Karen Sidebottom. 
 
Please join me in congratulating the Battleford Heritage 
Christian School on another very successful year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Long-term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
follow-up question for the Premier. Last Friday during question 
period, the Premier stated that the proposed increase in 
long-term care fees would affect, and I quote him: 
 

. . . the more wealthy of our seniors who are in long-term 
care. 

 
Well I would like to know and I’m sure the people of 
Saskatchewan would like to know how much your annual 
income should be to be considered wealthy in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, at what level of gross annual income does the 
Premier deem a person to be wealthy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the long-term care fee 
proposal in the budget deals with those people who have more 
income who could be identified as those that have, have a 
higher income and ask them to pay a bit more in our system. 
 
And what the amount is, basically, is that if a person earns 
$52,000 or more, they will pay the top amount that’s in this 
system. And $52,000 is income . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I would 
ask members to refrain from interrupting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — And basically what we’re doing is asking 
those people with that level of income or greater to pay a 
maximum amount of $3,875. This amount is calculated based 
on the total income on your tax return and that’s the figure 
that’s there. 
 
If you . . . if there are some difficulties with dealing with some 
of the expenses, then it is possible for people to go to the 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

Department of Health for a review of their income situation as 
to how they can pay the amounts requested. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Does the 
Premier consider someone whose gross annual income is 
$19,000 to be a wealthy person? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re looking at in our 
system is looking at the long-term care fees, and we’re asking 
those people who have a sum of money which is greater than 
the ones on the very bottom, which basically are defined as 
those people who are getting their old age security . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’ve asked the members 
just to refrain from interrupting. I expect members to do just 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The basic payment for long-term care is 
. . . deals with the people who receive the old age security plus a 
senior’s supplement. And that is the bottom line. Those people, 
about 3,000, there’s no change at all that takes place. 
 
People with more income on a . . . based on ability to pay will 
be asked to pay more. And what we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is 
asking for some of these people who when they’re in long-term 
care have basically almost 100 per cent of their costs covered, 
we’re asking those people to contribute from their income — 
not their assets but their income — to help pay for the care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want the NDP 
to listen up. The National Council of Welfare draws the poverty 
line at a gross income of $15,000 for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Would the member start over? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want the NDP 
to listen very closely. The National Council of Welfare draws 
the poverty line at a gross income of $15,000 for a single person 
living in a city like Saskatoon or Regina. Yet under the NDP’s 
new long-term care fee structure this senior citizen is 
determined to be wealthy enough to be able to afford a fee 
increase of 10 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a person whose income is up to $17,000 a 
year is having their long-term care fees increased by 16 per 
cent. That person’s fees are going up $2,000. Now a person 
with an annual gross income of $19,000 a year will face a 21 
per cent increase in their long-term care fees — an increase of 
over $3,000. 
 
It’s unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier explain when 
he decided that a senior citizen whose gross income is under 
$20,000 is a wealthy person? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, this 
budget increases the amount of money paid for long-term care 

by $10 million to $337 million. And what I would ask that 
member opposite is, why didn’t he use that same speech when 
he was talking about the minimum wage? Because it has more 
applicability to that particular situation than what he’s talking 
about now. 
 
On this side of the House, we work with those people who are 
at the bottom end of the scale, make sure that they have their 
services covered. And in certain circumstances like these 
long-term care charges, we’re asking those people who have a 
little bit more money to contribute a greater share. 
 
But even at the top end of the scale, the person that has a huge 
income, they still get a subsidy of about 200 or $300 a month, 
and we will continue to do that because what we want to do is 
make sure we have a system that covers all of the people in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, the NDP 
does grab taxes from people that are earning minimum wage. 
But more despicable, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they are now 
grabbing taxes from senior citizens who are in long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP keeps saying that the hike affects only 
120 people who are at the very top level, the maximum level, of 
the increase. But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health said in 
estimates on Friday that about one-third of the province’s 9,000 
long-term care patients are at the minimum level — the 
minimum fee level. So that leaves 5,000 seniors who will see a 
fee increase of at least $1,000 and as much as 26,000 more 
dollars a year for long-term care help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fee is not just affecting wealthy people. This 
fee increase is affecting most seniors that are in long-term care. 
 
I ask the Premier: will he do the right thing, and reverse this 
cold-hearted, callous decision? Will the NDP agree to cancel 
the hike in long-term care fees for seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately once again the 
member has his figures wrong. Because what we said, very 
clearly, when this was introduced . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when this program was 
announced on budget day, it was very clear that there were 
3,000 people on the bottom who saw no change, but everybody 
above that saw a change. 
 
And that’s exactly what we said was going to happen. We 
explained that. And it basically reflects the level of income that 
you have. 
 
What we will continue to do is work with the people of this 
province. And we’ll ask some of those people who have a bit 
more income to contribute as it relates to the long-term care, 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

 

because we want to make sure that we have a system that’s 
sustainable for the long term, and that’s the most important 
thing for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 
weekend I received a letter from a lady whose husband has 
Alzheimer’s and was placed in 19 . . . I’m sorry . . . in 2001 in 
long-term care at the maximum fee. Now in 2001 this couple 
deregistered some registered investment funds since they were 
already at the maximum nursing home expense thinking that 
this would help ease the burden of the medical and nursing 
home fees. 
 
Because of that particular move, their income this year is higher 
and the man will now have to pay the new maximum rate as of 
October 1. Now this lady thought they might qualify for help 
with their huge drug costs of more than 3.4 per cent of income, 
but they missed that, Mr. Speaker, by a mere $52. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I quote from this lady’s letter to me: 
 

My husband has Alzheimer’s disease so he will never know 
how badly our plans for our retirement years have failed. 

 
And she signs her letter, “A Devastated Constituent.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s new long-term care structure is 
devastating seniors across the province. How can the Premier 
let this situation continue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that member to 
provide the letter to me and I will arrange to get an appropriate 
answer to that letter. And what I would say is that there are 
methods of reviewing the financial situation of people so that 
we can adjust it to deal with the individual situation. 
 
What is not helpful is when the members raise the level of 
discussion to a point where they scare a lot of people. Get the 
information, make sure that we can answer the people’s 
questions directly. The goal is to provide care for people and we 
need to do it at a rate that is reasonable for everybody. 
 
We’re asking some of the people who have a little bit higher 
income to pay more, but that’s what we’re doing in this 
particular process. And we have to have the information from 
the individuals so that we can give them the right information 
so they can make their plans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, what’s scaring people in this 
province is that government’s decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors across Saskatchewan are angry about the 
tax grab on long-term care residents and they’re registering 
their anger by phone and by letter. I have a letter from Doris 
Munoz of Regina whose sister is in long-term care. Miss Munoz 
believes that after this increase and drug bills her sister will be 
left with absolutely nothing. 

She says, and I quote: 
 

I’m 73 years old and I voted for and defended the NDP all 
my life, but no more. That tax grab is so offensive, you’ve 
reached an all-time low by doing so. It’s not something 
Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, or Allan Blakeney 
would have stooped to. 

 
Mrs. Munoz says, you and your government should be ashamed 
of yourself for this move. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree. Will the Premier reverse his attack on 
seniors whose only crime is requiring long-term care support in 
their senior years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been seeing an 
amazing transformation of a party who didn’t care about the 
poor or the ones to be some kind of a concerned group. 
 
And what I would say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when an individual has a 
concern around being able to afford the kinds of things that they 
need for their living expenses, there is a clear review process 
which allows people to present the information and get an 
adjustment so that they can deal with the concerns that they 
have. 
 
And that is an appropriate way to deal with this. So I would ask 
that member, if I don’t have that letter already, that she should 
forward it to me, so that I can deal with it and we can get the 
proper information. 
 
It’s unfortunate that the members opposite seem to be sending 
out information that increases the concern of the older people in 
our . . . And we want to make sure that everybody has the right 
assessment of this situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a comment from Donna 
Busse. She has a 92-year-old mother-in-law in a long-term care 
and she calls this, and I quote, “an awful tax.” She says her 
mother-in-law saved all her life so she would have enough 
money to pay for her expenses in her later years. 
 
Another neighbour, however, spent all her money enjoying life 
while she could and now will pay just one-quarter of what Mrs. 
Busse’s mother will pay in a long-term care. 
 
Now these two women live in the same lodge, they eat the same 
food, and they receive the same care. As one woman put it, and 
I quote: 
 

Why should we save? (Why should we just . . . why don’t 
we) . . . just blow our money and enjoy life while we can 
instead of giving it all to the government! 

 
Mr. Speaker, seniors across this province are now considering 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

what to do with their money to avoid paying these exorbitant 
long care fees. Not surprisingly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, not surprisingly, other seniors 
are actually planning to leave the province while they can. So a 
question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker: why should one person 
in long-term care pay up to 148 per cent more than the person in 
the next bed receiving the same level of care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in our Canadian system, we 
ask people who can afford to pay more to pay more. And the 
example that the member gives today is a challenge for all of us 
in how we organize the services that we provide for society. 
 
But one of the things that people should remember is that 
long-term care costs are covered by the province — they’re not 
part of the Canada Health Act, they’re not part of the national 
system. And this is one of the issues that Mr. Romanow has 
been asked to review about which parts are included in the 
national health . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The issue of which parts of our care in our 
health system should be included in Canada Health Act and 
which parts shouldn’t be is part of the review that Mr. 
Romanow is doing right now. 
 
And it’s important that we get this right, because it does relate 
to the fact that the federal government has reduced the amount 
of money that they’re contributing, and it makes it very difficult 
for individual provinces to provide all the care that they have to 
provide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gross Domestic Product Decreases 
in Saskatchewan in 2001 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are 
also for the Premier. Statistics Canada has now released its 
report on economic growth in Canada last year. It turns out that 
Canada did not experience a recession last year, as many people 
had feared. In fact, the Canadian economy actually grew, Mr. 
Speaker. And the provincial economy grew in every province in 
Canada, every province — except one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while every other province in Canada was 
growing their economy, NDP Saskatchewan was in a recession. 
Saskatchewan’s economy shrank by almost 2 per cent last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is Saskatchewan’s shrinking while everyone 
else’s economy is growing? Why did the NDP create a 
made-in-Saskatchewan recession? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it very 
interesting today, the member opposite refers to the GDP (gross 
domestic product) and the decrease in our GDP in the year 
2001, and I want to say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, 
and I think that’s fair, Mr. Speaker — he has. 
 
And we did have a decrease based on these numbers. But you 
know what I find awfully interesting? That today he was able to 
pick this number off of paper from StatsCanada. But you know 
something? They haven’t been able to do it for the last 10 years 
as Saskatchewan has led Canada in growth in the GDP. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. I have asked members to refrain from 
interrupting during the questioning and during the answers, and 
more specifically, I would ask the source of persistent 
interruption, the member from Rosthern, to just try to resist. 
 
Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my point is fairly 
simple. We had economic growth, our GDP . . . Well if they 
want to listen, but I see they choose not to. I’ll wait till they’re 
quiet. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, there 
isn’t a member opposite who would refer to the growth in GDP 
eight consecutive years in this province. From 1992 until the 
year 2000 we had consistent growth in our GDP. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, we had the third fastest GDP growth among 
all of the province at an average rate of three and a half per cent 
in those years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s review the 
Premier’s record in his first year in office: record job losses, 
huge population losses, and now we find out Saskatchewan was 
the only, Mr. Speaker, the only province in Canada that had a 
recession. Clearly, the NDP is doing something wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every other government in Canada is growing 
their province. They’re growing their economy, they’re growing 
their job base, but here in Saskatchewan the NDP is shrinking 
the province, shrinking the economy, and shrinking the job 
base. Will the NDP admit their economic plan is failing? Why 
does the NDP have no plan to grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to complete 
my comments with respect to the lack of opportunity that that 
opposition has had to look at the GDP numbers, with the 
exception of this year. 
 
We had the third fastest GDP growth in the country. We had the 
second highest growth rate of real GDP per capita. We’ve had 
the real GDP per employed person growth rate that has been 
leading this country. But, you know, Mr. Speaker, they’ve had 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

 

their head in the sands on those issues. 
 
What they also don’t tell you today is StatsCanada tells us that 
this is as a result of a major drought in this province which they 
choose to ignore as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. The 
minister has 15 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m going to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The minister has 15 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’m going to ask the members 
opposite where they were in the last eight years as we led this 
country in GDP growth. And I’m going to ask if they will admit 
that they choose to pick statistics out only when it suits their 
political purpose but not recognize the fact that this province 
has had strong growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has no plan to deal 
with the fact that Saskatchewan is the only one to have shown a 
recession last year, Mr. Speaker. In fact, they won’t even admit 
that there is a problem. Every day we hear the NDP tell us 
everything’s fine, but they’re living in a fantasy world and 
ignoring reality. 
 
Here are the facts, Mr. Speaker. Last year, Saskatchewan lost 
12,000 jobs thanks to the NDP. Saskatchewan lost over 10,000 
people to other provinces thanks to the NDP. Saskatchewan’s 
population fell to under a million people for the first time in 20 
years thanks to the NDP. And now we find out Saskatchewan 
was the only province in Canada to have suffered a recession 
thanks to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the facts. The NDP’s economic plan is 
failing. Why does the NDP have no plan to grow 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about 
Statistics Canada and what they just released. And I want to 
quote from their Web site. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s economy contracted 1.9% in 2001, the first 
decline since 1992 (Mr. Speaker), as drought devastated 
crops, farm incomes dried up . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what StatsCanada said. 
 
Well, we have an economic plan on this side. And that’s 
balancing budgets, and that’s sustainable tax reduction, and 
that’s continued diversification of our agricultural community 
so that we can weather the kind of drought that we had last 
year. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that our economy has grown in 

areas where we have focused as people, and as business people 
in this province have focused their attentions to. And I want to 
talk about an economic plan — their’s is hinged on one thing, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hinged on tax reductions that they can’t tell us 
how they can afford to pay for. That’s their plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that 
this government has no plan for the growth of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at what is occurring in every other province; we 
look at Maritime Canada where the Maritime provinces, even 
though the potato industry has slumped in Prince Edward 
Island, the fishing industry has slumped in Nova Scotia and 
Newfoundland, every province has shown a decline. We see 
agriculture, in a difficult situation in Manitoba and Alberta, yet 
they continue to grow. 
 
The only province not growing, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan. 
That is due to the NDP. When the Minister of Finance forecasts 
that corporate income is dropping by over $100 million, that’s a 
clear indication that this economic plan is failing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why is the NDP producing a situation in Saskatchewan that is 
causing this province to fail? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members on this side of the House choose not to believe that 
Saskatchewan is a failure, anymore than we believe the 
businessmen and women who build this economy are failures, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if that opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Sorry. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if that opposition 
hasn’t learned that people have had enough of their negatives 
— and that’s based on the fact that they’ve lost three 
by-elections in a row — Mr. Speaker, I think they better sit 
back and take another look. 
 
They’re popular vote is dropping, and it’s dropping for a reason 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Let’s just try again . . . No. Order, please. 
Order, please. The minister will conclude. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And, Mr. Speaker, I say the people 
believe guilty as charged. Their premise of economic 
development is based on one thing, and that’s tax reduction will 
spur this economy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker since 1999 look at what’s happened in here. 
The flat tax is gone, the debt-reduction surtax is gone. The 
high-income surtax is gone. The non-refundable tax credits 
were introduced. The income tax rate was cut by 25 per cent; 
and the small business growth was down 8 and 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is more than tax reductions to create the 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

economy and if they can’t recognize the fact that the drought 
has a dramatic impact on this province, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, 
the people do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By 
leave to make a brief statement before ministerial statements? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. The Minister for Crown 
Investments Corporation has requested leave . . . Order, please. 
Order, please. Requested leave to make a personal statement 
prior to his ministerial statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Announcement of Birth of Daughter 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
I appreciate the opportunity. I listened to the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers talk about one less New Democrat. I want 
to report to the Assembly and members, other friends who 
might be listening that there is in fact one more New Democrat 
as of late yesterday afternoon. 
 
I want to thank all of my colleagues in the legislature and 
friends who phoned to wish Virginia and I well on the birth of 
our daughter yesterday afternoon. I appreciate it . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you. I appreciate it very much. 
 
I was asked many times in advance whether it was a boy or a 
girl and my response to that was — and this is for you, Murray, 
by the way — my response was this is up to Virginia, I do not 
like to micromanage to that degree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our daughter actually arrived a little sooner than we planned 
and we didn’t . . . we don’t yet have a name for her. And 
Virginia actually thought that we should . . . She really likes the 
name Tory, but I got really colicky over that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In closing I do want to say though, thank you to all of my 
colleagues on both sides of the House and to friends in the 
building who have phoned and wished both Virginia and myself 
well. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

GreenPower 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And I am tired, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. The environment is an issue on the minds of many 
citizens of this province, particularly today, which is Earth Day 
2002. 

Many of us have already made simple lifestyle changes to 
reduce our impact on our land, air, and water by choosing to 
walk or to take the bus instead of driving a car, or recycling our 
home waste, or turning off lights not in use. 
 
Today I’m pleased to rise in the House to tell you about a new 
opportunity that will help even more Saskatchewan residents go 
green. This morning in Saskatoon the Premier — and I was 
supposed to be with him but I wasn’t — the Premier announced 
that SaskPower has begun offering GreenPower to residential, 
farm, and small-business customers across the province. 
 
And thanks to an agreement just finalized by the city of 
Saskatoon and SaskPower, Saskatoon residents receiving 
electrical service from the city will also be able to purchase 
GreenPower. 
 
Today’s announcement is on top of the large industrial 
GreenPower product that SaskPower announced in March. 
GreenPower is a concrete example of the steps SaskPower and 
our provincial government are taking to tackle the challenges 
posed by the . . . posed by climate change, I should say. 
 
Last June the Government of Saskatchewan made a 10-year 
commitment to purchase GreenPower to help meet the electrical 
needs at provincial government facilities. 
 
The GreenPower product unveiled today for residential, farm, 
and small-business customers is priced at $3.50 to support a 100 
kilowatt hour block, a small premium that will be added to the 
customer’s regular monthly bill. At this price SaskPower’s 
GreenPower is amongst the least expensive in Canada. 
 
So just what does $3.50 worth of GreenPower get for you? 
Here’s just a partial list. You can operate five computers and a 
printer for eight hours a day for a month or — and I like this 
one, listen to this — do 20 loads of laundry or operate two 
high-pressure farmyard lights each night for a month. 
 
And just as important, a single block of GreenPower has the 
same positive environmental impact as planting about 240 fully 
grown trees by reducing the amount of fossil fuels burned to 
generate electricity. 
 
I urge members to join the green movement by contacting their 
local SaskPower or city of Saskatoon electrical office and 
signing up for GreenPower today, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to stand 
and respond to the minister’s statement on behalf of the official 
opposition. 
 
And just prior to doing that, also on behalf of the opposition, to 
extend all the very best to both the minister and his wife, 
Virginia, and congratulate them on the birth of their daughter. 
And if the minister signs up for his own program he’s 
announced, he may be indeed . . . be requiring a lot more loads 
of laundry here in the weeks ahead. And he may indeed be one 
of the first subscribers here to this new program. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, certainly the official opposition agrees in 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

 

principle with the move towards GreenPower and more 
environmentally friendly electrical generation in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And certainly the city of Saskatoon and 
SaskPower seem to have embarked on a program to deliver that 
GreenPower, just that, to the . . . certainly to the residents of 
Saskatoon. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the minister referenced the source for 
some of the GreenPower — or at least indirectly he did, anyway 
— and no doubt some of it will be attributed to the wind 
projects in our area of the province, in my area of 
Saskatchewan, near the Gull Lake area. 
 
And certainly I think when that . . . when those wind projects 
were announced they were very well received by the people of 
the area, people across the province in general, and by the 
opposition, frankly, who saw the merit of pursuing wind power; 
especially the partnership with a private sector company, a 
company that had formed as a result of a joint venture by two 
Alberta-based energy companies. 
 
And we certainly found that particular development 
encouraging with SaskPower looking towards the private sector 
for that sort of joint venture. What we’ve seen since then, what 
we’ve seen since then notwithstanding the announcement today 
though, is a government that has decided now that it is . . . now 
that they see this, the generation of wind power, of that 
GreenPower, to be more efficient than I think than they even 
had hoped, to be quite successful, they’re going to cut out the 
private sector partnership, they’re going to do it on their own. 
 
And I think that’s regrettable, Mr. Speaker. And maybe the only 
thing that detracts from the announcement today is what’s 
happening with that particular . . . with wind power generation 
in the southwest part of the province. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly be looking for 
more details on this particular announcement. In principle, 
though, the availability of GreenPower to the residents of 
Saskatoon at their own choice, at the premium outlined by the 
minister, is something in principle we find that we would agree 
with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Unparliamentary Language 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I have had 
an opportunity to over . . . to review the record of Hansard from 
last day’s proceedings and I wish to bring an item to a 
member’s attention. 
 
I believe it’s the members’ intent to use this Assembly to debate 
issues and ideas of political concern to the public that they 
represent and to avoid personal slurs or insults. 
 
I believe that the public is best served through passionate yet 
reasoned debate which maintains the integrity of members. I’d 
like to bring to members’ attention two quotations from 
Montpetit and Marleau on page 525: 
 

Personal attacks, insults, and obscene language or words 
are not in order. 

 
And on the next page, on page 526: 
 

In dealing with unparliamentary language, the Speaker 
takes into account the tone, manner, and intention of the 
member speaking; the person to whom the words were 
directed; the degree of provocation; and most importantly, 
whether or not the remarks created disorder in the 
Chamber. 

 
Further to that, all members will recall that we have had a 
long-standing tradition that members in this Assembly are to be 
referred to by their constituencies or their titles. 
 
Upon reviewing the record, I found that the Minister of Health 
in one of his remarks used the words, dairy queen, when 
referring to the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I 
believe in keeping with the values of this Assembly, I would 
ask the Minister of Health to at this time withdraw that 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that statement 
and I apologize for any concern that it may have raised. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today on behalf 
of the government to table the response to written question no. 
125. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 125 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials, and if he wishes, make a brief statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today is, 
sitting to my left, is Mr. Ron Styles, who is the deputy minister 
of Finance. And beside to the left of Mr. Styles, is Mr. Chris 
Bayda, who is the executive director of the financial 
management branch of the Department of Finance. 
 
To my right is Mr. Len Rog, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of the revenue division of the Department of Finance. 
Behind Mr. Rog is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is an assistant 
deputy minister in taxation and intergovernmental affairs at 
Finance. 
 
Behind me, is Mr. Glen Veikle, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of the treasury board branch of the Department of 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

Finance. Behind Mr. Styles is Mr. Bill Van Sickle; he is the 
executive director of the corporate services division of the 
Department of Finance. And behind Mr. Bayda is Ms. Joanne 
Brockman, and she is the executive director of the economic 
and fiscal policy branch of the Department of Finance. 
 
And all of these officials are here today to assist me in 
providing the opposition and the public with information about 
our plan as set out in the budget introduced into the legislature 
on March 27. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the minister, 
welcome to your officials here this afternoon. We have a few 
questions; I’m sure they’ll be a breeze for you. We’ll try to get 
some responses that I think would be of most interest to both us 
and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess right off the bat, Mr. Minister, I would like to talk a 
little bit about the revenue side of the budget that you have put 
forward. And one of the items that I wanted to draw attention to 
would be the petroleum . . . revenue from petroleum and the oil 
prices. And I noticed that recently the prices of petroleum have 
been, at least of oil and I think natural gas too, have stabilized 
and maybe have looked pretty attractive. 
 
I’m wondering how the estimates that you have put forward in 
your budget are holding against what you anticipate the future 
will be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I thank the 
hon. member for the question. Although when the member says 
that, you know, I’ll breeze through the questions, then it causes 
me to be concerned because I . . . he may, he may have 
something up his sleeve and not want me to breeze through the 
questions. But hopefully we will. 
 
In terms of the oil revenues and perhaps natural gas too, I would 
say to the member that we have made our projections based 
upon $20 oil throughout the calendar year 2002. And this is the 
same amount that Alberta has based their figure on. Natural gas, 
we’ve based that on $3 and . . . same as Alberta. 
 
And no, we have not revised our estimates upwards based on 
the fact that the price is higher than $20 right now. The reason 
being that this is early days in terms of the year and what we 
have seen, as the member knows being from Lloydminster 
where they have some oil and natural gas in the area; it’s early 
in the year and it would be . . . there’s a lot of volatility. We’ve 
seen the price of oil and natural gas go up a lot, go down a lot. 
And it’s true that it’s gone up somewhat so far this year, but it 
also could go down later in the year. And based on that, we’re 
sticking to our projection of $20 and $3, as I’ve indicated. 
 
But having said that, with the member, I’m hoping that prices 
are somewhat higher than that so that we have more revenue. 
Although I hasten to add that we always look for balance in 
these areas in the sense that a higher price is good for the oil 
industry or the gas industry, which in turn is good for jobs and 
economic development in the province, but you never want it to 
be so inordinately high that it will shut down industries as a 
high natural gas price did a year ago. There were some 
problems in one of the mineral industries and also, I think, in 
alfalfa pellets. And high oil prices can be a big problem on the 

farm because, of course, it’s very intensive in terms of the use 
of fuel. 
 
But in any event, we hope that the prices will be somewhat 
higher. We’ll see if they are. We don’t want them to be so high 
as to be a burden unduly to industry, farmers, or indeed, 
consumers. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, on that particular note and 
looking at natural gas in particular, I noticed in the schedule of 
revenues that is on page 12, the summary of revenues, that the 
natural gas anticipated revenue compared to 2001-2002 is 
significantly lower — about half the revenue; certainly lower 
than the amended forecast that you had put forward as well. 
 
Your comments about wanting to give not necessarily an 
optimistic or a pessimistic picture, would it be accurate to say 
that the reduction of about — my calculation — 32 per cent in 
your revenue projections for natural gas was a result that maybe 
you were over optimistic and has, in fact, played a negative part 
in the last year’s not only forecast but actual numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well obviously, we were more optimistic, 
Mr. Chair, than turned out to be the case. 
 
In that regard, we were in the company of other governments in 
Canada, like British Columbia and Alberta, which are also 
natural gas producers, and also the private sector. Because when 
we estimate what we will obtain from natural gas or oil, we 
don’t just come up with figures by ourselves. We consult with 
the private sector; we look at what they’re projecting. We look 
at what the other governments are projecting. And we tend to 
see whether our projections are in line with theirs and usually 
they are. And in this case, they were as well. 
 
And the member is correct that last year we had overestimated 
the revenue we would . . . we received from natural gas last 
year. And in that regard we were in very good company in the 
sense that everyone was in the same boat. In fact, Alberta’s 
surplus went from $7 billion for the fiscal year ending March 
31, 2001, to just barely having a surplus at all because they had 
also felt that natural gas prices would be higher than they turned 
out to be. So no one could really predict or did predict, 
including us, what happened to them. 
 
One thing that did happen in this Legislative Assembly, 
however, was when I had put forward for the year 2001 our 
projection for natural gas for that year at $5.86 for 2001, the 
member may recall I actually was accused by the opposition in 
the House of deliberately understating that and also the 3.39 for 
2002. The allegation was that I had said those would be too 
low. And as it turned out, they were actually too high. 
 
And I don’t say that in a political way. I simply say that to point 
out how difficult it is to predict these things. And the fact is no 
one know. The people that work for the oil companies don’t 
know, the investment bankers don’t know, and the governments 
don’t know. 
 
But in that regard, we turned out to be more accurate than the 
opposition thought we would be last year, but we had the price 
somewhat higher. We had said 5.86 for 2001 — it actually was 
5.35 — so we were in the right dollar range and closer than 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

 

some people were. 
 
But the point is no one has a crystal ball. So you do a forecast 
of what you think the price of wheat will be, the price of oil, the 
price of natural gas, and you wait and see what happens. And in 
that regard, governments are in the same boat as everybody 
else, because the price is set by the market and these things are 
affected by a variety of circumstances. The American recession 
brings the price down. That recession has ended, but they had 
one for a short time because there is less demand. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And all of the awful and tragic things that are going on in the 
world affect the price as well. First, they affected the price by 
making it lower after September 11. Now it seems the problems 
in the Middle East seem to be making the price higher. 
 
But again, these world events are difficult to predict, and we 
hope that the situation in the world will improve and that these 
awful events will not continue to affect the price but just the 
economic factors. But it’s very difficult for anyone to know for 
sure what the . . . how the economy will do in the US (United 
States) and other parts of world, and therefore, very difficult to 
make a projection. 
 
But to answer the question specifically, yes, we were somewhat 
optimistic last year about what the price of natural gas would 
be. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There is no doubt 
that there is a great variability in natural gas pricing. One of the 
keys that I’m sure your officials look to, as others in the 
industry look to, is the spot price and the trend of the spot price 
that happens to reflect the price at any one time, and then you 
try to extrapolate from that. 
 
So my question would be this. We’ve been told recently that at 
least we’re . . . I read it in the paper or heard it, that the 
Saskatchewan . . . SaskPower is giving us some information 
that indicates that some of their costs were considerably higher 
than they had anticipated. The main one, at least number one 
that was mentioned by the president, was the cost of natural gas. 
 
The cost of natural gas has apparently driven up the cost of 
SaskPower as it’s being distributed to its customers, and yet we 
see the cost of natural gas in the spot price going either 
sideways or down. 
 
And I know the cost, my cost in real terms from my supplier is 
much less than what SaskEnergy can supply. I have trouble 
squaring those two things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this might be a question that could be 
addressed to the minister in charge of the Crown Investments 
Corporation as well. But I will comment that the situation for 
SaskPower is complicated by two factors. 
 
One is that this year, regardless of the price of natural gas, 
SaskPower normally relies — by this year I’m talking about 
2001 actually — SaskPower normally relies, Mr. Chair, on the 
use of a certain amount of hydroelectric power, that is power 
driven by the river. I think mainly at Gardiner dam, although 

I’m not absolutely sure about that. 
 
But one thing that happened in 2001 is that there wasn’t very 
much moisture in the mountains. There wasn’t a lot of snow 
and of course we had a horrible drought and so there wasn’t a 
lot of rain either. And that meant that there was less water. And 
when there’s less water, then SaskPower has to rely on natural 
gas. And so quite apart from the price of natural gas, even if it 
had been a relatively low price, natural gas to produce power is 
more expensive than hydroelectric power. 
 
And so SaskPower’s price and therefore their bottom line was 
affected by the fact that they didn’t have the water to produce 
power and they had to buy more natural gas than they otherwise 
would have. That’s one factor. 
 
The second factor is that SaskPower, or SaskEnergy for that 
matter, I think is required to purchase and store the natural gas 
that they use. And because they need it, they have to buy it at a 
particular price and then they have to store it. And then once 
they store it, they have to use it. And so they probably get 
locked into a particular price. 
 
And of course they’re like everybody else — they don’t know 
what’s going to happen to the price in the future, but they buy 
the gas at the price that it is on the day they buy it, they store it, 
and then they have to use it. So those two factors would affect 
it. 
 
But I think that the matter might be affected more for 2001 by 
the lack of water than the price of natural gas, although both of 
those two factors would come into play. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s a 
very logical response in terms of water generation. That is 
certainly a critical part of the costing. The pricing of natural gas 
for their operations we’ll certainly try and direct to Crown 
Corporations and to those people. 
 
But in terms of how you go about budgeting and projecting 
those kind of revenues I think is very important. And I wanted 
to make sure that you were able to give us some comfort that 
you continue to be kind of on the mark of where you predict 
these revenues will be. Because at the end of the day, that’s 
going to be quite critical, either up or down, in terms of how the 
budget is going to perform during the year. 
 
I would use that same reasoning, and that same rationale then, 
to the price of potash. Can you tell me what your officials have 
done in terms of discussion with the industry, making the 
projections for the return on the sale of potash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I know that the matter of the budgeted 
amount we see arising out of potash has been the subject of 
some questioning in the legislature already, because we have 
said in the budget for this year that potash revenues will be up 
almost 26 per cent, or approximately $42 million above last 
year. And of course the question is raised, why would that be 
the case. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite that although it was 
alleged in the Assembly here that I had artificially inflated this 
number to make the budget balance, subsequent to that 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

questioning by the opposition, there was a statement from some 
potash executives who said in fact that they anticipate the same 
thing, that they would be paying more to the government in 
taxes. 
 
And the explanation in the media from the — I think it was a 
representative of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — 
was that they didn’t think our estimate was that much out of 
line. Although the opposition had said it was, they said no, that 
they thought the government was being reasonable. 
 
And there are a number of factors that go into that. The first is 
that production and sales levels are expected to rise somewhat 
in this fiscal year — about 4 per cent. And that will lead to an 
increase in the gross value of sales for profit-tax calculation of 
about 4.3 per cent, I’m told. 
 
Input costs such as the price of natural gas, which is the major 
input in the manufacturing of potash — that’s very important — 
are projected to be quite a bit lower, because of course natural 
gas prices have come down a lot, and that in turn will increase 
the operating profits per ton of the potash companies. 
 
Once the level of gross-profit tax is calculated, any applicable 
credits are then deducted in computing net, profit tax payable. 
And this leads to the third factor that I want to talk about which 
will contribute to higher, net, potash-profit tax, which is that 
there’s an historical capital investment account for 
Saskatchewan potash producers which comes to an end in this 
fiscal year. In other words, there’s a tax break that they’ve had 
for quite a long time that was always scheduled to end at this 
time, and it ends in this particular fiscal year. 
 
So there’s three reasons: one is more production and sales; 
secondly, lower costs to produce; and thirdly, the expiration of 
a capital investment account that was seen to be ready to expire. 
And so those three factors lead us to believe that the revenue 
from potash to government will be up by about $42 million. 
And as I said, that was . . . at least one potash executive, I think 
from PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) — it was 
in the media — has said that they think that’s accurate as well 
because of those factors. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, the discussions that we had, 
when we first commented on the 25 or 26 per cent increase in 
revenue from potash, the discussions that we had were that 
potash was going to not have a large increase or decrease in 
production but carry on in about the same fashion. And on that 
basis, we challenged you in times and you referred to that, that 
maybe that number was inflated. 
 
I guess my question would be, and continuing in that line, if in 
fact it’s natural gas prices that I think have come down, if that is 
a significant factor, tell me again then how the more or less 
sideways production rates are going to result in a higher return 
and particularly the tax that you had referred to that will be 
terminated, how does that rate in terms of increased profit for 
the potash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the tax change that I referred to 
which is, as I said, not something that arises out of this budget 
or even recently but I think comes out of the 1970s or 1980s 
results in a $19 million difference. The end of the . . . well it’s 

large historical depreciation banks that the potash industry had. 
Those come to an end and that means that there’s $19 million 
there which is more than we had before. 
 
And the other factors, as I said, are an expectation of increased 
sales and decreased costs. So I see that, according to the 
information I have, the value of sales is projected to go, from 
1.611 billion in the last fiscal year to 1.68 billion this fiscal 
year. So that’s an increase of some 69 . . . approximately $70 
million in sales. 
 
And so the estimate is that with the $19 million extra in the 
taxes, and the sales going up about $70 million, and the greater 
profits because of the costs of production coming down, that 
those three will contribute to the approximately $42 million 
increase. And as I said, I believe that that estimate has been 
verified as reasonable by at least some executives in the potash 
sector. 
 
I want to make this observation too, Mr. Chair, not in a political 
way but just as a matter of fact so that people understand. One 
of the . . . the member was interjecting something as a joke, Mr. 
Chair. But one of the things that has been said from time to time 
in the legislature is that I as the Minister of Finance would 
change the figure that I say we’re going to get from potash or 
oil or natural gas. And this allegation is made from time to time. 
 
But I want to make it clear that that has never occurred in the 
sense that we employ officials in the Department of Finance 
such as . . . Ms. Brockman is head of the economic and fiscal 
policy branch, Mr. McGregor is head of the taxation branch. 
And using them as examples, these officials year after year — it 
doesn’t matter who the minister of Finance is — give us their 
estimate based on what the private sector, what other 
governments are saying, of what the revenues will be. 
 
We don’t select these numbers. They give them to us. We may 
question them about them, but we rely upon the estimates of 
professionals to pick these numbers. These are not numbers that 
I write into the budget in the sense that I’m not an expert in 
these numbers. I get the best advice I can from the government 
officials. We look at what the private sector has to say. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And the officials, they don’t have a crystal ball so they are not 
always right. But they are pretty good and pretty close — 
they’re usually within a small margin. 
 
But my point is not to say that they are always right; my point is 
to say we don’t come up with these numbers ourselves on a 
political basis. We get the numbers from the officials. 
 
That’s how the number goes up this year, and as I say, there are 
people in the private sector that feel that we’re being reasonable 
in terms of the projection that the officials have given to us. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It is indeed a very 
complicated issue, lengthy but . . . and complicated too. 
 
I guess the question I would have then from your officials when 
they were projecting what’s going to happen in the future with 
regards to potash, the tax that is . . . the tax holiday that was 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

 

being removed this year that is going to help the government 
revenues, as you indicated, by something like, I think you used 
$19 million, does that . . . do your officials anticipate that’s 
going to be a negative impact on the industry in that that’s 
going to be a disincentive for either production or further 
development in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we don’t anticipate a problem in that 
regard, Mr. Chair. First of all, I should say that this isn’t so 
much the removal of a tax exemption as the expiry of a tax 
exemption after 22 years. And 22 years ago the industry made 
an arrangement with government whereby they had a tax break 
that would last 22 years, and it came to an end. And everyone 
has planned on that basis. So there’s nothing new there. 
 
But I want to say that we have been taking steps to work with 
the potash industry with respect to their level of taxation. Now 
having said that, it doesn’t matter if we’re dealing with the 
potash industry or the oil industry or indeed personal taxpayers, 
whatever the level of tax is, everyone will say, generally 
speaking, well I’d like it to be lower. So nobody is ever quite 
satisfied with their level of tax, because everyone would like to 
pay less. 
 
But having said that, we have been working with the potash 
industry, and in particular, in 1998 the highest profit tax bracket 
which was 50 per cent was eliminated, leaving 35 per cent 
profit tax bracket as the top rate. So we had lowered the top rate 
tax bracket for the potash industry. 
 
In 2001, the lowest profit tax bracket of 15 per cent was 
expanded from $35 profit per K2O (potassium oxide) tonne to 
$40. So that’s a tonne of K2O potash. So the lower tax is 
applied at $40 rather than 35. 
 
And this year, producers are now allowed to pay taxes on a 
consolidated company basis rather than a mine-by-mine basis, 
with a maximum of 10 per cent of accumulated base payment 
credits applicable against profit tax payable annually. That 
doesn’t sound very clear, but the point of these things is that in 
1998, 2001, and 2002, we reduced taxes for the potash 
producers. 
 
So because they’ve known that their depreciation treatment was 
coming to an end and because they’ve got some tax breaks in 
the last few years and because of the quality of Saskatchewan 
potash — which I believe is the best in the world which is why 
we, I think, are the largest producer in the world — I believe 
that the potash industry has a very bright present and a very 
bright future. 
 
And all of these things have been planned for to keep the potash 
being mined and keep the people being employed there and also 
all the service industries that depend upon employment that 
comes from the potash industry. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I think you’ve just outlined a 
principle that is quite important. Industry will respond to 
conditions such as tax incentives. They will respond in a very 
short order. And I assume that you’re anticipating that the 
potash production, that’s part of the formula of potash 
continuing to be developed in this province. 
 

Potash is a very important part of our economy. We, in fact, are 
world leaders of that particular resource. And I would certainly 
encourage you to continue on that direction of offering very 
favourable taxes to allow industries to become more confident 
that they can develop those resources with a return to the 
shareholder, whether it be private or public. So I commend you 
for that. 
 
But using that principle, can we not continue in that same vein 
with other resources, the gas and oil production? The reason 
I’m saying that is because even though we have a very vibrant 
oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan it doesn’t compare with 
the industry that . . . or the level of vitality of the industry on the 
Alberta side of the border. And I’m using, colloquially I’m 
using, my area as an example. 
 
I know that there is only about one well drilled on the 
Saskatchewan side for an equivalent of maybe four or five 
drilled on the Alberta side with the resources being the same on 
either side of that imaginary line. 
 
Is there anything that you can offer or your officials can do to 
encourage continued tax incentives to make sure that 
production increases and hopefully becomes even more 
competitive, and therefore more productive, and therefore a 
larger royalty back to our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well that’s certainly something that we 
should try to do on a continual basis and we do try to do, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
I would like to say to the member that the details actually could 
be more appropriately put to the Minister of Industry and 
Resources in his estimates. I know that he will come armed 
with all kinds of numbers and statistics about the royalty levels. 
But having said that, I want to say to the member that indeed 
this is something we’re constantly trying to do at the 
Department of Finance. 
 
We work in close co-operation with the Department of Industry 
and Resources and their predecessor, Energy and Mines — and 
have for many years — to make changes to the royalty structure 
that will further enhance the competitiveness of the oil business, 
for example, and gas. I can’t detail all of them right now, but I 
can tell the member and the House that in the last five years 
we’ve made a few changes to the royalty structure for oil to 
make it more competitive. 
 
And we will look, in answer to the question, yes, we will look 
on a continuous basis at ways to change the royalties to increase 
production on the Saskatchewan side and, I have to say by the 
way, production has gone up on the Saskatchewan side. 
 
Now the member is correct that there’s more production on the 
Alberta side. In terms of oil, that tends to be because Alberta 
has a light, sweet crude oil which is more profitable to produce. 
Saskatchewan has a heavy oil which is less profitable to 
produce. That affects the development as between the two 
provinces, I think more so than the royalty structure. 
 
In terms of natural gas, I believe that Alberta has 30 times the 
known reserves of natural gas as Saskatchewan. They just have 
more natural gas. In fact, British Columbia is the second largest 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

natural gas producer. They have more known natural gas 
reserves than Saskatchewan does. 
 
So there are differences between Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
Alberta happens to be blessed with light, sweet crude in the 
case of oil and they are blessed with more natural gas than we 
have. 
 
But having said that, the member is correct — and I agree — 
that we should always try to make sure our royalty rates 
encourage production. We have been changing them. 
Production has gone up. 
 
And of course I would just finish off the answer this way by 
saying we always need a balance. And the balance is between 
the right of the industry to make a profit — and I want to be 
clear that the industry has the right to make a profit for their 
investment and their labours — and the right of the people of 
the province to get a fair return for the extraction of 
non-renewable resources. So we want the taxpayers to get some 
return as well. And of course, a lot of that money is used for 
programs like health care, education, and so on. And the 
finances have been quite tight this year and it’s helpful to have 
the resources. 
 
So, yes, we try to look at the royalties. We try to look at that 
balance — what the public needs — what the industry needs. 
And we’ll continue to work with the industry to look at ways 
that are beneficial both for the industry, on the one hand, and 
fair to the people of the province on the other. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have one more 
question on this vein, and then I’m going to turn it over to my 
colleague. She has a couple of questions. 
 
But the question that I would have is that if we are concerned 
with getting the best return we can for the resource that we have 
by judiciously applying royalties — and also the tax incentives 
to encourage that development — I want to ask the question 
about returning some of that . . . the royalty investment back to 
the people. 
 
In areas that have a significantly higher cost associated with 
that production . . . and I’m talking about the heavy-oil area that 
I’m from; there is a significant higher cost in terms of 
infrastructure, roads, and the grid roads in particular. That cost 
right now is being picked up by the taxpayers of the 
municipalities in that area, almost exclusively. Some of the 
grant money comes back for heavy haul road — maybe one or 
two areas in that municipality — but basically the taxpayers are 
picking up a significant amount of that extra cost that generates 
a royalty that is then distributed to the entire province. 
 
I’m asking if your officials will consider — seriously consider 
— working with Municipal Affairs, but seriously consider 
returning some of the royalty that’s generated from there 
because of the extra cost associated with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I would make two observations 
with respect to that. First of all the municipalities where the oil 
and gas companies are operating will assess some municipal 
taxation on the value of the property that the oil companies or 
gas companies may have in the municipality. So certainly most 

municipalities would consider it to be, yes, a cost to have oil 
companies but also a benefit because there would be a business 
there that they could tax. So that would be one part of it. 
 
The second observation I would make would be that in terms of 
where the revenue should go and municipal revenue-sharing, 
the province will look at how much money is coming in, in 
royalties and then, you know, what can be paid out to 
municipalities from that. And of course this year we saw some 
increase in the municipal revenue-sharing grant so there was 
something extra there. There’s been some extra money for roads 
in the last few years, and a few other ways. 
 
In answer to the question, would my officials look at perhaps 
changing the revenue-sharing formula to take into account how 
much revenue there may be in a municipality related to oil and 
gas, I would answer it this way. No, probably not the Finance 
officials. However the intergovernmental officials that used to 
be the Department of Municipal Affairs, or the Government 
Relations officials as they’re now called, that’s something that 
they would look at. And that question might be appropriately 
addressed for further discussion with the minister of 
governmental relations about, you know, for further discussion. 
 
But I have to say that it’s not something that Finance would 
really look at. We would tend to come up with a global sum that 
we could make available to municipalities, and Government 
Relations department would be more active in terms of dealing 
with the municipalities as to how that money should be paid 
out. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials. 
 
The questions that I have for you today are mostly related to 
PST (provincial sales tax) and some of the implications. Mr. 
Minister, could you tell me how many businesses are registered 
with PST . . . have registered PST numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that there are about 
42,000 businesses in Saskatchewan that would be PST payors, 
that pay money to the government for PST. And 32,000 of 
those, approximately, would also be PST collectors. So there’s 
about 32,000 businesses that collect the PST from their 
customers. And then in addition to those 32,000 there would be 
another 10,000 businesses that don’t collect PST themselves but 
remit PST to government on some purchases that they have 
made. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me 
how many PST auditors we have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The Department of Finance employs about 
50 — that’s five, zero — auditors on PST. And I believe they 
are located in Regina, mostly, but also in Yorkton, Saskatoon, 
and Prince Albert. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you give us an 
idea of how many audits were performed last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I should add that the number of auditors is 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

 

going from 50 to 59 as . . . because nine auditors are being 
added as a result of the budget. And the number of field audits 
for . . . The last year we have available is 2000-2001, where the 
figures are compiled, so we don’t have the complete figures for 
2001-2002. 
 
But it was 1,066 field audits — you know, where they’re out in 
the field, which may be in Saskatchewan or they may go to 
Calgary, Toronto, somewhere else. And desk audits, where 
they’re doing the audits from their desks in Saskatchewan, I 
believe about 2,597. 
 
Now as I said, that’s . . . those figures are for 2000-2001. And 
when we have figures for the last fiscal year, I’d be pleased to 
provide those to the member as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again to the minister. I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, how many of these audits resulted in 
additional monies that would be required, that perhaps someone 
had underpaid. And at the same time could you give me an idea 
of how much money was collected in interest and penalties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Mr. Chair, I can’t answer the question 
in quite the way it’s been asked. But I can tell the member . . . 
because we’ve got a penalty figure and an interest figure which 
results from both audits and late payments, both. And the 
penalty figure, the latest one we have was $1.7 million in 
penalty and $3 million in interest. But that would be both audit 
and late filing. 
 
And then with respect to the total revenue that might arise from 
audit, the latest figure we have for 2000-2001 is $18,505,590. I 
don’t have an average per audit or per auditor but that gives the 
member some idea. It was about eighteen and a half million 
dollars in 2000-2001. 
 
And just while I’m on my feet, I won’t go on at length about it, 
but I might say that one of the concerns that has been expressed 
to me over the last three years or so has been by Saskatchewan 
construction companies sometimes and the other day it was 
actually by a Saskatchewan road builder. And they have wanted 
us to ensure that when Alberta companies, especially, come in 
with their machines that no PST has been paid. Or it could be 
an apartment company that owns many apartments and brings 
appliances and carpeting in from Alberta, which may happen, 
and no PST paid. 
 
They want to be sure that we collect that PST so that companies 
from out-of-province are in the same level playing field as in 
province. And that’s one of the reasons why we’ve beefed up 
auditing. And I was told recently just in casual meetings, not for 
this purpose but where I ran into people from construction 
companies and also a road builder, that they were happier with 
the government in terms of this issue than they had been in the 
past in the sense that they thought we were creating more of a 
level playing field because we were collecting the PST on a 
proper pro-rated basis from Alberta contractors. So it’s one of 
the reasons for the beefing up. 
 
And in this revenue that the auditors find, the eighteen and a 
half million dollars, I’m sure that some of that would be for that 
sort of area, although I’m not able to say how much of that 
would be from out-of-province companies doing business in 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I’ve had a 
question put to me from a company who actually does business 
. . . and one of their competitors is from Alberta. And they are 
feeling uncomfortable believing that when they make the sale 
here in Saskatchewan, that perhaps these people are not . . . 
either they don’t charge the PST or maybe it’s charged and not 
even . . . not given to the government. How do you ensure that 
if an Alberta company actually charges the tax — how do you 
ensure that the money is actually given to the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, before I answer the question I 
wonder if the member could clarify whether she’s talking about 
businesses that are out of province but selling into the province 
or whether she’s talking about businesses that are actually 
coming to the province, such as a construction company or an 
oil company. And the answer will vary depending upon which 
set of circumstances she’s referring to. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I was thinking about a company 
whose headquarters are . . . is in Alberta and will sell into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to a business that’s operating, 
for example, in the province of Alberta, it they’re selling goods 
in Saskatchewan but have no office or business here, they’re not 
required to collect the PST on the goods that they sell to a 
Saskatchewan person. And that’s not something new; that’s 
always been the case. 
 
So that, for example, if I order, you know, a fishing rod from 
Joe’s Fishing in Calgary, and they send it to me and I pay them, 
they are not required to collect the PST if they have no business 
in Saskatchewan. And that has always been the case, so they 
wouldn’t collect that from me. 
 
Now on the other hand, I as a consumer when I bring that in, I 
am technically required to pay PST on that item. And as I’m 
sure the member knows, the difficulty there is that it’s very 
difficult to control. If you don’t have compliance by the 
consumer then you’re probably . . . you’ve got some goods 
coming in that a tax technically is payable by the consumer, not 
the business. 
 
In some cases, such as automobiles, those the tax will always be 
paid because the vehicle has to be licensed in Saskatchewan so 
you catch it. 
 
But there will be other items where you will not catch it. 
Somebody may bring a washing machine into Saskatchewan 
and they haven’t paid the PST, and we don’t have the resources 
and it wouldn’t be cost-effective to go, you know, to audit all of 
those things. 
 
But as I said earlier, in some cases you will have a situation 
where a business will bring a lot of goods into Saskatchewan 
for a commercial development; let us say they’re furnishing the 
development. And we will watch all of the commercial 
buildings going up — the building permits and so on — and 
ensure that in those larger circumstances an audit is performed 
and that we collect the sales tax with respect to those kinds of 
goods that come into the province. 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. This probably 
sounds very strange that I’m concerned about somebody not 
paying a lot of tax, because taxes isn’t my favourite issue. But I 
do know that there are a number of businesses that are finding it 
a very unfair playing field right now, because companies are 
coming into Saskatchewan and when they give a tender or a 
quote they have to add PST and their competitor doesn’t. 
 
On a bigger-ticket item — and I can . . . I’ll have to rely on my 
background and know that the playground equipment business, 
for example — there are . . . there is a lot of companies that 
come into the province and they don’t, they don’t have to pay 
the . . . they don’t pay the PST. So it’s an issue that I think has 
to be looked at if we’re going to allow all businesses to be able 
to compete fairly. 
 
I have one last question for you and that is: a couple of years 
ago the provincial government did a bit of an exchange with the 
federal government for auditors between GST (goods and 
services tax) and PST. I’m wondering if you can give me an 
idea of what you learned from that experience of the exchange 
of auditors. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that the idea of a 
joint audit between the GST people of the federal government 
and the PST people of the province has not actually been that 
beneficial to the province and probably the federal government. 
Simply the reason being that the taxes are different and they 
have different effects. And there’s not much that can be gained, 
one from the other, by jointly auditing. 
 
But I’m further advised that what is beneficial has been an 
exchange of information between our province and every 
province of the nine provinces with a sales tax and the Canada 
Customs and Revenue Agency, in other words what we 
normally call Revenue Canada but which is now the CCRA. 
 
And the CCRA, that is the federal government, and the 
Government of Saskatchewan exchange information with one 
another about companies doing business and so on. And that is 
quite valuable to give information to us that we might not 
otherwise have; the same, we’re giving information to the 
federal government they might not have. 
 
But the joint audit aspect does not work out quite as well in the 
sense that the GST is a value-added tax with input tax credits, 
which makes it different than the PST, which is more strictly 
consumption tax. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I just have one short question to follow up on that. 
 
And after . . . before I pose it, I just wanted to thank yourself 
and your officials for the response that we’ve had so far today; I 
think we’re going to move on. 
 
But just one question following up on that. And I want to 
preface it by saying that I have extended my thanks, and I think 
the chamber of commerce in the city of Lloydminster has 
extended their thanks to you for that PST question right within 
the city. And that’s been a very important consideration. And 

again we thank you and your officials for making that 
determination. 
 
The question now is, and I think you have received a question 
from me earlier in a written form, those contractors on the 
Alberta side that send equipment into the Saskatchewan side for 
oil field construction, they are in fact charged full GST . . . PST 
price on any equipment that comes across the border, for no 
matter how short a period of time. It doesn’t apply with trucks I 
understand but for Caterpillars, backhoes, that kind of work, a 
full PST is charged. 
 
And I’m hoping that your officials will rethink it through that 
and maybe prorate the taxation on that or let them put a tax on 
maybe one piece of equipment. And maybe it’s a generic tax, 
one out of six can come into Saskatchewan, maybe not 
necessarily the same one but at least they would have paid the 
tax. I’m hoping that that will be a consideration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that what we do, Mr. Chair, is 
not to charge the whole tax on a company that comes into 
Saskatchewan with its equipment but we charge it on a prorated 
basis. 
 
And if they are operating for some significant period of time in 
the province, then in the first year they would be charged 
one-third of the amount of the provincial sales tax. If they were 
here just for a few days, I’m advised that we wouldn’t, you 
know, expect to charge them, but if they’re here for some 
longer period of time that that would be charged one-third. 
 
And if they were here three years for example, to use a simple 
example, then they would pay the sales tax one-third a year for 
three years on a piece of equipment that they brought in. 
 
Now the other side of the coin, and this is what we get more 
questions about actually, is that the Saskatchewan companies — 
and this is the question that I get — come to us and say, we 
don’t think it’s fair that somebody should be able to come in 
from Alberta with equipment they haven’t paid the sales tax on. 
So they want us to do something, which is why we do the 
prorated tax and why we have the tax auditors. So that’s what 
we try to do. 
 
We’ll always be prepared to look at having a more fair system 
if there’s some problem with it, certainly. But it has to be fair 
both to the companies in Alberta that might come here to do 
business and to the companies here that have to pay the sales 
tax on all of their equipment and have to compete with the 
Alberta companies that may come in. 
 
Having said all that, I’d like to thank the officials also for their 
assistance today. I’ve found the questions very interesting and I 
hope the answers were at least somewhat interesting. And I’d 
like to thank the opposition for their questions, which I think 
were very important questions, and also for their progress in 
moving the estimates along. 
 
So with that, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I request the committee to 
report progress and move to Labour estimates. 
 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Yes, I’ll have the minister introduce her 
officials now please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
afternoon, I have to my right, Cheryl Hanson, the assistant 
deputy minister. Directly behind Cheryl, we have John Boyd, 
executive director, planning and policy branch. And directly 
behind myself, we have Dawn McKibben, director of human 
resources and administration branch. 
 
Also here today with us, starting along the back wall, sitting 
behind the bar, we have Eric Greene, acting executive director, 
labour services division; Doug Forseth, executive director, 
labour relations and mediation division; Fayek Kelada, director, 
health and safety services, occupational health and safety 
division; and Cheryl Senecal, acting director, Status of Women 
office. 
 
Also to the other side, seated behind the bar, we have Peter 
Federko, chief executive officer from Workers’ Compensation 
Board; and Gail Kruger, the vice-president, Finance and 
Information Technology at WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board). 
 
Mr. Chair, I’m looking forward this afternoon to answering 
questions from the members opposite about estimates for the 
Department of Labour. But before I do, I’d like to make a few 
brief comments. 
 
Mr. Chair, the mission of the Department of Labour is to work 
with employees and employers to achieve safe, fair, 
representative, and co-operative workplaces that contribute to 
ongoing economic and social development here in 
Saskatchewan. I’d like today to highlight a number of those 
initiatives contained in this year’s budget that will assist the 
department in carrying out that mission. 
 
First, we are adding four positions to the occupational health 
and safety division. This year’s budget provides for the addition 
of a hygiene unit engineer who will work with the mine safety 
unit to help address ventilation issues and chemical hazards 
associated with mining. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chair, two uranium mining and milling 
radiation specialist positions are being added to the mine safety 
unit. The radiation specialist will administer compliance with 
the requirements of the Nuclear Safety and Control Act. This is 
the first step, Mr. Chair, in implementing a harmonized 
regulatory program for uranium mining and milling. 
 
Saskatchewan’s uranium mines are currently subject to 
regulation by both provincial and federal agencies. To improve 
the efficiency of this regulatory regime, the province and the 
Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission are engaged in 
discussions to transfer compliance administration to the 
province. Ultimately, Mr. Chair, this initiative will improve 
efficiency by reducing overlap of responsibilities and 

duplication of effort. 
 
Mr. Chair, also in agribusiness, which is a growing industry 
sector in Saskatchewan, the department, in recognition of this 
fact, has dedicated an additional occupational health officer 
position to work in this very critical industry. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Chair, I recently released the report of 
The Workers’ Compensation Act Committee of Review. A 
number of the committee’s recommendations focused on the 
need to reduce the backlog of cases at the Office of the 
Worker’s Advocate, which is part of our department. And I’m 
delighted to inform you that as part of this budget, the Office of 
the Worker’s Advocate is adding an additional worker’s 
advocate position. 
 
The new position is one very important component of the plan 
of the Office of the Worker’s Advocate that they’re 
implementing in conjunction with their colleagues at the 
Workers’ Compensation Board to reduce the backlog and 
provide better service to injured workers. 
 
I want to conclude my opening remarks, Mr. Chair, by speaking 
about what I believe is a very innovative plan to ensure that 
women’s issues will continue to be addressed by this 
government. 
 
The first step in merging the Women’s Secretariat with 
Saskatchewan Labour, which, Mr. Chair, is almost a 
homecoming — the Women’s Secretariat began as the bureau 
of women in 1964 in the Department of Labour — but we have 
established a Status of Women office, reporting directly to the 
deputy minister. 
 
The Status of Women office will be a single window into 
government for women, women’s organizations, and 
organizations that serve women. The office will provide 
cross-government policy coordination on women’s issues and 
support for pay equity. 
 
As an essential part of this cross-government approach, Mr. 
Chair, we have designated women’s policy advisers in every 
department and in the Crown Investments Corporation. The 
departmental women’s policy advisers will have a responsibility 
for ensuring that consideration of issues affecting women is 
fully integrated into each department’s policy development and 
decision making. 
 
The Status of Women office will include a director, a pay 
equity policy analyst, a senior policy analyst, and an 
administrative assistant. As well, a communications officer 
specializing in women’s issues will be added to the department. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Chair, I truly believe this is an innovative approach for a 
government to take — innovative because it integrates issues 
affecting women into the mainstream of government decision 
making; innovative because it puts responsibility for addressing 
women’s issues inside of every department while ensuring that 
there is centralized leadership in overall government policy and 
the maintenance of key resources for the women’s community. 
 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

Mr. Chair, I look forward to responding to questions from the 
members opposite. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister and her officials here today. 
 
There’s a number of issues that you’ve just mentioned and this 
is quite an in-depth area where we can go in many different 
directions. But mainly today I’d like to talk more in general 
items, at least in the beginning of our Labour estimates. 
 
Last Throne Speech, a year ago, the government announced a 
round table, which the minister at the time said there was going 
to be a dialogue between employers and employees in the 
province with the intent to reach a consensus on a wide variety 
of labour issues. 
 
And I’d just like to initially ask the minister about the round 
table. There has been some concern, especially in the media. 
And I’d just like to quote a comment by one labour official, 
said: 
 

Nearly a year after it was launched, the government’s quest 
to bridge the gap between labour and management through 
a round table process is stalled. 

 
And according to one union official. 
 
And I would just like to ask the minister what is happening with 
the round-table process at this time. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the idea of the 
labour/business partnership and round table was put forward a 
year ago in the Speech from the Throne. Since then we have 
been doing consultations and had discussions with various 
stakeholders throughout the province. 
 
I believe that this idea has a great deal of merit and we are 
continuing to work towards that idea of having a round table 
established to have open discussions on various items that affect 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at Saskatchewan, a population of just over 1 
million people spread over a very huge geographical area, to be 
able to come together and have discussions on issues that affect 
both — and in fact all people in the province: employers, 
employees, workers, whether organized, unorganized — it’s 
important. We are in reality one large community. And I think 
an idea such as the labour/business round table will help with 
the facilitation of ideas that can improve our province as a 
whole. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to get in more 
detail about round table. Has the process actually started? How 
many meetings has taken place? I have a number of questions 
concerning who is participating in the round-table process. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, currently we are in 
consultations with the major stakeholders in this process to 
come to a format that would work well for all of the involved 
parties and stakeholders. 
 
One thing that I believe personally is that I have to get this 

business round table off on a good start. There is wonderful 
opportunities for a mechanism such as this to contribute a great 
deal to Saskatchewan. 
 
But what we don’t want to do is have it set up as one side 
against the other. I mean, hence the name, round table. 
 
We would like to have open discussions. It’s not a negotiations 
table. What we want is input on issues that affect all 
Saskatchewan. So the consultations are still in progress and we 
haven’t yet set up a formal process. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. When I first heard 
about the round-table process I was hoping that it was going to 
be something that was fashioned on what’s happened in Ireland 
and the Irish experience and miracle really in what’s happened 
in their country. They refer to it as more as a social partnership. 
 
And I believe that where this province needs to go is to get 
labour and business, and not only labour and business, but 
government, universities, Aboriginals, and agriculture together 
to set out a course for the province, as in Ireland. They made 
this process work to the betterment of their country and they 
had to make some very hard decisions. And labour and business 
and government had to compromise, get away from the 
adversarial process of labour negotiations, and sit down 
together for the good of the whole province. 
 
I guess my question is, this process is . . . you say it’s still in a 
consultation period. It was announced over a year ago now that 
this process was going to start taking place, and I’m just 
wondering, has there been a problem getting this consultation 
process underway and what roadblocks and problems have 
arisen so far? Why is it taking so long to get it working? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I know there’s been some 
concern in a variety of areas as to why it has taken so long to 
get the business/labour round table up and operational. And as I 
said previously one of the concerns that I have is that I want to 
ensure that the business/labour round table gets off on a good 
foot, good footing and good start. 
 
I don’t want this to end up being a negotiation or a bargaining 
table where each side falls back into traditional roles. We are 
looking for a commitment that people will look at the big 
picture of Saskatchewan and the things we need. And this isn’t 
only business/labour, but there’s also concerns with education, 
communication, travel. It really cuts — transportation — it cuts 
across all avenues and all departments of Saskatchewan. 
 
So really what I’m looking for is . . . And maybe it is taking a 
little longer than what we had first anticipated and maybe I am 
being a little overly cautious, but I feel that it’s better to have it 
off on the right footing than it is to do something in a hurry and 
not receive results from it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m just wondering has 
the minister got a plan or a process in mind with an ultimate 
conclusion? And what is that process and what is that 
conclusion? 
 
We speak of a . . . The minister speaks of a consensus being 
developed. If there is a consensus, will that lead to changes in 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

 

The Trade Union Act and The Labour Standards Act? Is that 
what the minister is proposing at the end of this consultation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, one of the things . . . when I 
first became Minister of Labour and I got into the initial 
discussions or the discussions at that point on the 
business/labour round table, one of the things that struck me 
was when you went out into the community and had discussions 
on this, every individual had different ideas as to what this 
round table should do, the issues that it should be focusing on, 
and the outcomes. So that’s one of the processes of the 
consultations is to try and come to a consensus on what we 
hope to achieve with the business/labour round table. 
 
Dealing with legislation and review of legislation isn’t an 
option at this time — that’s not what the board or the round 
table was intended to do. What we’re looking at is what should 
be our focus, general issues that affect all of Saskatchewan, but 
not specifically legislation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, to you and your officials, 
welcome. Madam Minister, you had mentioned when you 
started this discussion this afternoon that you were pleased that 
Women’s Secretariat had came back from where it was 
originally and is now into Labour. 
 
Can you give me a . . . for the last number of years, I’ve 
questioned the minister on the Women’s Secretariat and I’ve 
. . . she’s been so pleased to tell me that this entity is standing 
alone and it deals with all the issues that are affecting women in 
this province. And I think at that time there was 11 staff 
although I don’t have the figures in front of me now. 
 
Could you tell me how many staff you have now and how you 
can possibly be dealing with all these same issues when we’re 
down to probably less than a third of what we were six months 
ago . . . three months ago? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The member opposite, when she made 
her comments . . . I am very pleased that the Women’s 
Secretariat has come back into the Department of Labour. As I 
said, it has a very long history and going under a variety of 
names, but whatever you call it, this group of very dedicated 
women has done a wonderful job researching, doing analysis on 
women and women’s issues throughout the province, and also 
having input. I don’t think they have received as much credit as 
they should have for the pay equity research and work that they 
have done over the years. 
 
But what we’re looking at now is a different focus. The core 
policy unit will be back in the Department of Labour; we will 
have a director, two policy analysts, an administrative assistant. 
That will make up the Status of Women office itself. There will 
be a communications person dedicated to maintaining and 
focusing on the numbers, great numbers, of publications and 
information that was put out previously by the secretariat. 
 
(16:00) 
 
One of the things that’s very important to the community 
women’s groups and the women’s groups throughout our 
province is the publications and communications. So we are 
looking to maintain that through a communication person 

within the Department of Labour dedicated to women’s issues 
and focusing on women’s issues and women’s publications. 
 
Also, as I made mention in my opening remarks, the women’s 
policy advisers that have been designated in every department 
and in the Crown Investments Corporation, to have a focus and 
responsibility to ensure that women’s issues are given priority 
and a focus in initial stages of policy development that is done 
within each department. 
 
So while it is a change, I think it is a . . . Well I truly believe 
that it’s a change for the better; that the Women’s Secretariat 
and the various groups that there has been over the years have 
built a very good foundation, a very solid base, for which to 
spread out. And now to have a women’s policy adviser in each 
department, branching out and having a more direct influence 
on policy as it’s developed within the departments, I think, is 
going to be a huge improvement and step forward for us. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, thank you. 
Madam Minister, I know that women have been doing . . . in 
this office have been doing an enormous amount of work over 
the last few years, and of course they haven’t been given the 
recognition for it. But I’m not sure that this change is going to 
make things better. 
 
I know that you must have had the number of letters I’ve had 
from people who are very frustrated with the fact that there used 
to be a department that women could go to, that if they had an 
issue, they knew they could call the secretariat. And now all of 
a sudden, they’re lost in a Department of Labour that . . . I’m 
not sure why Labour would be the right department for this 
group to go to because women’s issue transcends the 
boundaries of just working women. 
 
But I know that I’ve had a lot of correspondence from people 
who are very frustrated at the . . . at your government who has 
been talking for years about the importance of women’s issues 
and how — underlining the fact that you have a department 
specifically for women — it just all of a sudden got lost. 
 
Now we’ve been speaking in the last few weeks about other 
areas where the government has lost their priorities, and I 
believe that this one is one that women are going to find out that 
again they’re not going to know where to turn to. 
 
I was waiting and looking in the budget book to find the line 
that talked about how much money this . . . your area was going 
to be receiving. Last year I believe it was around the million 
dollars mark, and it’s not even a line item in your . . . in 
Labour’s budget now. Could the minister please explain to me 
how much money is going to be allocated for the work that 
women are supposed to be doing. And how we can possibly 
have the same amount of work done when we have fewer 
people doing the work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I’m surprised that the 
member opposite . . . Actually when you look at the numbers 
there is more women and more direct focus on women’s issues. 
They are spread throughout every department which will give I 
think a better network for the work that has been done. 
 
There’s also the centralized, with the Status of Women’s office 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

in the Department of Labour. That will be the window for 
access and for communications to community groups and 
women’s groups throughout Saskatchewan. I truly feel that this 
is a better approach to take. 
 
As I said previously, the Women’s Secretariat and the work 
that’s gone on in fact over the last 30-whatever years — a long 
time — has built a very good base for women’s issues in this 
province. They’ve done a huge amount of research that is very 
good and now we are branching out. And it’s not less;, it will be 
more — more staff, more people focused on these issues. We’re 
doing it better, a little differently, but I believe it will be a better 
outcome. 
 
And when you commented on the Status of Women or the 
Women’s Secretariat coming back into the Department of 
Labour, and the Status of Women’s office being in the 
Department of Labour, and why the Department of Labour — 
women’s issues are quite prevalent in the Department of 
Labour, whether it’s labour standards; whether it’s minimum 
wage; whether it’s our work and family unit that does a great 
deal of work in balancing work and family. Many of the issues 
we deal with on a day-to-day basis have to do with women, and 
in fact a larger scale, families. 
 
So I guess I disagree with you that . . . the Status of Women 
office is a perfect fit for the Department of Labour. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
women’s issues are prevalent in a lot of areas. Women have 
concerns in Agriculture; they have concerns in Economic 
Development; they have concerns in Health; they have concerns 
in Social Services. So to say that we’re going home to Labour, I 
think is sort of a — it isn’t giving women who aren’t concerned 
just with the idea of Labour itself — it’s not giving them the 
notice that they deserve. 
 
Madam Minister, I think that being able to talk about women’s 
issues in every department is a good idea. I want to know how 
you’re going to be able to measure your outcomes. How are you 
going to be able to show that women’s voice is being heard 
when women phone into the office and say, how can I get my 
voice heard; how are we really making a difference? 
 
I noticed, Madam Minister, when I was in British Columbia a 
while ago, they didn’t remove their women’s department; they 
actually enhanced it. And they took some of the pressing issues 
from other departments and put them under this department. 
 
So, Madam Minister, can you please indicate to me how we’re 
going to have a measured outcome of the result of this change. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The member 
opposite asked about the . . . I guess the accountability and how 
we are going to measure outcomes. There’s many structures in 
place, and when you look at the foundation that the Women’s 
Secretariat built with the research they have done and the work 
that they have begun, I believe those structures are in place, and 
the tools to measure. 
 
One of the exciting parts about this is, is that the core policy 
unit that will be in the Department of Labour, while not only 
being a single window of access for women’s groups and 

organizations and organizations that deal with women’s issues 
throughout the province — that’s their source or point of 
contact into the government — but the structures and the 
functions, I mean, to have them spread out into the departments 
will give us I think better access to the departments than what 
was had previously by the Women’s Secretariat. We will have 
input at the very beginning of policy development and research 
that is done within the department. 
 
Also the women that are designated women’s policy advisers in 
each of the departments brings with them the knowledge that 
they have of that department. That is something that we didn’t 
have before in the secretariat. 
 
This branching out I think will be a very good move and having 
that knowledge that is out there in the departments and being 
able to focus that and fed back through into the core policy unit 
in the Department of Labour for networking. 
 
Because you and I know you can’t put someone out into a large 
department and say, we are charging you with this 
responsibility. That person has to have a network of support, a 
network of resources. That’s why we are looking at a system to 
have feedback back to the core policy unit and the Status of 
Women’s office at the Department of Labour. None of these 
things work in isolation so there has to be that network and that 
resource base that will continue on, and I think serve the 
purpose very well. 
 
There is accountability built into the process. There is tools in 
place. That isn’t . . . I don’t see that as being a concern. And 
when we have talked to women’s groups . . . I have spent a 
great deal of time talking to women’s groups across the 
province over the last little while having discussions, some brief 
discussions in some instances, other instances a little longer. 
 
One of the things we would like the core policy unit and the 
Status of Women office to work on is an action plan for 
Saskatchewan women. So that will really be our focus over the 
next little while. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I am always looking and 
open to change and if we can do something better then I think 
it’s a good idea. I know that there were many issues that I think 
would require more . . . we needed more help in. 
 
The whole idea of working with Native women. I think that 
there was not the same opportunities, or I’m not saying neglect, 
but I do believe that there was more work to be done that we 
hadn’t seen. 
 
Women entrepreneurs. And I know that the Women’s 
Secretariat has put some money towards women of distinction 
and that type of thing, and that’s fine and dandy but it maybe 
isn’t the same opportunity to actually help with the problems 
that women may have in that area of life. 
 
So I am quite open to the idea of seeing how this is going to 
work. I’m imagining that women from the various departments 
are going to be able to get together on a monthly basis or some 
basis, and bring forward their ideas to your Status of Women 
department. 
 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

 

I am concerned, however, that I don’t even see a line item in 
your department that talks about the Status of Women. We had 
a secretariat last year that was right on . . . in the department. 
This year, it’s not even noted in the Department of Labour. 
 
So again, I’m going to ask you the question: how much funding 
is going to be given to the Status of Women department within 
your Department of Labour? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the Status of Women’s office 
comes back into the Department of Labour into the support 
services division. It will be a separate office unto itself with that 
designation, the Status of Women’s office. It will be a separate 
unit, much the same as the balancing work and family unit will 
be. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, does that mean that this 
department or this separate unit is going to be able to spend the 
unlimited money it’s going to take to bring women’s issues to 
the forefront in everybody’s mind in this province? 
 
I know that the secretariat the last number of years has had 
concerns because they didn’t have the funding it took to make 
sure that women’s issues were brought forward to various 
groups and departments. And you could advertise and let 
entrepreneurs and every type of woman in the province know 
that women’s issues were important to this government. 
 
So what I’m asking you is, is how much funding is going to be 
available to the Status of Women department within your 
Department of Labour? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite asked 
about unlimited funds. If I was Alice and this was Wonderland, 
it would be great. But there isn’t unlimited funds in any 
department. 
 
The Women’s Secretariat, when it came into the Department of 
Labour, will fall under our budget. It will be . . . that core unit 
will be funded through the Department of Labour. But the other 
. . . the women’s policy advisers that are in every department 
will fall under their budgets. So it gives us access actually to 
more staff. 
 
Like I said before, we will be delivering policy programs a little 
differently. And I know one of your concerns may be the grants 
and the funding that came along that way. What we’re going to 
do is we’re going to have to sit down over the next little while, 
once the two vacant positions are filled with permanent staffing 
positions filled, and decide where priorities lay. And with the 
action plan for Saskatchewan women, see what our priorities 
and where best our focus is, operating this a little bit differently. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, thank you for your answer. 
I’m looking at the estimates. I see that the Department of 
Labour went from 14.5 million to thirteen eight and you now 
include about the million dollars that came from the Women’s 
Secretariat. So it is considerably . . . it’s less money. 
 
And of course you can’t measure everything by dollars, and of 
course I know there’s not unlimited dollars. But I am concerned 

that I have listened for the last six years from your government 
talking about the importance of women’s issues and why you’re 
spending this money on it and now, all of a sudden, it’s not 
there. 
 
So I guess you’re saying that in the last . . . that in the next little 
while you’re going to come up with your game plan. So I 
imagine within the next couple or three months as we sit here 
and do estimates, that we will . . . by that time I will find out 
what you’re going to be doing, how much money you’re going 
to be spending, and we can have this discussion again. 
 
So thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I guess I’m a little bit 
disheartened that the member opposite looks at total budget 
dollars as a good measure of the effectiveness of a program. 
 
When you look at government departments right across the 
whole scope, every department has programs dedicated to 
helping women and families and dedicated to women’s issues. 
The totals are quite staggering in some departments, but the 
results are worthwhile. There isn’t a department in this 
government that doesn’t have a focus on women and women’s 
issues. 
 
So while the Women’s Secretariat, you may not see the budget 
that you’ve seen before, being it has come into the Department 
of Labour, it doesn’t mean that the focus is any less. This 
government has had a commitment for a number of years — a 
great number of years — to women and women’s issues and 
will continue to focus on those issues over the coming years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I just . . . for clarification I 
want to remind you that the . . . one of the first questions that I 
asked you was how you were going to measure the outcomes. 
Not necessarily . . . I indicated . . . I know it’s not just dollars. 
It’s measuring the outcomes. And you had indicated to me that 
you were going . . . you have some benchmarks in place. 
 
So I’m going to be watching with interest so that we can 
actually analyze as a group to see how . . . if this is more 
effective. And that’s the important issue. In lots of cases the 
only thing we can do, the only think I can do when I look at this 
budget is say women’s issues is gone as a line item? How am I 
going to be ensured that they were looking at it with the 
importance that it should be? 
 
So, Madam Minister, just again, the outcomes will be looked at 
by . . . not just your department by . . . but by us across the 
floor. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to turn to another topic 
concerning the Minimum Wage Review Board. The other day 
the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio reported 
on expenses racked up by the Minimum Wage Review Board 
over the last year, and it was reviewed . . . revealed that the 
board spent $800 for research and consultation services and that 
this was the only original research the board undertook. And 
I’m assuming the board requested and received other research 
material on which they based their conclusions. 
 
Back on February 25, the board sent to the Minister of Labour, I 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2002 

 

understand, one piece of paper with one sparse recommendation 
— that the minimum wage be increased. There was no 
background information, no explanation or documentation 
supporting the decision of the board. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I would just ask the minister whether she 
received supplementary information or a report from the board 
explaining their recommendation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite asked 
about the one-page recommendation that was put forward by 
the Minimum Wage Board. And I’d like to assure the member 
that the Minimum Wage Board does a great deal of research in 
its effort to make a recommendation to myself, as Minister of 
Labour, which I in turn take to cabinet. 
 
When — and actually in fact that question comes about because 
of an incomplete answer that I gave at a press conference — 
when the media asked about the recommendation, right away I 
got in my mind a one-page, very formal, written letter that puts 
forward the actual recommendation to myself. But that 
one-page recommendation comes attached to a report. Where 
the economic analysis is done, the recommendations and the 
rationale for it is put forward by the Minimum Wage Board, 
where their information and the economic analysis that was 
paid for and that was released in the claim forms that were the 
expenses with the Minimum Wage Board. 
 
But also the information that comes . . . and there’s a great deal 
of information that is out in the public realm that is not, or does 
not, have to be purchased. You talk about Stats Canada 
information from there, various other sources that were used by 
the Board, also work that was done within government by 
different departments discussing the effects of minimum wage 
and economic analysis that was done within government. 
 
So there was more than just a one-page report and that was 
something I’ve talked about a number of times. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well according 
to my information, the board spent $800 on research and 
consultation services and only did one original research. 
 
Could you also elaborate on the other research findings by other 
organizations, and you say in the department. What items did 
they look at as a board to determine the minimum wage? And 
also, could you table the report that was commissioned by the 
board? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, a great deal of the research 
that’s done by the Minimum Wage Board is information that is 
readily available out in public. Many of the presentations and 
work that was done is available from the various groups. 
 
But the final report and some of the presentations that are made 
to the Minimum Wage Board are done in a confidential manner 
that they won’t be released, and there is a variety of reasons 
behind that. But the complete report of all their findings that 
comes to myself, is put with the recommendation and goes to 
cabinet for a full discussion on the minimum wage 
recommendation and the decision is made from that. 

So the complete report, while you may obtain parts of . . . I 
know the chamber of commerce, I have received their 
recommendations. There’s a variety of reports out there where 
the organizations will give you a copy of or make them freely 
available but others aren’t. But the total report that comes with 
the recommendation is a cabinet document and is covered by 
confidentiality. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I cannot accept 
that answer. I believe that the people of Saskatchewan need to 
know that . . . how the board determines its recommendations 
and I believe that we need to inform the people of 
Saskatchewan how the decision is made and based on what. 
 
You made reference to — I forget how you put it — an 
economic study of some sort. It’s been recommended for a 
number of years that an economic impact study be done before 
any increases to the minimum wage be done. And I’m 
wondering when you made reference to this study, were you 
referring to an economic impact study or exactly what kind of a 
study that was done? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I guess we’re wondering exactly what 
type of economic impact study you’re discussing or you’re 
referring to. I know there was a number of . . . or a great deal of 
research done. There was economic analysis done on a variety 
of things. If you’re looking at an economic impact study and 
spending a great deal of money having this done . . . something 
more specific? 
 
I guess I’m sitting here thinking of someone on the radio the 
other day complaining about the board spending $1.59 six times 
for pastries. So if people are complaining about the board 
spending or buying six pastries at a buck fifty-nine apiece and 
then we’re going to turn around and spend a large amount of 
money on more studies and research, when there’s a great deal 
of research out there and a great deal of research readily 
available, it would be another debating point. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well I guess I have to ask the minister, what’s 
the point in forming the board if they’re not going to do any 
studying? How do they come up with their conclusions? What’s 
the point of it? They have to base their decisions on something 
so how did they come about their decision? How did they come 
about their recommendations they presented to cabinet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, when you look at the number 
of presentations that are made to the Minimum Wage Board, 
when they are sitting during their hearings and receiving 
presentations, many of the groups that submit presentations, 
whether verbal or written, have a great deal of economic 
analysis that deals with their sector or their areas of concern that 
are already in the reports. 
 
The board also, as you know by the expenses, has some outside 
information and statistics, economic . . . or research that’s 
provided to them; also the research that is readily available in 
many places; also the research and the analysis that is done 
within government at their request, for specific areas. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’d like the minister to name one 
study that the board looked at. If you say there’s a number of 
them there, name one. I’d like . . . I’d prefer you to name them 



April 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

 

all, but at least name one. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the Minimum Wage Board 
operates independently from government and sets its own 
agenda. 
 
In the final report that was delivered to me, there is pieces of 
reports and financial statistics that they used in their analysis, 
but I don’t have the complete reports that they used. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, right now, the new minimum wage 
is higher than Alberta’s. Alberta’s is at 5.90. Manitoba is at 6.50 
until April 2003. This is a fairly dramatic increase. 
 
And all I’m asking, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, on 
what basis did the minimum wage go up? Where did they come 
up with their conclusions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When the member opposite asks what 
justification and what rationale we use for increasing the 
minimum wage; there was a great deal of research done by the 
board and presentations made to the board. 
 
But I don’t think there’s anyone in this Chamber right now that 
doesn’t realize that the lowest income earners in this province 
need some supports in a variety of ways. 
 
Now the government provides a variety of income tax 
reductions to support families. And one of the ways that this 
can be done is, along with the economic rationale and 
reasoning, an increase to the minimum wage. These are people 
that have no ability to speak for themselves; they have no 
organization, no group. So the minimum wage traditionally has 
been . . . the Minimum Wage Board traditionally has spoken for 
the lowest income earners in our province. 
 
So while the economic research is there, the presentations are 
there by interested parties throughout the province. While the 
discussion is had at cabinet, there is a variety of issues that do 
go into this, and I believe the Minimum Wage Board has put 
forward a good presentation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I’d like to welcome you to this session today. I know it’s your 
first as the new minister and I appreciate the effort you’re 
putting forward. 
 
I do want to say though, I’ve spent the last half hour listening to 
the discussion between you and the critic. And in view of your 
last comments, Madam Minister, I would say that you don’t 
have the evidence, you don’t have the evidence statistically, to 
justify the increase in the minimum wage. It was purely a 
political decision. It followed along the philosophical lines that 
your government espouses. And it was timely. And there may 
have been an election coming up this spring, and it would be 
nice to get those kinds of things out of the way. 
 
I believe you admitted to that just a moment ago in your 
answer. You said that it followed in line with the ideals of your 
government and that it met the requirements to help people who 
were in great need, in terms of minimum wage support. Would 
you care to comment, please? 
 

(16:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, just a few comments for the 
members of the opposition. The economic analysis was there. 
The Minimum Wage Board put in a great deal of work. And if 
we look at the minimum wage from 1982 until 2002, if the 
minimum wage had have kept pace with the rate of inflation, 
minimum wage today would be $8.35 an hour. 
 
Minimum wage earners, statistics prove, spend 92 to 94 per 
cent of their income back into the community immediately to 
purchase goods and services. These folks aren’t saving to go to 
Mexico for the winter; they aren’t saving for a new car. They 
are working to survive. 
 
When you look at . . . I mean, just keeping pace with the 
minimum wage and also the minimum wage earner, if they’re 
working a full-time job which is 40 hours a week, which is 
pretty rare, they’re still living at 20 per cent below the poverty 
level. Minimum wage is not even comparable . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I’m having a difficult time 
hearing the minister’s response. Would the committee please 
come to order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Just to finish off the answer and to 
impress the members opposite that if the minimum wage had 
have stayed and . . . or kept pace with the rate of inflation over 
the last 20 years, minimum wage today would be at $8.35 an 
hour which would bring minimum wage earners closer to the 
poverty level. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:51. 
 


