















































Hansard: May 30, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1695 
 May 30, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the condition of Highway No. 23 west 
from Junction 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Hudson Bay and 
Kelvington. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a rare 
privilege today to present petitions that have been put together 
by the grade 5 class at Valley Manor School in Martensville. 
They took a particular topic and put a lot of work into it. They 
collected 556 signatures. And I would like to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately enact a law that would enforce all bicycle 
riders, in-line skaters, and skateboarders to wear an 
approved safety helmet. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of those students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really pleased to 
present a petition today on behalf of people who are concerned 
about the tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be found in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Hendon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
rise on behalf of citizens who continue to express a concern 
about the high cost of prescription drugs. The prayer reads as 
follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the great community of Melfort, and I’m pleased to present on 
their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with the overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The communities, Mr. Speaker, involved are Dalmeny, 
Langenburg, Martensville, and Marchwell. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Sedley, and 
Trossachs. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
dealing with tobacco offences: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; furthermore, anyone found guilty of 
such an offence will be subject to a fine of not more than 
$100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Hawarden and Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition for 
adequate, reasonably priced telephone service from the citizens 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

in Emerald Lake. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins and provide reliable cellular telephone coverage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Prince Albert, Warman, Martensville, 
and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition of citizens concerned about Highway No. 15. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the residents of 
Simpson, Imperial, and Liberty. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency. And it’s regarding the tobacco 
legislation that was put forth: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine not 
more than $100. 

 
And the signatures on this, Mr. Speaker, on this petition, Mr. 
Speaker, are from Mildred, Chitek Lake, Spiritwood, and Shell 
Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
residents of the province concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Spiritwood, 
Rabbit Lake, and Mayfair. 
 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 11, 23, 24, 32, 59, 132, and sessional paper no. 147. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as Chair 
of the Standing Committee on Estimates, I present the third 
report of the said committee which is as follows. Your 
committee considered the estimates of the Legislative Assembly 
and adopted the following resolutions. 
 
Main Estimates, 2002-2003. Resolved that there be granted to 
Her Majesty for the twelve months ending March 31, 2002, the 
following sums: for Provincial Auditor, $5,602,000; for 
Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate, $2,651,000; for 
Information and Privacy Commissioner, $105,000; for Conflict 
of Interest Commissioner, $122,000; for Legislative Assembly, 
$5,977,000. 
 
Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2003, the 
sum of $12,046,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 
Supplementary Estimates, 2001-2002. Resolved that there be 
granted to Her Majesty for the twelve months ending March 31, 
2002 the following sums: for Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate, $55,000. 
 
Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2002, the 
sum of $55,000 be granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Your committee recommends that upon concurrence of its 
report by the Assembly, the sums as reported and approved 
shall be included in the next Appropriation Bill for 
consideration by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Signed by Mr. Viktor Kaczkowski, Committee Clerk, and 
myself as Committee Chair. 
 
Therefore, moved by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, 
seconded by the member for Watrous: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

 

on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: what is the total amount of money 
that CIC has placed with private venture capital companies’ 
funds for investment; what is the current market value of 
these investments? 

 
Also on day 56: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: for the year 2002 to date, how 
much money has the Crown Investments Corporation 
placed with private venture capital companies for 
investment; what venture capital companies and/or funds 
received money for investment; what amount did each 
receive and what is the current market value of those 
investments, plus questions for a number of other years . . . 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what entity is 
responsible for the payment of legal fees incurred in the 
defence of lawsuits launched against the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund Management Corporation and 
its eight funds; what entities have suits against . . . 
outstanding against the SGGF and its funds; and for each 
lawsuit how much has been spent to date on the defence? 

 
And I have another question. I shall give notice on day no. 56 
and ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: is Mr. Gary 
Benson, the president of SGGF, paid by SGGF 
Management Corporation and/or any of its eight funds; if 
so, what is the total compensation for the year 2002? 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 56 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what was the 
total compensation paid by SGGF Management 
Corporation and/or any of its eight funds to Mr. Gary 
Benson in the year 2001? 
 
And I have similar questions, Mr. Speaker, for the years 
1996 to 2000 inclusive. 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: how many 
parties approached the Saskatchewan Government Growth 
Fund for capital investment in 2001; how many such 
applications were approved; how many were denied? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have similar questions for the years 1998, 
1999, and the year 2000. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure for me 
this afternoon to introduce to you and seated in your gallery, 
Ann Belobaba from Vancouver Island. Ann is here for the 
convocation of her son, Drew, who graduated from the College 
of Law in Saskatoon yesterday. 
 
She tells me that the family has Saskatchewan roots; one of her 
ancestors is the Hon. George Scott, an early Speaker of this 
House and a great Liberal. She informs me that the family were 
all Liberals in Saskatchewan. Since then, as the family has 
moved progressively west, I have to report they’ve moved 
progressively to the right but we know at least they’ve got good 
Saskatchewan roots. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Ann Belobaba to 
the House this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly quite a few very important guests and, Mr. 
Speaker, they are here for a Conference of Canadian Protocol 
Officials, exploring the role that protocol plays in modern 
democracy. 
 
And I’m going to ask each of them to stand as I introduce them. 
Now this is a little bit lengthy so if I start fast talking here, just 
. . . I apologize in advance. 
 
But representing Canada from the Office of the Governor 
General at Rideau Hall, Lieutenant-General (ret’d) James 
Gervais, Deputy Secretary, Chancellery; Ms. Michèle 
Lévesque, Deputy Secretary, Policy, Program and Protocol 
Branch. 
 
From the Department of Foreign Affairs and International 
Trade: Mr. Richard Kohler, Chief of Protocol; Ms. Caroline 
Chrétien, Deputy Chief of Protocol and Director of Diplomatic 
Corps Services Division; Mr. Claude Boucher, Senior 
Coordinator, Federal Provincial Relations. 
 
From the Department of Canadian Heritage: Ms. Micheline 
Ouellette-Rogers, Director, Canadian Identity; Mr. Kevin 
MacLeod, Manager, State Ceremonial and Protocol. 
 
From the Department of National Defence, Mr. Serge Bernier, 
Director, History and Heritage; from the Department of Public 
Works & Government Services, Mr. Gerry Wharton, Manager, 
Ceremonial and Protocol Services. 
 
And from the Parliament of Canada, International & 
Inter-Parliamentary Affairs, Ms. Claire Poulin, Director General 
and Chief of Protocol. 
 
Representing Ontario, from the Ministry of Economic 
Development and Trade, Mr. Roy Norton, Executive Director 
of International Relations and Chief of Protocol; Ms. Ishbel 
Halliday, Coordinator, Delegations and Special Events. From 
the Ministry of Citizenship, Ms. Nanda Casucci-Byrne, 
Manager, Ontario Honours and Awards. 
 
(13:45) 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

Representing Quebec, from the Ministère des Relations 
internationales, M. Pierre Loiselle, Chef adjoint du Protocole. 
 
Representing New Brunswick from the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, Ms. Anne Reynolds, Chief of 
Protocol. 
 
Representing Nova Scotia from the Department of Tourism and 
Culture, Ms. Colleen MacDonald, director of protocol. 
 
Representing Manitoba from the Executive Council, Mr. 
Dwight MacAulay, Chief of Protocol, Ms. Karen Bryk, Senior 
Protocol Officer. 
 
Representing British Columbia from the Intergovernmental 
Relations Secretariat, Mr. Marc-Andre Ouellette, Director of 
Protocol and Events, Ms. Heidi Elliott, Coordinator of Order of 
British Columbia. 
 
Representing Alberta from the Executive Council, Ms. Betty 
Anne Spinks, Chief of Protocol. 
 
Representing the Northwest Territories from the Department of 
the Executive, Ms. Carmen Moore, Protocol Officer, Ms. Kathy 
Bentley, Policy Advisor. 
 
Representing Nunavut from the Ministry of the Executive and 
Intergovernmental Affairs, Ms. Annette Bourgeois, Press 
Secretary and Protocol Coordinator, Ms. Margaret Nowdlak, 
Protocol Officer. 
 
And finally representing our province of Saskatchewan from 
the Provincial Secretary Division of the Department of 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, Mr. Michael 
Jackson (Conference Chair), Executive Director, Government 
House and Chief of Protocol, Ms. Irene Bauer (Conference 
Coordinator), Deputy Chief of Protocol, Ms. Gwen Jacobson, 
Protocol Officer, Ms. Liz Hugel, Protocol Officer, Ms. Debbie 
Saum, Executive Assistant to the Deputy Provincial Secretary. 
 
I’m sure that all members will want to join me in welcoming 
them here today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the loyal opposition, I would like to join the 
Provincial Secretary in welcoming our guests here that are here 
attending the Conference of Canadian Protocol Officials. We 
hope you enjoy the proceedings today and we hope you enjoy 
your stay in our province and we wish you all a safe journey 
back home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today is a very special day for me today. In fact, I’m 
wearing my special tie. In the west gallery are my parents, 
Angus and Glenna Addley, and my niece, Sarah. And why it’s 
such a special day is three years ago my niece was diagnosed 
with leukemia, and after a two-year plus very hard battle with 
leukemia, she is winning that battle and she’s very much an 
inspiration to all of us in our family and those that know her. 

And I just want to thank the hon. members for all their thoughts 
and prayers that have been conveyed to me and to her and to my 
family as well. 
 
My parent’s other grandchildren have all been able to be here to 
be introduced, and unfortunately, Sarah was not able to make 
the trip. Today she has, so I would ask all hon. members to 
welcome my hero, Sarah. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce students from my 
constituency. Wadena is the home of the Shorebird Festival and 
Pamela Wallin and also 22 great grade 4 students in the east 
gallery. 
 
They are accompanied today by their teachers, Tracy Ziola and 
Ms. Shay Strukoff, and also chaperones, Linda Kuras, Karen 
Paquachan, Jean Pauls, Linda Weber, Cheryl Melnyk, Shelley 
Mayer, Connie Rothlander, Claudia Linde, Crystal Scheller, 
Judy MacDonald, Jeannine Snell, Maureen McClymont, and 
Jay Lorenzen. 
 
And I’m looking forward to having lunch with you later on. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, a group of 23 grade 5 and 6 students from the M. J. 
Coldwell School in my riding and they’re sitting in your west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They are accompanied here today by Charmaine Stouse, their 
teacher. The group has just got here so they’re invited to take in 
some of the proceedings of the House, then tour the legislature. 
Then I’ll have the opportunity to catch up to them later for a 
photo and a visit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the youth of today are the 
leaders of tomorrow. And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that 
when the students of M. J. Coldwell School become our society 
leaders, we’ll be in very good hands. 
 
I ask all the members to offer a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a honour to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in this 
Assembly two people that are very special to me, as well, in 
your gallery. My mom and dad have joined us today. They are 
John and Alice Wall. Mr. Speaker, most of what I count as 
valuable in my life I owe either indirectly or directly to them. 
And so I’m grateful they could be here today. 
 
My father retired last year, I think it was, from being in 
business since he was about 16, I think. And my mom’s also 
recently retired, affording them the chance to travel around and 
do this. 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, my father is serving his third 
term on the Swift Current City Council, and my mom has been 
recently elected to . . . elected for the first time to the school 
board. I’ve cautioned both of them; I said given our political 
involvement, we’ll run the risk of being compared perhaps to 
some sort of Mennonite version of the Kennedy’s, Mr. Speaker, 
minus all the . . . minus the dancing of course. But they are very 
special to me and I just ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to the Legislative Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Pamela Wallin to Receive Honorary Degree 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina are 
holding convocation ceremonies for their graduating students. 
In addition to recognizing the graduates, convocation also 
provides an opportunity to bestow honours upon individuals 
who have contributed to Saskatchewan, Canada, and the world. 
 
This year, the University of Regina is presenting an honorary 
degree to trailblazing journalist Pamela Wallin. Ms. Wallin 
hails from Wadena and graduated from the University of 
Regina with an honours degree in psychology and political 
science. She will be honoured for her advancement of women’s 
issues and for her contribution to and success in the world of 
journalism. 
 
Among other distinguishing achievements, Ms. Wallin was the 
first female bureau chief on Parliament Hill. She currently hosts 
and produces Pamela Wallin’s Talk TV and the Pamela Wallin 
Cultural Weekends. She is the president of her own production 
company and she has also authorized a number of best-selling 
books, the latest of which is entitled Speaking of Success: 
Collected Wisdom, Insights and Reflections. 
 
Amongst her numerous awards, she was the first recipient of the 
United Nations UNIFEM (United Nations Development Fund 
for Women) Canada Award for outstanding contributions to the 
advancement of women. She is a member of the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit and she is the namesake for Pamela Wallin Way 
in her hometown of Wadena. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know from following her work and from having 
had the honour of meeting Ms. Wallin that she is very proud of 
her Saskatchewan roots almost as much as we, in 
Saskatchewan, are proud of her. 
 
I would like this Assembly to join me in congratulating Pamela 
Wallin on her Honorary Doctor of Laws from the University of 
Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Walkerton Inquiry 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, Mr. 
Justice Dennis O’Connor released the final report of the 
Walkerton Inquiry. The most interesting finding was that 
Ontario residents could be guaranteed safe water for an annual 

household charge of $19. I believe Saskatchewan residents 
would gladly pay this amount if it was going to ensure our 
communities have modern systems and qualified operators. 
 
So far, the Saskatchewan government’s response to the water 
crisis has been to threaten prosecution of municipal officials 
who operate substandard official . . . substandard systems 
because they can’t afford to upgrade. We all know that the 
threat of criminal charges for municipal leaders is an inadequate 
response. 
 
A Sask Water report estimated that the cost of upgrading the 
province’s water systems will be $300 million. 
 
We all know the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program 
is inadequate. We need to identify water quality as a national 
priority, and yes it will take money. We need a dedicated charge 
that goes directly into funding water system upgrades. This 
would be a far more constructive approach to the water crisis 
than to threaten municipal officials with jail. 
 
Twenty dollars per citizen to ensure drinking water is a drop in 
the bucket. Thank you. 
 

Announcement of New Seniors’ Housing 
Development in Regina 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I was 
delighted to be able to attend the announcement of an exciting 
new development for Regina. The Regina Lutheran Care 
Society today announced a unique $20 million housing 
development offering supportive living for seniors. The project, 
called Broadway Terrace, will offer enriched independent living 
in 123 suites plus a 15-bed personal care home. Construction is 
scheduled to begin next month with completion by the summer 
of 2003. 
 
Some of the features that make Broadway Terrace unique in 
Regina’s seniors’ housing market include use of the life-lease 
model, a basic meal program which is covered by monthly rent, 
and the inclusion of a personal care home within the building 
giving residents access to additional care within their supportive 
community. 
 
The building design includes a central atrium that will provide 
natural light throughout the 11-story building. Of course the 
building will be wheelchair accessible. 
 
Broadway Terrace is open to residents 55 years of age or older 
from all denominations and cultural backgrounds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina Lutheran Care Society was founded in 
1960 when a group of interested Lutherans recognized the need 
for a nursing home for the aged in Regina. It has operated a 
long-term care home since 1964 and later added a housing 
complex. 
 
I am pleased to see the care society’s building on this strong 
foundation of service and is continuing to meet the needs of 
seniors in Regina and especially the development of housing 
that offers a nurturing and supportive environment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome/Fetal Alcohol Effect Programs 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today in the legislature to discuss a very serious issue for many 
Saskatchewan people. Fetal alcohol syndrome, or FAS, and 
fetal alcohol effects, or FAE, is 100 per cent preventable yet 
every year in this province hundreds of children are diagnosed 
or born with these conditions. This neurological disease is 
caused solely by the consumption of alcohol during pregnancy 
which causes damage to the brain. Those affected can’t process 
information in a typical manner, often leading to behavioural 
problems. 
 
This disorder can have devastating consequences not only for 
those affected but also for their families. Mr. Speaker, there are 
programs starting to address some of the needs of FAS and FAE 
sufferers but much, much more needs to be done. 
 
In addition to programs aimed at prevention, programs aimed at 
early intervention for children with FAS need support. Part of 
promoting the seriousness of this issue to the people of 
Saskatchewan is official government recognition of FAS. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I will be 
introducing to this legislature, Bill No. 203, An Act to 
Recognize Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Day in Saskatchewan. This 
Act would officially name September 9, Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome Day in this province in perpetuity. 
 
Our best hope for the prevention of FAS and FAE is increased 
public awareness. And it is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that this 
legislation would serve that purpose. I urge all members of this 
House to support this Bill and support all efforts to combat FAS 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

“Saskatchewan Books Go Public” Campaign 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, I’m quite 
proud to be the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
with the most extreme case of writer’s block in the Assembly. 
In just a few blocks in Regina Lakeview constituency, not far 
from here, reside authors Siggins, Mitchell, Bowen, Warren, 
Gault, Lohans, Birdsell, and Holmstrum. This collection of 
authors makes me proud, and makes Saskatchewan nationally 
recognized. But I have to admit that distinguished as they are, 
my block is just part of an excellent literary tradition in 
Saskatchewan that goes back at least to 1905. 
 
To make the public more aware of this important aspect of our 
culture and our history, the Saskatchewan Publishers Group is 
today launching a media campaign called “Saskatchewan Books 
Go Public”. The campaign is designed to spread the word about 
the incredible talent in Saskatchewan and to encourage all of us 
to buy and read Saskatchewan. After all, Mr. Speaker, there are 
over 15,000 available Saskatchewan book titles, enough to 
occupy more than a few summers. 
 
The campaign includes highway billboards, newspaper 
advertisements, weekly book reviews, a weekly radio program 

on Regina’s new community FM radio station CJTR, a new 
Web site, a yearly newsletter called Papercuts, and finally a 
poster-sized Saskatchewan book map. 
 
Good marketing, good tourism, good reading, Mr. Speaker. 
This is an admirable project with many hands and many 
supporters, and I congratulate them all. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Members for the Saskatchewan Party 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, over 600 new members have joined 
the Saskatchewan Party in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Southeast and they’re eagerly looking forward to nomination 
contests next week. 
 
Two high-profile candidates, Don Morgan and Kevin Waugh 
are seeking the Saskatchewan Party nominations and they have 
been actively signing up new members over the last few weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both of these candidates would make excellent 
MLAs and we are confident that one of them will join us here in 
this Legislative Assembly after the next election. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, strong membership sales in Saskatoon Southeast 
indicate that more and more people endorse the Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan to grow the province by 100,000 people in 10 
years. These people are tired of the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government and they want a change. They know that no 
change in government means no growth. These people 
understand that where you’ve been is not half as important as 
where you’re going. They support the Saskatchewan Party’s 
vision and they support the Saskatchewan Party’s plan to 
achieve that vision. They know that winners make goals and 
losers make excuses. 
 
The members from this side of the House wish both Mr. Waugh 
and Mr. Morgan success because we know that whoever wins 
the nomination seat in Saskatoon Southeast will join us in the 
very near future in this Legislative Assembly as a Saskatchewan 
Party government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Internet Company Joins TRLabs 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Great 
accomplishments usually come from co-operation and 
collaboration. A recent example can be found in Saskatoon 
where Itracks, a Saskatoon-based company, has joined TRLabs. 
Itracks is a leading provider of Internet market research 
software and data collection services for the market research 
industry. The company works with many of the world’s largest 
market research companies. Itracks joined TRLabs to advance 
their product and service offerings by leveraging TRLabs’ 
expertise and TRLabs’ partner network. 
 
TRLabs is Canada’s leading research consortium in the 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

 

information and communications technology. Based on 
industry, university, and government collaboration, TRLabs 
operates five laboratories in Western Canada — two of which 
are in Saskatchewan — where university professors, graduate 
students, industrial sponsors, and staff researchers work 
together to conduct applied research. 
 
Industry sets the direction of the program while universities 
contribute professors and students who develop the original 
research projects. Tim McNeil, executive vice-president, 
information systems for Itracks, says that his company’s new 
relationships with TRLabs is central to Itracks product 
development strategy. Co-operation and collaboration become 
the key element in surviving the most competitive of market 
environments — the Internet, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
valuable lesson for us all to learn. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Response to United States Farm Subsidies 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today The 
Globe and Mail is reporting that the federal government is 
considering a short-term compensation package of several 
hundred million dollars for Canadian farmers. This is a step in 
the right direction. And according to The Globe and Mail 
though, it appears to fall quite short of the $1.3 billion which is 
the number that the federal government itself identified as the 
impact of the US (United States) farm Bill on Saskatchewan . . . 
on Canadian producers. 
 
We have been assured that this government is working on the 
issue. So I ask the Premier, what details does the government 
have about this federal farm package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to say to the member opposite that we have had a . . . my 
office has had a conversation with the Department of 
Agriculture and the ministry. And we’re told that the federal 
Agriculture department and the ministry are working at putting 
a package together for Canada. 
 
I want to say to the House and to the member opposite, we’re 
extremely pleased today that the member of the opposition 
party is still onside as we work away to bring federal dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan and to Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
Because on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been 
working on this piece for the better part of a year. 
 
We’ve been talking about the importance of not only good 
agricultural policy for Canada and for Saskatchewan, we’ve 
been talking about additional money that we require for trade 
injury. And we’ve also been talking, Mr. Speaker, about the 
importance of getting additional money for drought. And to see 
the Leader of the Opposition still onside, Mr. Speaker, on day 
10 after we’ve been talking about this, is a wonderful event for 
this House and the people of Saskatchewan to recognize, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 
thank the Deputy Premier for the compliments, though we do 
know we are doing a very good job on this side of the House 
and polls are telling us that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on a serious matter, Saskatchewan farm 
families are looking for answers. And today’s story actually 
raises more questions than answers. How much money is 
Ottawa looking at? How much will Saskatchewan’s share be, or 
is it going to be fully funded by the federal government? How 
will it be paid out? When will it be paid out? Is Ottawa insisting 
that it be cost shared with the provinces or are they negotiating? 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the Premier or the Deputy Premier answer any 
of those questions today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I listened carefully to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s question. And I note in his comments and his 
question to me, he asks, Mr. Speaker, what is the provincial 
government’s share going to be. What’s the provincial 
government’s share going to be, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And as I said a couple of days ago, already, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a chink in the armour. The member from Watrous a 
couple of days ago said, Mr. Speaker, that we should be paying 
10 million full dollars out of Saskatchewan taxpayers to 
subsidize the federal government, Mr. Speaker. And today, the 
Leader of the Opposition stands up in the House when we’re 
talking about trade injury and he’s already suggesting, Mr. 
Speaker, that there should be provincial taxpayers’ money into 
subsidizing trade injury. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, you need to stay on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The member will make all his remarks 
through the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re not trying to make this a political battle. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re talking about a federal government whose cabinet is very 
close to making a decision. The province is running out of any 
time to have any input and say into what that decision is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is crunch time. We need $1.3 billion this year 
and we need a long-term commitment to continue this level of 
funding as long as the US farm Bill is in place. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has made it clear, Mr. Speaker, and I 
will reiterate it today in case the Deputy Premier is not 
listening, that Ottawa must bear this responsibility. It is a 
federal responsibility not to be cost shared by the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. I’ve said it 100 times; I don’t know why the Deputy 
Premier can’t get it through his head. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the government doing to make this case to 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

Ottawa? I haven’t heard one solid response from the Deputy 
Premier that any progress has been made. What steps is this 
government taking on behalf of farm families in Saskatchewan 
to ensure that the federal government comes through and 
prevents Saskatchewan taxpayers from having to pay an 
excessive bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the House and 
to the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, there’s 
no question about where this government has been, and this 
ministry and this department has been on agriculture for the 
past year, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been leading the parade, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we’ve been saying is we’ve been saying we need trade 
injury, Mr. Speaker, of which now, collectively, we think we’re 
going to get trade injury. We’ve been saying that we need 
drought assistance for the last year and a half, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve been saying that we need a new agricultural policy 
framework in Canada. And I say, Mr. Speaker . . . Of which 
we’ve been leading, by the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, I asked you way back in 
January of this year, I asked your critic of Agriculture, where 
are you, sir, on your agricultural . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask, once again, the Deputy 
Premier to address all his questions through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I asked the 
member from Kindersley and I asked the Leader of the 
Opposition back this year, early this year, where is your 
agriculture . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to take a little time, I want to take 
a little time so that the member has a chance to collect his 
thoughts and direct his questions to the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the member opposite 
and the Leader of the Opposition: where is the Saskatchewan 
Party policy direction on agriculture? Mr. Speaker, today I’ve 
not seen one, one word — not heard one word from the 
Saskatchewan people about what the Saskatchewan Party 
agriculture policy is, not one word. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Business Activities 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskTel. Mr. 
Speaker, in March SaskTel through SecurTek, one of its 
subsidiaries, announced that it was creating a new business 
venture called SafetyNet. This venture would supply senior 
citizens with personal alarm devices and monitoring services. 
The personal alarm devices notify the monitoring company if a 
senior needs help. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these types of security devices have been 

around for many years, but now SaskTel is getting into this 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is yet another example of SaskTel getting into 
an industry, starting a business that competes directly with 
businesses already doing this sort of thing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the minister responsible for SaskTel 
continue to approve, continue to approve actions and new 
ventures by SaskTel that compete directly with existing 
businesses in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well in a few short minutes already the member was not exactly 
accurate. He identified himself as the Kennedy that did the 
dancing, I don’t know what he’s doing up here asking 
questions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would, I would say to that member, Mr. Speaker, 
that SaskTel is in partnership with the private sector when it 
delivers this service, Mr. Speaker. The seniors in the 
community of Saskatoon, I know, in a number of conversations 
that I had, appreciate this service. 
 
SaskTel through SecurTek has partnered with many different 
companies here in Saskatchewan. It’s also partnered with 
private sector companies outside of Saskatchewan to bring 
revenues back to Saskatchewan. And what it has done, Mr. 
Speaker, is ensured jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Brad 
Brickner is the president of VS Response Systems of Regina. 
This company is privately owned and operated and has been 
providing this service here for a number of years. They have a 
partner as well in their venture, and their partner is the Regina 
Health District EMS (emergency medical services), Mr. 
Speaker, who monitor the devices and immediately respond to 
the seniors’ calls for help. 
 
VS Response System serves seniors across the city, and is 
proud of the years of service it has provided to this community. 
But now Mr. Brickner is very concerned — very concerned that 
he will be competing directly with his very own government 
through SaskTel. He called the minister to express his concern. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — He’s concerned at the prospect of competing with 
his own Crown, so he put a call into the minister’s office. But 
the response he got back, Mr. Speaker, was a letter from the 
president of his competition, Mr. Don Ching, the president of 
SaskTel. 
 
To the minister, to the minister: why didn’t he take the time to 
respond directly to Mr. Brickner and why does he insist through 
the Crowns on competing directly against Saskatchewan 
businesses in the province of Saskatchewan? 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I know 
I’ll get a round of applause when I read this quote from the 
opposition, but I think the answer really strikes at the very, the 
very heart of where the opposition is going here. I look in The 
Leader-Post of May 15, 2002 and I quote from that member, 
Mr. Speaker. He says that: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government would also end the 
practice of Crowns competing with private companies, he 
added. 
 

Mr. Speaker, but listen. Let’s really understand what this 
means, Mr. Speaker. With SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, they offer 
Internet services. So does the private sector, Mr. Speaker. They 
offer cell service, Mr. Speaker. So does the private sector, Mr. 
Speaker. I look at SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
who has been in competition for years, Mr. Speaker. I look at 
SaskEnergy, who is in competition with CEG (Constellation 
Energy Group Inc.). 
 
I’ve now listed off three of our major Crowns who he says, Mr. 
Speaker, he would not allow competition. What does it mean? It 
means those three companies are gone, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what it means. That’s what it means. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re asking on behalf of Mr. 
Brickner and others in this industry for a direct response to the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . for a direct response to these people as to why 
they would use their . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d ask members to . . . I’d ask 
members to stay in order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re asking them for a direct 
response to these businesses as to why they would use the 
Crown corporations to compete directly against Saskatchewan 
business now in the senior citizens personal alarm monitoring 
industry, Mr. Speaker. By his answers, it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has fallen and it can’t get up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the partnership that they have with the 
Regina Health District. Here’s the partnership that they have. 
This particular company, Mr. Speaker, pays the Regina Health 
District for each and every client, each and every client that 
they have that they provide services for. So by getting into this 
business, this government, Mr. Speaker, is now competing not 
only against this business, but against the Regina Health 
District. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Would the minister please inform the Assembly if he approves, 
if he personally approves of that, of his Crown corporation not 
only competing against Saskatchewan businesses, but against 
the Regina Health District? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in trying to respond 
to that question, as a subscriber to Access Cable myself, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last monthly bill I got — I just pulled this out — 
I see in cable service that I receive, on the front cover, Mr. 
Speaker, I see a cell phone, Mr. Speaker, is what I see on the 
front of my bill. A cell phone, Mr. Speaker. That says to me . . . 
And they’re partnering with Rogers AT&T, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
who they are partnering with. 
 
So that member would have us clear the way so that SaskTel 
couldn’t partner with any private sector, but allow a company 
and a corporation like Rogers and AT&T to come here in 
Saskatchewan, offer cell service, Mr. Speaker, take the profits 
and revenues outside of Saskatchewan. What sense does that 
make? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund. 
 
Yesterday Saskatchewan taxpayers heard that yet another 
scandal involving the NDP government. This time it turns out 
that the SGGF (Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund Ltd.) 
lent more than $50 million to two leasing companies, one of 
which is owned by John Johns, a former member of the SGGF 
board of directors. Another leasing company is owned by Roy 
Lloyd who serves as a financial adviser to the SGGF. The two 
leasing companies, Cajon Leasing and R & R Leasing, used the 
money to buy cars and computers and other equipment which 
they have leased to the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immigrant investor monies managed by SGGF are 
supposed to be used to invest in small- and medium-sized 
Saskatchewan businesses. Why is the Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund funnelling millions of dollars into 
untendered leasing contracts so the NDP can use the money to 
buy government cars and computers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to pick up where we left off yesterday and correct a 
misinterpretation I’m sure the member didn’t mean to leave. 
 
He said yesterday there were not tenders put out on these 
contracts or on these vehicles we bought. Simply incorrect. I 
want to let people know that SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) tendered. I want to make this very 
clear — SPMC tendered. 
 
Now to the question today. I’m quite prepared to pick up where 
we are now and talk about this. Let’s understand the reason why 
these companies are set up the way they are. They’re set up the 
way they are because the immigrant investor funds require 
certain requirements. They require it to be through these 
corporations. We go through the corporations. The auditor 
audits the corporations. We’ve used the funds appropriately. 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

They’ve been used in . . . (inaudible) . . . of the taxpayers. And 
the members opposite should apologize for accusing us of 
anything else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the mandate of the 
Saskatchewan government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the mandate of the 
Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund is to provide 
investment capital for small- and medium-sized Saskatchewan 
businesses. The goal is to encourage new job creation and 
diversify the Saskatchewan economy. But the NDP government 
used $50 million from these investment funds to purchase 
government cars, computers, and buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does leasing cars to the government help 
grow Saskatchewan? How many new jobs were created as a 
result of the NDP government using $50 million from the 
SGGF to finance the acquisition of government cars and 
computers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear 
about . . . I think the members opposite are playing a bit of a 
shell game here. I think that they should be very upfront and 
honest about what the SGGF is there for. 
 
The SGGF is there to make investments and to make secure 
investments on behalf of these immigrant investors. This is not 
like the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. I want to make this very clear. This 
is not like the 1980s. There is a requirement for us to make sure 
that they’re secure investments. This is part of what we’re 
doing. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, and be very clear about this, 
this investment growth fund has invested in some 59 different 
Saskatchewan businesses — now they single out 2 — 59 
different businesses, $195 million worth of investment. This is 
part of what we have this growth fund there to do and part of it 
is to invest in secure leases and that’s what we’ve used it for. 
And that’s perfectly appropriate and the members opposite 
should understand that and they should make that very clear in 
their question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the summary of the SGGF III to 
VIII inclusive, indicate that 45 per cent went to those very 
companies that the minister talked about; 55 per cent of the 
monies went to the two leasing companies — 55 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. What did they spend the money on? They bought 
leased cars and computers and buildings. Untendered contracts, 
Mr. Speaker, so the taxpayer has no idea whether the 
government was taken to the cleaners or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the NDP government to come clean. 
Will the minister table a list of all the cars, computers, furniture, 
surveillance cameras, buildings, and everything else the NDP 

government acquired, along with copies of the $50 million 
worth of leasing contracts they signed with R & R Leasing and 
Cajon Leasing so that the taxpayers, for themselves, can figure 
out where all the money went? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me say 
this again for the member so that when he makes his apology 
after . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Now I hope the member opposite writes this down so that when 
he apologizes after the question period he can be very clear 
about this. 
 
These items were tendered. In many cases these items went to 
tender; not only for the cars, they went to tender with . . . 
through the Crowns. Where we’ve used it, we’ve made sure 
there’s value. 
 
But I know why the members opposite have a problem 
understanding how the fund is used now as opposed to when it 
was in the ’80s. The difference is, Mr. Speaker, that when we 
put out a tender, we make sure we get the goods that we paid 
for and that is a big difference from the way that those guys 
would operate things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, given the, given the mass of 
political scandals plaguing the federal government these days, 
the federal Liberal government, Jean Chrétien can hardly be 
considered the best judge . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, even Jean Chrétien and the 
federal Liberal government recognize that the NDP’s use of $50 
million for lease is inappropriate and it stinks. The Provincial 
Auditor of the province of Saskatchewan thinks that the NDP 
deal also stinks. Mr. Speaker, most of the people in 
Saskatchewan think the same way. 
 
It’s time for the government to come clean. Release a list of 
everything the NDP government acquired with the $50 million 
from the SGGF and release the copies of all the leasing 
contracts the government has signed with R & R Leasing and 
Cajon Leasing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, let me be very clear 
about how this works. The funds that were from the immigrant 
investors were invested in secure lease arrangements. We 
tendered. We have gone to other leasing arrangements. We have 
tendered for that. 
 
And do you know what we found? We found that when we put 
them out for tender, the SGGF money still came in at a better 
cost for taxpayers. 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

 

I want to say that the members opposite should understand that 
this is to the benefit of taxpayers. Yesterday there were some 
rather interesting accusations made in the rotunda about the way 
the SGGF was managed. 
 
Let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker. What we are making sure is 
happening here is that these funds are used in a secure fashion 
for the benefit of Saskatchewan people, that we are protecting 
the money that the immigrant investors have put into this 
province, and that they are being used for our best interest. 
 
And to hear that party opposite stand up and accuse us of being 
like the federal Liberals, let me tell you this. I have not stayed 
in any chalet, Mr. Speaker, but I do in my other department run 
a hotel that several other members, former colleagues of theirs 
are currently guests in. And I think we need to understand that 
is not something we are going to be . . . (inaudible) . . . on this 
side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Action Plan 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the government has finally 
introduced its legislation from the health action plan. But 
outside of the bureaucratic shuffling of the health districts into 
the new larger regions, the health action plan is a lot of plan and 
not much action. 
 
People had hoped that the government was serious about 
reducing waiting lists, installing CT (computerized 
tomography) scans in regional hospitals, and about reducing 
ambulance fees. But there’s nothing in the legislation 
introduced yesterday that will do anything to deal with the 
fundamental problems of three-year waiting lists for hip 
replacements, and patients going out of province and paying 
$1,000 so they don’t have to wait one year for an MRI 
(magnetic resonance imaging). 
 
We’re getting the new health regions. Everything else in the 
action plan is a wish list. 
 
When is the government going to deal with the fundamental 
real issues of health crisis in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s curious that the member 
opposite has not been around and heard about the various things 
that we are doing that implements our health plan, that has us 
move forward together with the people of this province. 
 
We have now the surgical registry established. The people have 
met the surgeons and other senior administrators. They are 
tackling the wait list issues. We have the Quality Council 
legislation introduced. We have new health research foundation 
legislation introduced in this House. We have The Regional 
Health Services Act, which was introduced yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue to work with the people 
right across the province to make sure that we have a system 
that works very well for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hillson: — But, Mr. Speaker, that’s the whole point. The 
waiting lists are going up, not down. So we’re getting the new 
health regions — that’s all we’re getting. 
 
City residents are guaranteed that if they have to be transferred 
from one hospital to another or from the nursing home to the 
hospital, there is no charge. Rural residents are routinely 
charged hundreds and even thousands of dollars for the same 
service. 
 
EMTs (emergency medical technician) in the city are paid an 
average of $3 more than they are in the country. This makes it 
very difficult for rural districts to keep qualified staff. The 
government said they were going to deal with these issues. 
They promised it in a health action plan. The NDP promised it 
in its 1999 election campaign. But as I found, waiting for the 
NDP to make good on its promises is like the old Freddy 
Fender hit song, “Wasted Days and Wasted Nights.” 
 
When will the government move on its promise to have 
standard ambulance charges across the province that do not 
discriminate against rural residents, rural patients, and rural 
workers? Or does the government really think that the new 
health regions will get this province out of its last-place 
standing in health care in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased last week 
to introduce The Paramedics Act to deal with a number of the 
issues around emergency medical services. We put in a half a 
million dollars to train more of the emergency medical 
technicians to be part of the whole emergency medical system. 
We have a new airplane that’s providing service across the 
province. 
 
I think maybe the more appropriate member for that . . . more 
appropriate song — and I won’t sing it but I’ll say it — is “Hit 
the Road, Jack.” Go to Ottawa and get some money from 
Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 203 – The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Awareness Day Act 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 203, The Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome Awareness Day Act be introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Bill No. 62 — The Health Statutes Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à certaines lois sur la santé 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 62, The 
Health Statutes Consequential Amendments Act, 2002 be now 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a 
second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 
ask leave of the Assembly to move a statement of condolence in 
regards to the untimely passing of Mr. Carl Block. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the leave of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with deep regret that I rise today in regards to 
the passing of Mr. Carl Block on May 28, 2002. Mr. Block was 
killed in a light plane crash at the Great Sand Hills on Tuesday. 
 
Mr. Block was a rancher and a prominent individual within the 
Saskatchewan and the Canadian cattle industry. He served 
numerous organizations across the province in various 
capacities. 
 
Mr. Block was active in the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association, serving as president for the years 1995 to 1996. 
Within the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, Mr. Block 
served as a director from 1993 through to March of 2002. Mr. 
Block also served as Chair of the Animal Health & Meat 
Inspection Committee from 1996 through 2001, the Animal 
Health Research Committee from 1995 to 1997, and foreign 
trade from 1995 to 1997 and again from 2000 to 2002. 
 
Mr. Block was also the past chairman of the Canadian 
Cattlemen’s Quality Starts Here from 1997 to 1998. And most 
recently, Mr. Speaker, he was on the board of directors for the 
national checkoff and was the current chairman of the Canadian 
Animal Health Coalition. 
 
Mr. Block was the principal leader in the establishment of the 
national cattle identification program that continues . . . and 
continued to serve as a director for the Canadian Cattle 
Identification Agency of which he was chairman from 1998 to 
2001. 
 
Mr. Block believed that animal health and product safety were 
important industry issues and was appointed to the International 
Trade Advisory Committee and Sectoral Advisory Groups of 
International Trade, ITAC and SAGIT, and has made a 
prominent contribution, Mr. Speaker, in the area of animal 
health internationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Carl was a great contributor to the beef cattle 
industry and generously gave of his time to issues he viewed as 
important. He was concerned for maintaining the development 
of a strong cattle industry that allowed producers to get a good 
return for their efforts. 
 
Carl believed trade to be an important issue, especially those 
factors such as animal health, product safety, offshore products 

which affected trade. Carl recognized that these issues had the 
greatest potential to either enhance or disrupt our market 
producer returns and have long-term effects on the health of 
Saskatchewan and the Canadian beef industry. 
 
In addition to the many, many organizations to which Carl was 
an integral part, Mr. Speaker, he along with his wife Pat also 
operated their own cow-calf and backgrounding operation in 
Abbey, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this afternoon that all members join with me 
in expressing our deepest sympathy to Carl’s wife Pat, their 
four children, Jennifer, Mary Jane, Neil, and Kristina, and to 
their three grandchildren. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to respond to the 
minister’s statement of condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for your respectful tribute to Carl Block. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m honoured to rise today to respond on behalf of members 
from the opposition. 
 
Mr. Block was indeed a well-known and well-respected figure 
in the Canadian cattle industry. As the Minister of Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Revitalization has indicated, throughout his life 
Mr. Block was an active member of a number of organizations 
throughout the province and across the country including the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, the Canadian 
Cattlemen’s Association, The Animal Health & Meat 
Inspection Committee, the Canadian Animal Health Coalition, 
and the Canadian Cattle Identification Agency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many of these organizations, Mr. Block not 
only was an active member but also served in various capacities 
ranging from Chair to director or president. It was here that Mr. 
Block’s natural leadership skills and thorough knowledge of the 
cattle industry were acknowledged and highly regarded. 
 
Mr. Block’s dedication to maintaining and developing a strong 
cattle industry was undoubtedly one of the main factors that led 
him to becoming involved in so many organizations. His 
involvement led to numerous significant contributions over the 
years. 
 
In addition to his outside interests and activities, Mr. Block and 
his wife, Pat ran a cow-calf and backgrounding operation on 
their ranch in the Great Sand Hills. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, our deepest condolences 
are extended to Carl’s wife, Pat, along with their four children, 
Jennifer, Mary Jane, Neil, and Kristina, and their three 
grandchildren. It is our sincere hope that they find comfort in 
their memories of their life with a truly dedicated man and a 
wonderful individual, and that they are able to gather strength 
from those around them during this most difficult time. Our 
thoughts and prayers are with the family. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce a 
motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by 
the member from Cypress Hills: 
 

That the statement just made in regards to the untimely 
passing of Mr. Carl Block be communicated to the Block 
family on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and respond to 
written questions no. 239 through 242 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for 239 to 242 inclusive are being 
. . . have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sitting to my left is 
Mr. Ron Styles, who is the deputy minister of Finance; and to 
my right is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of taxation and intergovernmental affairs; and behind 
me is Mr. Glen Veikle, the assistant deputy minister of the 
treasury board branch. Behind Mr. Styles is Mr. Terry Paton, 
who is the Provincial Comptroller; and behind Mr. McGregor is 
Mr. Dennis Polowyk, who is the assistant deputy minister of the 
treasury and debt management division. 
 
I’d like to move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $462,208,000 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
2003. 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And 
welcome to you, Mr. Minister, this afternoon and to all your 
officials. 
 
The time that we’ll spend on interim supply, Mr. Minister, I 
don’t think is going to be too long this afternoon with your 
request for a one-twelfth supply. We understand that we’re very 
close to the month of June. And as we move forward into the 
fiscal year, we know that there are a need to move forward with 
ensuring that various agencies and departments, of course, have 
their funding. 

A few items that we need to clarify this afternoon, Mr. Minister. 
But before I get into some specific questions, one of my 
colleagues wishes to address a very specific question, so we’ll 
begin with him first. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, my question deals with the Sask 
Water end of the budget. There was a program announced, I 
believe at the beginning of the month with reduced pumping 
rates and rental rates. With that money, how much do you feel 
will be . . . the budget will need to cover the reduced rates in the 
program that was announced at the beginning of May? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, no we do not have an answer to 
that question. That question should appropriately be addressed 
to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation in those estimates. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. The only 
reason I’m asking is because obviously it’s going to affect the 
whole budget — Sask Water’s budget — so much money then 
halfway through they announced this program. So I was just 
wondering if that’s going to throw out the whole budget figures 
for the year. 
 
But another question dealing with Sask Water I’ll ask: is any of 
the money going towards new programs coming up for the 
month of June for well digging or dugout digging or movement 
of water to address the drought for the cattle producers out 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, those questions would be 
appropriate for the estimates of the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. Those are detailed questions that pertain to that 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, not specific questions regarding the executive branch 
of government but a couple of questions in the area of lending 
and investing which is the bottom portion of the form that 
you’ve circulated. I want to thank you for providing us with that 
information. 
 
Two questions, Mr. Minister. First of all in that area you note 
that a share of investment is necessary for the Department of 
Learning. Could you indicate what kinds of things will be 
happening in the Department of Learning as far as the capital 
needed, the monies needed for that department for the month of 
June? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to the Department of 
Learning, Mr. Chair, the $66 million estimated is having to do 
with the student loan fund. And the amount shown, the 
one-twelfth interim supply, would be the estimated costs with 
respect to student loans for that month. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chair, to the minister, one of the categories that we’ve had 
some debate on in this Legislative Assembly is the newly 
created corporation that is dealing with the education 
infrastructure financing. 
 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

And in the budget, Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated that there’s 
almost $90 million that will be anticipated as far as an 
expenditure. I note that for the month of June you’re not 
planning on any additional costs, neither did you have some for 
the months of April and May. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you indicate what is happening with the 
capital program at post-secondary institutions, I guess 
specifically the University of Regina, the University of 
Saskatchewan; are they anticipating announcements in this 
area? 
 
And then the other question of course is regarding the 
kindergarten to grade 12 schools. The process that is in place is 
usually boards of education are notified quite quickly in the 
spring that they are successful in moving forward a capital 
project. Does this mean that with no request for monies that this 
program is going to be delayed into the fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think what this means, Mr. Chair, is 
simply that the projects are not so far along that money has to 
be released during the month of June. 
 
Projects may be approved either for post-secondary institutions 
or K to 12 at some point. I’m not sure if they’re quite at the 
point where they’ve actually approved the projects, but the 
money does not have to be paid out because they haven’t 
actually started doing any work. And so we don’t need to ask 
the legislature for interim supply, in other words, money to 
spend in June, because we won’t have any bills to pay. 
 
With respect to the approval of projects, all I can say about the 
post-secondary sector would be that they would be in 
discussions, the two universities, with the Department of 
Learning at the present time. And with respect to the K to 12 
system, the system that normally operates for the approval of 
capital projects would be operating in the same way as it 
usually does as far as I’m aware. 
 
But we simply don’t anticipate that we will actually be 
spending any money in June so we’re not asking the legislature 
to allow us to do that. We think that any projects that are 
approved will come on stream in the sense of having to actually 
pay people later on in the year, and we’ll wait, hopefully, until 
the entire budget is approved before asking for interim supply 
or . . . yes, before asking for actual money to spend. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that explanation, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, could you clarify the expenditure that I’ve just 
mentioned which is the proposed expenditure of over $89 
million in the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation. 
 
Could you indicate what additional expenses the Department of 
Finance, or the treasurer, or the people of Saskatchewan will 
incur as you borrow that additional money and allow it to be 
used by the school boards of the province, the post-secondary 
educational institutions? How will the costs of that borrowing 
. . . will it be applied directly to the taxpayers in a total sense, or 
will it be assigned directly to the projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Other than the interest costs on the money 
that is being borrowed, we don’t expect there to be very much 
in the way of costs. Whatever there is will be quite minimal. 

Institutions which access financing through the corporation, that 
is the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation, will have 
to pay interest on that money and . . . so that will be a cost to 
them. And they will expect, I’m sure, to receive the cost of that 
interest from the General Revenue Fund on an annual basis. 
 
So in that sense that will be a cost to the General Revenue Fund 
each year. That is, the cost of interest on the money that will be 
borrowed this year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this 
question may be better asked of the Minister of Learning, but 
you’ve indicated that the interest cost on the project will be 
charged from the General Revenue Fund. I’m wondering if you 
could explain . . . School boards’ shares of projects vary, 
percentage varies from one school board to another based on 
ability to pay. 
 
At the same time now we’re talking about interest that is 
accumulating on that entire amount. Both the government’s 
portion and the school board’s portion is now put together, and 
that entire amount as I understand it is now financed by the 
corporation. How will you break down the cost of interest to 
both the board for its share and the government for its portion 
of the interest cost on the total bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to the share that will be borne 
by the local authority, whether a school board or the university, 
they will . . . for their share that they’ve always had to put in, 
that will operate in the same way that it always has. They will 
either have the money or borrow the money and pay interest on 
their share. 
 
With respect to the share that comes from the province, they 
will borrow that amount from the corporation. That amount will 
also bear interest. So in that sense, they will have to pay that 
interest as well. But with respect to that new interest that they 
pay, they will expect to be reimbursed by the province. So that 
in the first instance, they will bear the cost but they will expect 
that cost really to be borne out of the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay, Mr. Minister. Thank you. If I 
understand you correctly, let’s use the situation where a school 
board — and I’ll use a school board first, Mr. Minister, not the 
post-secondary institution — a school board has a $1 million 
project and 60 per cent is being funded by the board and 40 per 
cent by the government, but the board does not have 60 per cent 
of the money sitting in a fund. So the old process of course was 
they would go through debentures and they would finance that. 
 
Is that now going to be financed separately as well or will they 
be able to finance their share, 60 per cent share, the 
government’s 40 per cent share entirely in one block through 
the Education Financing Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is no. With respect to their 
share, that would be treated as it always has been. So if they 
have the cash, fine. If they borrow it, fine. But they have to 
come up with that money. 
 
With respect to the provincial share, they will access that 
money through the corporation and, in that sense, they may 
have to pay higher interest because they’ll be paying interest on 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

 

the entire amount. Then they will expect us to reimburse them 
for their additional interest cost on the amount that they will 
borrow from the corporation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, has 
your department or the Department of Learning communicated 
this type of information to all boards? Are all boards 
understanding the situation and, in that way, do they . . . have 
they . . . are they waiting for projects to be approved or are they 
waiting for information from your department regarding how 
they can be financed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I don’t know if they would be waiting 
for information from my department. But I would say that 
certainly it has been communicated to school boards from the 
Department of Learning if not the Department of Finance, how 
this would work. 
 
And in answer to the part of the question, would everyone 
understand that? — I’ve learned that it’s not wise to say yes, 
everyone would understand it, because I’ve learned often 
people don’t understand things that may have been 
communicated. 
 
So there has been communication as to how this would work. 
There may be some people that either did not receive 
communication or see the communication, or who do not 
understand what has been communicated. But certainly what 
I’m saying is consistent with what the Department of Finance 
and the Department of Learning would have communicated to 
the various parties. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
we understand that some communication, you’re right, has 
occurred. But it seems that officials at the various 
post-secondary levels, at the school board levels, maybe had 
more questions than the information that they were provided. 
 
And I think that I can only stress that, you know, improved 
communication and continued communication take place. Since 
this is a new venture I think not only do we want the people of 
Saskatchewan to understand what’s going on, but we also want 
to make sure that those people making decisions and making 
choices also understand. 
 
Mr. Minister, just to indicate a couple of other questions in the 
area of revenue. And you’ve indicated of course that today 
we’re talking about one-twelfth expenditure for expenses 
incurred. We’re nearly two-twelfths or one-sixth of the way 
through the year, tomorrow being May 31. And we’re going to 
be into June very quickly, and that means a quarter of the 
government’s fiscal year. 
 
In your document on the budget you indicated values that you 
were using on various commodities, ranging from the interest 
rate to the Canadian dollar to potash to gas, oil, the like. Has 
your department — officials in your department — raised any 
concerns about the projected numbers that you used to 
determine what the revenue would be for the upcoming fiscal 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, the department has not raised 
concerns. The department officials advised me, Mr. Chair, that 

it is too early in the year. There are some positive indicators 
such as the price of oil is higher than we projected, the price of 
natural gas. But it is early in the year. 
 
We have not had any concerns expressed to us that we will not 
meet our targets. We are quite confident that we will in fact 
meet our targets. But as I have said to the member before, it 
really is only after the first quarter is over and then probably at 
least a month after that, that you can put together estimates of 
how you’re actually doing because it takes that long for people 
to remit their sales tax returns and so on. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that, Mr. Minister, and we do 
believe that maybe stability has returned to the world and to 
Canada as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other important sources of revenue of 
course for the province of Saskatchewan in its budget is 
transfers from the Government of Canada. Mr. Minister, last 
year the estimate for equalization payments was 377 million 
and you ended up the year with 492 million or thereabouts. And 
this year you’re projecting 530 million. 
 
Is there any discussions with the federal government regarding 
not only the equalization payments but the Canada Health and 
Social Transfer and all of the other transfers that occur from the 
federal government? Are we looking at additional monies 
coming to Saskatchewan from the federal Liberal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly in answer to the part of the 
question — that is, are there discussions with the federal 
government? — there are ongoing and continuous discussions 
with the federal government not only between Saskatchewan 
and Ottawa but all of the provinces and Ottawa, because we of 
course are always saying to the federal government that we feel 
that they should be more supportive of the health care system, 
for example. We feel they should be more supportive of the 
highways system. The post-secondary education system could 
certainly use more support and there are always discussions 
about equalization. 
 
So we have discussed these matters with the federal 
government. I’ve met with Paul Martin, along with my 
provincial counterparts, and also talked to him on the telephone. 
Of course, we’ve always . . . or also expressed concern about 
the agriculture situation. In addition to the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Premier talking to federal officials about 
that, I’ve certainly taken the opportunity to, when personally 
present with Paul Martin, raise that matter as well and also 
talked to him about it by telephone. 
 
So in answer to the part of the question, are we raising these 
issues with the federal government, the answer is yes. 
 
In answer to the part of the question, do we have any sense that 
with respect to equalization or Canada Health and Social 
Transfer (CHST), will we get more money this year? There is 
certainly no guarantee of that, no indication of it, and I’m not 
sure I would be all that optimistic for new money this year. 
 
I’ll leave the agriculture situation aside because that’s been 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

discussed already in the legislature today and the member 
knows as much about that situation as I would. 
 
But on the others, there have been some signals from the federal 
government lately that they feel that they should give us a little 
more money for health care, but nothing in terms of how much. 
And from what Paul Martin has told me, I don’t believe they 
would be sending anything in this current fiscal year. 
 
If they do anything I think the first time we’d see any new 
money would probably be next year. But I must say that’s a 
statement that’s quite speculative in nature, because there’s 
certainly no commitment but there’s been an indication that 
perhaps they do realize they should be doing somewhat more. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
you’ve indicated that your projections are difficult to talk about 
at this time as far as getting an understanding of where revenue 
sources are because we’re just a short two months into the year. 
So you’re talking more on the basis of a quarterly report. 
 
Similar contact here regarding the federal government regarding 
equalization, and I know you’ve given an explanation in this 
House — a good one — about how equalization payments are 
determined and the formula; and it’s a complicated issue. 
 
Does that kind of information come to you on a quarterly basis 
from the federal government so that you have an understanding 
about how Saskatchewan is doing relative to the other 
provinces, and how the equalization payment will be affected 
on a quarterly basis? Do you get that information at least 
quarterly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that the officials at 
the Department of Finance receive information from the federal 
government on an irregular basis throughout the year, but also 
on a continual basis throughout the year. So that a number of 
times each year, as the federal government is able to update its 
economic information, that information is then passed on to the 
provinces. 
 
And the updates that may occur throughout the year aren’t 
necessarily just in relation to the current year but may be in 
relation to past years as well, as they continually update what 
may have happened three years ago and two years ago and as 
they estimate what may be happening this year. 
 
So the answer is: they receive continual updates throughout the 
year at irregular intervals, but they are talking to the federal 
government several times throughout the year as to what their 
estimates are looking like. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, one final area that I’d like to get a bit of explanation 
on. In your budget, you’ve indicated that the government’s 
budget relies quite heavily on the profits from Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority. In fact, you’re looking at for this 
year, a $332 million anticipated revenue from SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority). 
 
Mr. Minister, over the last while we’ve heard about new 
contracts being signed with the Native community in terms of 
moving in the area of gaming, as far as a new gaming contract. 

Do you suspect that the numbers, the number that you’ve 
provided, which is 332 million, how that will be affected by the 
gaming contracts that the government has just signed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We have in our estimated revenue, factored 
in the assumption that we would have a new agreement with the 
First Nations with respect to the four casinos that they operate. 
And so the fact that the agreement has been signed will not alter 
our estimate. 
 
We had estimated that . . . you know, from our point of view, at 
the time of the budget we thought an agreement would be 
signed. We had an idea of where we wanted the dollar figures to 
end up. We knew what our negotiating position was with 
respect to costs, and that is the number we put into the budget, 
which is consistent with the agreement that was in fact 
subsequently signed with the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move resolution 
no. 2: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2003, the sum 
of $462,208,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
And I so move. 
 
And while that’s being taken up, Mr. Chair, I want to thank the 
opposition for their co-operation in moving the interim supply 
Bill along, and also the officials for their assistance here today. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 64, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2003, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

 

third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 
(15:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
is Mr. Brian Smith, who’s the executive director of the Public 
Employees Benefits Agency. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to 
your official, Mr. Minister. 
 
This Bill No. 17 is probably the shortest piece of legislation I 
have witnessed in my short time here. Just a couple of questions 
though if I could. The essence, I understand, is to change the 
age from 55 back to 50. And I’m wondering, is that just a 
previous oversight or is that a change of policy that has been . . . 
come . . . has come forward since it was first introduced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s correct, Mr. Chair. We made a 
change last year, I believe, to allow the members of the plan to 
access their funds at age 50. But we neglected to make the 
change for the spouse of a member who might be separated 
from the member and entitled to some of those funds. And we 
had left in the legislation a situation where the spouse of a 
member would have to wait until 55 to access his or her funds, 
but the member would be able to access them at 50. 
 
So we simply . . . It doesn’t change anyone’s substantive rights 
in the sense a spouse will only be entitled by way of court order 
or separation agreement. But if the spouse is so entitled to 
receive funds out of the pension, we believe that just as the 
member could access those funds at age 50, so should the 
spouse have the same right. And we neglected to include that in 
the change last year, which we should have done, and so we’re 
changing it this year to rectify the situation. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just for 
clarification then, on the record, could you just quickly review 
again the circumstances in which a spouse would be able to 
access this retirement fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. It would be if you had a member of 
the pension plan and that member became subject to a marital 
breakdown so that he or she was separated or divorced from his 
or her husband or wife, then a judge could decide that the 
spouse was entitled to a certain portion of the pension plan. Or 
as is quite commonly the case, the parties could agree on that — 
to split the pension plan. And it is in that situation of marital 
breakdown with a court order or a separation agreement, that a 
spouse would be entitled to access those funds. 

If you had a member of the plan who was happily married and 
their spouse at age 50 simply went and asked for part of the 
funds, he or she wouldn’t be entitled to them. He or she would 
have to have a court order or a separation agreement which said 
that he or she was entitled to get those funds. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Yes, thank you, and I think that kind of 
focuses exactly the kind of situation that needs to be in place. 
Now it would be hard to tell from . . . into the future how many 
people this might apply to. But could you give us an estimate of 
the frequency that you think this might occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It’s actually a relatively small number of 
people. There are about 30,000 active and 9,000 retired 
members of the plan. But the number of situations where 
marriages have broken down I’m sure is reasonably high 
because the divorce rate is fairly high in society. But the 
number where they agree, or the court orders that the spouse 
should get part of the pension is not all that high. 
 
In 1998-99 it was 39 cases, in ’99-2000 it was 52 cases, in 
2000-2001 it was 49 cases, and in 2001-2002 it was 31 cases 
where we were notified that there was a marital breakdown and 
either a court order or a separation agreement entitling a spouse 
to access some pension funds. 
 
So it’s a relatively small number of cases, but very significant 
to those spouses that may have gone through a marital 
breakdown and have to rely on part of that pension. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, if this really 
applies but if a spouse under those conditions is eligible for the 
pension, is the pension payable on a regular basis or is it 
withdrawn to that person in a lump sum? I guess I’m thinking 
here of the tax implications of this pension. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is, Mr. Chair, that the spouse 
would be able to do any of the same things that the member 
could do. And as the member will know, the . . . When a person 
retires and wants to take their pension, they could agree that 
they’re going to get it paid on a monthly basis or they could 
take a lump sum and invest that in a RRIF (Registered 
Retirement Income Fund), and whatever rights that they would 
have, the spouse would also have. It would almost be as though 
you had two separate pension plan members and each one of 
them would be entitled to take out their portion. 
 
And they might do different things too. One might decide to 
leave the money in until he or she was age 65, I suppose; and 
one might decide to take the money out at any time between the 
ages of 50 and 65. One might want simply to set up some kind 
of monthly payment for the rest of their estimated life and one 
might want to withdraw it all as a lump and invest it in the ways 
that they’re now allowed to do. 
 
But either of them would have the same options. And their 
options would be the same as any other members of the pension 
plan. The only difference really would be that in this situation, 
because there has been a marital breakdown, what would 
otherwise be one pension plan now would see the money 
divided into two names. And each of those people could come 
along at the time that was best for them and appropriate for 
them and arrange to take their money out, either monthly or all 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

at once. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Chair, I know it’s a small number and 
you indicated that it’s not a large . . . it shouldn’t make a large 
impact. 
 
Will there be an impact on the administrative responsibilities of 
the people that are administering the fund? And will there be an 
impact — I guess, significant impact — on the fund itself in 
terms of the ability to pay those . . . the pension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It would almost be an insignificant impact 
actually because the change, you know, would really just allow 
any of those, out of approximately 40 or 50 people, to access 
the pension now at age 50 instead of 55. So it really, out of the 
thousands and thousands of people that are dealt with each year 
by the Public Employees Benefits Agency and the thousands of 
inquiries they have, this additional feature would really not 
make much difference at all to their lives and it would be quite 
insignificant in terms of the administration of the plan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. When you go 
through a marital breakup and there is this provision for the 
spouse to access this at the same . . . pension at the same age, 
anything that we can do to make it easier for that transition 
would be useful. 
 
I’m wondering, is this kind of pension available . . . or the 
structure, is it similar in other provinces, do you know? Often 
we have to be competitive with other provinces and I’m 
wondering if this is rather an innovation that is peculiar to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Actually we are not aware of what they’re 
doing in other provinces but I would be pleased to ascertain 
that. We can ask the counterparts of Mr. Smith in the other 
provinces what they’re doing, and I’d be happy to send the 
member a letter setting out how we compare to the other 
jurisdictions in that regard. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, could you indicate when the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan was first set up? When did it take place? 
 
And I noticed in your remarks of April 11 you’ve indicated that 
we have 30,000, approximately 30,000 members that are part of 
the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. Could you indicate whether or 
not that 30,000 membership were people who joined the plan at 
the time when there was a matching contribution from 
government? Or are these . . . does this plan continue to grow 
on what you would call a very consistent basis year to year? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — The information I have before me today, 
Mr. Chair, and I’d be happy to get further information for the 
member, but the statistics I have go back to 1994. And that’s 
not a bad time to start, I suppose, because I think the matching 
contribution was eliminated in approximately 1993; it was 
something like that. I believe the plan started in approximately 
1986, if my memory serves me correctly. Mr. Smith says he 
thinks that’s correct. 
 
In 1994, 121 new members came into the plan, and that figure 
has gone up to 709 new members in the year 2001. And it 
appears that, generally speaking, the number of people joining 
the plan has been going up year after year with some minor 
variations. And starting with 121 in ’94; up into the 200s in ’95, 
’96; 300-and-some in ’97; 4 and 500 in ’98, ’99; a slight dip in 
2000 to 475; and then up to 709 in 2001. 
 
So the answer to the question would be that, notwithstanding 
the fact that the matching contribution was eliminated, the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan has been marketing the plan as a 
vehicle for people that have no pension other than perhaps the 
Canada Pension. 
 
And it’s encouraging people and employers of people who have 
no pension plan to register them in the plan and it’s meeting 
with some success as those numbers would indicate. So that’s 
the situation as it exists since the elimination of the matching 
contribution. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’re encouraged 
to see that indeed Saskatchewan people who don’t have access 
to any other pension plans at their work level are taking 
advantage of that, as you’ve indicated with over 700 and . . . I 
believe you said 709 applicants in 2001. That’s encouraging. 
 
Mr. Minister, some of those people that joined the pension plan 
a number of years ago I’m sure are receiving benefits today. Do 
you have any data that would indicate what an average benefit 
is being received by people of . . . that have now started to draw 
on the plan? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The average monthly benefit being 
paid is $41.17. And the largest monthly benefit is $181.34. So 
the average is about $41. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
your remarks on April 11, you also indicated that the fund has 
. . . the fund is managed by professional managers and they’ve 
done a fairly good job of investing that. And I think you 
indicated that over 10 years . . . over the last 10 years, there’s 
been a rate of return of about 10.7 per cent, which is, which is 
pretty good return. 
 
In the last couple of years we’ve seen a fair amount of volatility 
in the investment area. When we look at the last two years, have 
they significantly reduced that average of 10.7? Or has there 
been, you know, a continuation of a good return in the last 
couple of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, we don’t have with us the exact 
returns that the plan has made, but Mr. Smith, who looks at all 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

 

of the returns that all of the pension plans in the public sector 
earn, tells me that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has been, sort 
of, in the middle of the pack in terms of what it’s earned the last 
few years. It’s not the best in terms of its return but it’s not the 
worst either. And he thinks it’s roughly in the middle. 
 
So I’ll give that information and then I’ll undertake to get the 
exact rate of return for the last two years and to send that over 
to the member as soon as I have that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, that will be quite 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at the rate of return of 10.7 as an 
average for the last 10 years, that’s a good return for those 
people investing. 
 
And when you indicate in the House here today that the average 
amount of monthly benefit for those drawing benefits is about 
$41, that’s not a large amount of money. 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, are there maximums . . . 
maximum amounts that can be contributed to the pension plan? 
Or is it a wide open type of thing where people who indeed see 
the rate of return as a positive thing and are looking forward to 
retirement would be able to contribute much more? You 
indicated in your remarks, I think, that the fund contains about 
197 million today, to date. I am aware that before there used to 
be a maximum because of the matching contribution. Are we 
still in that kind of a scenario? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, there is a maximum that 
can be contributed which is $600 per year. 
 
And I should say that part of the reason that the average 
monthly benefit is so low is because the plan is relatively new. 
And so that people that actually paid into the plan but are 
already retired, you can see since it only started in 1986 in 
many cases would not have been contributing that long. 
 
So I mean for example, if somebody joined in 1986 at the age 
of 55 and they paid until 1996 when they turned 65 and then 
started drawing, they would have only paid in 10 years of their 
working life . . . or they don’t have to be working; they can be 
working in the home and so on as well . . . I mean they don’t 
have to be working outside the home. 
 
And so what we’ll see in the future, I think, is perhaps is the 
amount of monthly benefit going up because as the plan is 
longer in its life, people will also pay into the plan for a longer 
period of time and accumulate, you know, more money. And 
what we’d like to see is, you know, is somebody who might be 
20 years old enrolling in the plan and maybe be in the plan for 
40 years and eventually they would have a more significant 
pension. So that’s what we’re trying to do. 
 
And the other thing that we would be interested in doing is 
increasing the amount of money that a person could contribute 
to the plan. And I think if it was simply up to the province we 
would simply do that and would have done that before. But as 
the member will know, with respect to a pension plan we have 
to have the approval of the Canada Customs and Revenue 
Agency or what we commonly call Revenue Canada to allow 

pension contributions that are tax deductible. And they set the 
limit of what you can claim as, you know, a contribution to a 
pension plan. 
 
And when the previous government obtained approval from the 
federal government to set up the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 
they obtained approval at the $600 level. That’s the approval we 
have and I’m sure if a different government was here they 
would feel the same way that I do, that it might be in order to 
ask the federal government to raise that level so that people 
could contribute more. 
 
But I believe the federal government up until now has been 
unwilling to let us raise it because they’ve changed their policy 
about how much they want people to be able to deduct from this 
pension plan. 
 
But nevertheless it’s something that we would like to pursue to 
allow people to contribute more to the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan, because it is a shame that there are people in our society 
that don’t have any pensions. And if we could improve this plan 
to help those people have a better pension which would help 
them in the future, that’s something that we should try to do, in 
my opinion. 
 
And so I think we have to try to keep talking to the federal 
government about allowing us to enhance this pension plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I want to thank you for 
clarifying that indeed that maximum amount is $600. And if I 
heard you correctly, Mr. Minister, I think you’ve indicated that 
the start of the plan was approximately 1986. You know, about 
16 years ago. Mr. Smith has concurred with that. 
 
And you’ve indicated that that $600 limit was established in 
1986. And I think you can be assured that if you want to lobby 
the federal government for changes in this area, you know, we 
understand that the cost of living is increasing and everything 
else is increasing. 
 
Sixteen years at a limit of $600 as a maximum amount I think is 
not indicative of today’s costs. And I encourage you to pursue 
that amount with the federal government because very clearly 
we’ve heard from people that that contribution is — in relative 
dollars 1986 to 2002 — just isn’t cutting it any more. 
 
So thank you for clarifying that and that will help. I know it will 
help me and I’m sure it’ll help many of my colleagues in 
answering questions about the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the things I don’t understand, one of the 
clauses in your amendment, is the six-month revoking period. 
And you’ve indicated that that clause will be eliminated. It will 
eliminate the six-month revoking period. Could you explain 
how that will affect potential retirees as they move forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. When the plan was new 
and there was no experience with it, the original legislation said 
that a person could retire and take their pension from the plan 
but they would have a six-month period and — well it’s in the 
legislation — they have a six-month period where they can 
revoke their retirement. They can say no, I’ve changed my 
mind, I don’t want to retire. And then they have the right to pay 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

money back into the plan. 
 
And as a consequence of that, what has happened is people 
retire; they want to take their money out of the plan and they 
want to go to an insurance company and buy an annuity. But the 
insurance company won’t sell them an annuity. They will say 
well, you have six months to revoke your retirement, in which 
case you won’t be accessing that money and so we won’t sell 
you anything for a six-month period. You have to wait six 
months after your retirement before you go and buy your 
annuity. 
 
So that the members of the plan who want to retire have been 
saying to the plan, they don’t like that. They want to be able to 
retire, go to the insurance company, buy their annuity, and be 
done with it. And so we’re revoking the six-months period in 
which they have to revoke their retirement to allow the people 
who wish to buy an annuity the day after they retire, for 
example, to do so. 
 
And it’s not for the convenience or any advantage to the 
pension plan. It’s simply what the consumers say that they wish 
to be able to do. They don’t want to be frozen for the six-month 
period. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
would that place someone at risk who decided after a month 
that retirement wasn’t good for them and they wanted to indeed 
end their retirement? 
 
As I understand, you’re saying that the six-month period, sort of 
waiting period allowed someone to reconsider that and move 
back into, into the pension plan. Now that the six-month period 
is going to be revoked or this six-month revoking period is 
eliminated, will that say that, as soon as you’ve signed the 
document that says you’re retired, indeed you don’t have a 
second choice? Is that what I’m hearing from you, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In one sense, that is true; that if you’re 
holding the people up for six months before they can buy an 
annuity, it gives them a six-month period where they can think 
about things and they may change their mind. 
 
But to look at it another way, that provision does not exist in 
other pension plans. And so I guess what we’re saying is, you 
know if anybody else can decide to retire and buy an annuity, so 
should these people be able to. And if it’s . . . would be a good 
provision for them to have to live with, well so should 
everybody else. 
 
But basically we’re saying they should be in the same boat as 
everyone else and have the option to go out and buy their 
annuity. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the other clauses refers to the benefits, the accumulated 
benefits as being able to be withdrawn as a lump sum if they are 
under a certain value. 
 
And I was looking at the information you provided, and I don’t 
see what that value is. Could you clarify what the amount 
would be that a person who is in the pension plan could in fact 

remove the lump sum — as a lump sum remove all of their 
benefits. And could you indicate whether or not this type of 
change to the Act, is this necessary due to the pension benefit 
regulations that have changed you know a lot in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer to the question is members 
who have a monthly pension of less than $16.29 for 2002 would 
qualify for a small pension payout. In other words they can just 
take their money out as a lump sum. They could also take the 
small pension if they wanted to, but they could take it out as a 
lump. 
 
And no, it isn’t due to any other recent changes that have been 
made. It’s simply that it’s quite small and so if you want to take 
it as a lump, you’re free to do so. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for 
clarifying that. A couple of final questions. You’ve indicated 
that one of the clauses allows for, I think, an expansion of a 
benefit that can be now claimed by dependent children and 
grandchildren. That’s a tax-free death benefit rollover. I believe 
that your remarks indicated that this was only available to 
spouses before and that now it’s expanded. 
 
Could you indicate whether or not this enhancement, which I 
believe is an enhancement, is sort of catching up with what 
other pension plans have, and whether or not this will put any 
additional financial burden on the pension plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is yes, it would bring this 
pension plan into line with other pension plans to allow a 
rollover to dependent children or grandchildren. And to the 
second part of the question, no it would not cost the pension 
plan any money. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My final question 
is around the clauses in the Bill which indicate that there seems 
to be a wider discretion for regulation changes to, you know, 
outside of the Bill. 
 
Are you concerned that there will be less opportunity for 
members, both opposition and government, to scrutinize what’s 
in the Bill? Because it seems that we constantly see Bills that 
move additional decision-making powers into regulations. 
 
Could you clarify why it seems that this Bill has moved more 
control outside of the Bill and into the hands of regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Once again, we are changing the 
regulation-making power to make it consistent with other 
provincial pension legislation, so that the regulations that this 
board of trustees would be allowed to make would be roughly 
the same as what other boards of trustees of pension plans can 
do. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I see that the minister has the same official. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
again this Act looks to be very short and very to the point, looks 
like housekeeping in terms of trying to make it comply. 
 
I guess my question would be starting off this way: all these 
changes that you’re putting in there, are they all related to 
making the pension . . . the amendment, the supplementary 
provision to the amendment Act comply with the federal tax 
regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s correct, there are no real policy or 
procedure changes for the pension plans. The purpose of the 
amendments are simply to provide clarification on specific 
provisions in the Act to ensure continued compliance with the 
federal Income Tax Act, and the changes don’t actually affect 
the operation of the pension plan or the way things are done. 
It’s simply to say in the legislation that this is how they’re done 
because they have to be in that way in order for the plan to 
remain a plan under the Income Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess on the basis 
that no question is a stupid question — but this might rate close 
to it — what would happen if these provisions were not passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The danger of not complying with the 
federal income tax laws saying the way pension plans have to 
be structured is that the federal government has the authority to 
deregister the pension plan. And if that happens, then the 
contributions that the person is making to the pension plan are 
not tax deductible, so they don’t have a pension plan the way 
they thought they had a pension plan. Plus they owe the federal 
government a bunch of money for tax deductions that they’ve 
claimed as they’ve paid into the plan, that they haven’t paid 
income tax on. And if the plan is deregistered, the federal 
government would come along and say, you now owe us a 
bunch of money for income tax on the contributions you’ve 
made to this pension plan which we say is no longer a pension 
plan. 
 
So we try to keep the legislation in line with what the federal 
authorities require. They have the authority certainly to do that 
under the Income Tax Act. And if we don’t do that, then the 
members of the pension plans may find themselves in the very 
unfortunate position of not quite having the state of affairs they 
think they have in their personal planning. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thanks, Mr. Minister. So I assumed that 
was the exact reason. And so I’m wondering is the . . . You 
referred to in some of your remarks in introducing this Bill, to 
clarify any of the severance payments and retirement . . . or 
retiring allowances paid at the time. Was there a confusion 
about the kind of money that was put aside through severance 
and retirement funds as opposed to a straight contribution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, the practise has not been inappropriate 
at all. Any severance payments that have been made have not 

been part of the pension plan. Severance payments have been 
made, but not out of the pension plan. 
 
And what the federal government requires is simply that the 
legislation say what it is we’re doing, so that the legislation will 
actually say severance payments do not come out of the pension 
plan. And as I say that’s what we’ve been doing but the federal 
government wants us to actually say in the legislation that that’s 
the way that we’re doing it. And that’s the only purpose of that 
change. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I can understand why the clarification is 
needed but you also mentioned something about this and I’m 
reading from your explanation in the introduction of the Bill: 
 

Participating employers would need to amend their 
governing legislation to provide for these payments. 

 
I’m not sure what you meant by their governing legislation. 
Would that be the federal legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this Bill is sort of an overarching Bill 
that applies to several other pension Bills, namely the Liquor 
Board Superannuation Plan, they have their own Act. Same 
with the Power Corporation Superannuation Plan, the Workers’ 
Compensation Board Superannuation Plan, and the Public 
Service Superannuation Plan, which includes not only the 
public service but the Anti-TB (tuberculosis) League 
Superannuation Plan, and the STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) Superannuation Plan. 
 
And what this Bill is that we’re amending today is a Bill that 
has provisions that apply to all of those pension plans. And my 
point, when I was speaking in the House before, was simply 
that if we didn’t make this change in this Act, then the 
legislature would have to make this change in each of those 
individual Acts. The change would be the same, it’s just that 
instead of doing it once, we’d have to do it several times. 
 
And I know that the members opposite are just as interested in 
efficiency as I am and don’t want to do this more than once, so I 
thought well let’s just do it once and be done with it. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Quite right, Mr. Minister. And I just have 
one question I guess just for clarification in my own mind. I’m 
not anticipating from what you’ve said that there’ll be really 
any change to the members’ pension at all, and I’m wondering 
if there’ll be likewise very little financial impact in their 
pension from these changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There will be absolutely no financial 
impact from these changes. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Minister. That’s my last 
question. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to thank the 
opposition for their co-operation with these last three Bills this 
afternoon, and also Mr. Smith for his assistance, and I move 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

that the committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have sitting beside 
me Mr. Len Rog, who is the assistant deputy minister of the 
revenue division of the Department of Finance; and behind Mr. 
Rog we have Mr. Doug Lambert, who is the director of revenue 
programs in the revenue division of the Department of Finance. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Momentarily distracted there. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Bill being very short of course indicates the 
announcements that you made in your budget address when you 
presented the budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if your officials, either in Finance 
or in Health, when you start to look at your expectation that you 
will receive about $60 million worth of revenue in additional 
tobacco tax . . . And I think I’ve heard you state publicly that 
you are anticipating that there will be a reduction in the number 
of smokers, and in fact I think you indicated that that kind of 
introduction of this magnitude of increase in the tobacco tax 
would probably prompt people to quit smoking. 
 
I’m wondering have you . . . has your department done any 
research in terms of forecasting for the future what a decline 
might mean in the numbers of people actually smoking that are 
current smokers, not only paying the tax increase that you’re 
announcing but also paying last year’s taxes as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer to the question specifically is 
no. The Department of Finance has not conducted research with 
respect to how much the use of tobacco will go down as the cost 
goes up but others have. The Department of Health has either 
conducted research or compiled research which indicates — and 
this is shown in study after study — that as the price of tobacco 
goes up, the rate of consumption will go down. 
 
And based upon the information that we receive from the 
Department of Health, we have projected that 20 per cent of the 
tobacco consumption will go down, that society will consume 
20 per cent less. Some people will quit, but the other thing that 
will happen which is something we’re trying to do is that young 
people will not start smoking who otherwise might start 
smoking. 
 
And the same studies have shown that the group that is most 
sensitive to price increases for tobacco is the group of young 
people. Because they tend well to have less money. Or if they 
have some disposable money they may want to spend it on 
things other than tobacco if they don’t have too much. So we 
haven’t done any studies, but all of the studies indicate that as 
the cost of tobacco use goes up, consumption will go down. 
 

And I might just add that I know . . . This is very anecdotal, but 
I’ve spoken to many hundreds of people around the province 
since the budget and I wondered what their reaction to the 
tobacco tax increase would be and how much anger would be 
expressed. And occasionally there is anger expressed at me. But 
what is far more common — and I’ve encountered it again and 
again — have been smokers or ex-smokers who have said to 
me, you know, I want to thank you for that tax increase because 
it caused me to quit smoking. And I have heard that again and 
again. Now that’s not a scientific study but I think others have 
heard that too. 
 
And so studies have been done many times in many places. 
They’re all consistent, that a tobacco tax increase will cut down 
on consumption. And we factored that into our estimates and 
it’s one of the things that we’re trying to accomplish for health 
reasons. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure your answer is going 
to be very similar to the one you gave me a while back, indeed 
that you don’t look at numbers except at quarterly intervals. But 
I’m wondering, have Department of Health officials looked at 
whether or not they see a reduction in two areas? 
 
You’ve indicated you anticipate 20 per cent will quit and 
you’ve also indicated that the goal was to try to ensure that 
young people don’t start. Is the Department of Health or are you 
expecting some department to be able to provide you with the 
information that says yes, we indeed are seeing 20 per cent of 
people quit smoking and that, in fact, the rate of youth who 
begin smoking is dropping? Will those kinds of statistics be 
available to you and to this House very shortly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. The Department of Health 
monitors the rate of tobacco consumption. And I am advised by 
the officials that we have received a report with respect to 
tobacco consumption for the period of the early part of 2001. 
And they would expect that in early 2003 we would get some 
information with respect to early 2002 so that we could make 
some comparison. 
 
Now what will be difficult with that first report, I think next 
year, will be that it will deal with the period before the budget 
change and after perhaps. And how much . . . how much can be 
ascertained from that look, I’m not sure. 
 
But the answer will . . . is that for each year, the Department of 
Health will monitor tobacco consumption. And if not in early 
2003, then certainly in early 2004, you would have information 
that would show what the impact of the tax change was on 
consumption because we would have the data to do that kind of 
comparison. 
 
So it will be monitored, but it will be some time before the 
information is actually available. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And we understand 
why that takes a while for you to get that information. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we talk about the fact that 20 per cent . . . 
Or at least I think it’s your hope, and I think it’s our hope as 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

 

well, that at least 20 per cent of people do stop smoking because 
we know that in the long term the province will be better off, 
and in fact we might be able to save some health dollars many 
years into the future. 
 
And I note that you projected in the budget that the revenue 
from tobacco taxes, and I’m talking about now all tobacco 
products, will be about 182.5 million up about 60 million from 
the previous year. And you’ve explained why you haven’t, you 
know, indicated a full 100 per cent of the expected increase in 
the taxes. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering that will there be a time, next year 
or the year after, if 20 per cent of the people stop smoking and 
stop purchasing tobacco products, will we see the revenue of 
182 million in fact begin to decline for future budgets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We have forecasted, Mr. Chair, a 20 per 
cent reduction in tobacco consumption. Not necessarily 20 per 
cent fewer people smoking. It could be 20 per cent, but 20 per 
cent less consumption. 
 
We have built into the budget the assumption that the 
consumption will be down 20 per cent, and that’s what our 
figure for this year is based on. We don’t necessarily assume 
that consumption will go down further in subsequent years. But 
if it does, we certainly would welcome that, even if we have 
less revenue, because we believe we’ll save money on health 
care if that happens. 
 
But we’re not making that assumption at the present time — to 
answer the question — although the Department of Health also 
has a tobacco reduction strategy, and it’s part of their strategy 
that they will continue to attempt to reduce tobacco 
consumption in a variety of ways. And so we’re hopeful that 
consumption will continue to go down and that we’ll have less 
tobacco tax revenue in the future. 
 
But if the question is have we built in that kind of figure for 
subsequent years? No, we haven’t done that as of yet. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
you look at the number of people that might quit smoking and if 
it appears that the increase in taxes has produced a positive 
effect in terms of people dropping the habit and in fact not 
smoking, do you anticipate that collectively — and we notice 
that this has been an approach right across Western Canada as 
far as the increase in tobacco taxes — do you see that this might 
be an approach that governments will take to address two 
concerns? 
 
One, a revenue source; in other words, if you’re still looking for 
182 million next year and, you know, you want to . . . you see 
that there’s been a decline in the number of . . . or the amount of 
consumption, that you’ll increase the taxes as well to maintain 
that revenue source but also, hopefully, to cause other people to 
stop smoking. 
 
Is that a plan that might be something that governments — your 
government and other governments — might consider? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think it remains to be seen. 
Certainly what we would do I think would be more or less in 

concert with other governments. This tobacco tax increase in 
the budget was coordinated really with British Columbia, 
Alberta, and Manitoba — the Western provinces — and they all 
raised their tobacco taxes quite a bit. 
 
The reason for that is that we’re concerned about the issue of 
cross-border smuggling of tobacco; that if our price is too far 
out of Alberta’s or theirs from BC’s, you’re going to get a lot of 
smuggling of tobacco across provincial borders. And so we 
would want to take a coordinated approach. 
 
I don’t anticipate trying to maintain revenues by further 
increasing tobacco taxes nor would I rule it out. I would say that 
we want to take a coordinated approach with other provinces, 
also in concert with the federal government which has variable 
taxation rates across the country. 
 
And one of the things that we’re encouraging the federal 
government to do is to raise the level of tobacco taxation in 
those provinces in Eastern Canada where it’s been kept quite 
low because of the smuggling problems that they had. Because 
if those provinces and the federal government raise their prices, 
it would cut out the danger of smuggling to Western Canada 
and it would have some health benefits as well. 
 
So that’s a very general answer. There is no plan to increase the 
tobacco taxes further other than to continue to talk to the other 
Western provinces, to continue to monitor what’s happening in 
other provinces, to continue to press the federal government to 
equalize tobacco taxes across the country because, as I say, they 
have variable rates. So we would want to do those things and 
see what happens as well. 
 
I mean, one of the things that we really haven’t analyzed very 
well is that if somebody’s a smoker and they’re smoking, let’s 
say, a pack a day and they spend $9 a day therefore plus — or 
we’ll say $10 to keep it simple — they might be spending $300 
in a month on tobacco. 
 
And it may be the case that when they stop doing that, they’ll 
spend $300 a month on something else, and that may have a 
beneficial effect on the economy and revenues as well. 
 
So I don’t know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. One of the 
members says they could buy Nicorettes. Apparently they buy 
the patch so it gives business to the pharmacies and I’m sure 
that some revenue comes to the government in other ways. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
must have been anticipating my next question because 
immediately after the budget was announced that the tobacco 
taxes were going up, I believe it was here in the city of Regina, 
when you talked about pharmacies, that indeed that there was a 
shortage of aids that could be purchased — whether they be the 
patch or any other products that would assist people in stopping 
smoking. 
 
Mr. Minister, is a provincial sales tax charged on those items 
that people would purchase that would assist them to stop 
smoking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I know that the provincial sales tax is 
applied to the patch and also it would be applied to other similar 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

forms of stop smoking as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I recall a conversation with a 
constituent back in my hometown immediately after who, I 
believe, is probably into his, you know, third month of stopping 
smoking and he was wondering whether or not, because there 
was going to be an improvement in his health, whether or not 
the government was going to consider providing the patch and 
other materials to people at a reduced rate for those who want to 
actually quit smoking. 
 
Was there any discussion in your department or with the 
Department of Health around providing that type of a benefit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, there was no serious discussion about 
it, part of the reason being it’s actually less expensive to go on 
the patch than it is to smoke. And so if a person can afford, 
which they shouldn’t do, to spend money on tobacco, I don’t 
think there’s anything wrong with people spending less money 
on the patch to quit smoking. 
 
And frankly, I’m also of the view that it isn’t up to the 
government every time I or somebody else wants to improve 
our personal health to pay for everything. It is quite reasonable 
for people to be responsible for some things. 
 
There are many things many of us do — purchase — that are 
beneficial to our health. We don’t look to the government to 
pay each and every one of those, and I don’t think there’s 
anything wrong with people spending less money on the patch 
than they do smoking. 
 
There is no reason why people can’t stop smoking and purchase 
the patch. It’s cheaper than what an average smoker would pay 
for smoking. And that’s what people should do. And they 
should be concerned about their health. We should be 
concerned about their health. But that’s my view — that there’s 
nothing wrong with people buying the patch. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I know that 
there are some people, I guess, who have a very difficult time 
stopping smoking and have tried it before and have looked at, 
you know, purchasing not only the patch but other products as 
well. And my understanding is that that cost can get up pretty 
high per month, almost equivalent or maybe even more than the 
cost of a pack a day prior to the increase in the tobacco 
products. 
 
So while I guess we understand why, you know, you can’t make 
things available on a complimentary basis, but indeed our hope 
is that people stop smoking. So if there’s some things that we 
can do to assist them, other than increasing the cost of that 
product. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess you mention that you are currently not 
anticipating increasing taxes, you know, next year but you 
haven’t ruled it out. And you said that you were taking a 
coordinated approach with other provinces. 
 
And of course I think the people understood in all of the four 
Western provinces that this was a coordinated effort to ensure 
that one province wasn’t less. Because I think when Alberta 
increased the taxes before the Saskatchewan budget was 

released, we did see cross-the-border purchasing that was going 
on. 
 
Is there any concern, as we saw a number of years ago, where 
there was smuggling on a national and an international basis? 
Have we reached . . . have you and the other provinces looked 
at whether or not we have reached a point in terms of the cost 
for a package of cigarettes or cigars whereby smuggling on an 
international basis may be something now that we have to pay 
much more attention to? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly we tried to monitor the 
borders quite carefully in co-operation with the federal 
government. The difference in tobacco prices between the 
Western states, sort of who are our neighbours, and ourselves 
— when you take into account the Canadian dollar versus the 
US dollar — are not as big as some might think. 
 
For example, in North Dakota the price of a carton of 200 
cigarettes is $60.82 in Canadian dollars. And in Montana, it’s 
$55.17 in Canadian dollars. In Saskatchewan, a carton of 
cigarettes would be $67.63. So it’s not so huge, I think, that 
people would go into the risk of smuggling too much into the 
country without, you know, paying duty and going beyond their 
limit and so on. 
 
And so I think the differences are not as great as they once 
were, especially given the state of the Canadian dollar versus 
the US dollar. And so we don’t see it as a major problem, but 
certainly it’s something that we always try to monitor very 
carefully. 
 
And the federal government, of course, through Customs and 
Excise at the border is there to monitor it. And we have an 
agreement with them that they will monitor certain things on 
our behalf as well. And so we think that the situation is quite 
controllable. 
 
It is somewhat different perhaps in Ontario and Quebec, where 
a carton of cigarettes in Ontario is about $42.26 versus New 
York State is $79.58 Canadian. That’s quite a difference. But I 
believe the federal government is being more successful in 
Eastern Canada controlling the flow of cigarettes than was the 
case a number of years ago so . . . But out in the West, we 
haven’t seen a lot of trouble in this regard. And we’re hoping 
that that continues. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that update. I 
wasn’t aware that the price is so competitive. And in fact when 
you talk about the Western provinces’ position versus the states 
immediately south of us, it doesn’t seem to be a whole lot of 
advantage. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I recall the conflict of a number of years ago, I 
think most of the illegal transportation of tobacco products 
occurred in Ontario and Quebec and the Native reserves, and 
that’s where a lot of difficulty developed. And while I 
understand that you’re saying that the federal government is 
looking at making sure that they stay, you know, that they stay 
competitive in terms of taxes and yet monitor through Canada 
Customs whether or not illegal smuggling would occur. 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1719 

 

Mr. Minister, I’ve been asked a number of times about the 
purchasing of tobacco products on Saskatchewan reserves. 
Could you clarify the agreement that you have regarding taxes, 
the provincial tax that is applicable, and whether or not the 
price of a package of cigarettes at a business on-reserve is the 
same as the purchase of a package of cigarettes right here in 
Regina at a tobacco store here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes the . . . Well whether or not the price 
would be different would depend on who the purchaser was. 
But one thing I should clarify that is sometimes not well 
understood is that when a store on a reserve or on a First Nation 
purchases tobacco for resale, or gasoline for that matter, they 
have to pay all the taxes upfront. 
 
So from the wholesaler of the tobacco they pay the same price 
that a store that was not on a First Nation would pay. They pay 
all the taxes that would be due to the federal government and 
the provincial government. 
 
But then what happens is if I’m a First Nation person with a 
treaty number, I present my treaty card to the First Nation store 
and they will charge me the cost of tobacco without the tax in 
so that I’m not paying the tax. If I’m not a First Nation and I’m 
purchasing the tobacco there, I’ll simply pay the same price that 
would be paid elsewhere as well, because you need to have the 
treaty number in order to not pay the provincial tax on-reserve. 
 
Now the reason why we entered into that kind of arrangement 
for tobacco and gas was of course because under the federal 
Indian Act it says we’re not allowed to charge provincial taxes 
on a First Nation, and that includes gas and tobacco. 
 
The Department of Finance receives from the vendors on the 
First Nations a report of who has come in and purchased 
tobacco, what the treaty numbers are, and then we send a 
cheque for the amount of the tax. We rebate the tax back 
because it’s already been paid to us in the first instance when 
the tobacco is purchased from the wholesaler. 
 
What we also do is we examine the treaty numbers that come in 
and the level of consumption of tobacco in relation to those 
treaty numbers. And we’re trying to watch to see if somebody’s 
purchasing more tobacco tax free on-reserve than would be for 
their own personal consumption. And if the numbers are out of 
order in the sense that somebody’s . . . If somebody comes in 
and buys 100 cartons of tobacco under one treaty number, you 
know, per week, we’re not going to pay the rebate. We would 
say to the, to the First Nation vendor, that’s not reasonable for 
that treaty number, that person wouldn’t consume that much 
tobacco for their own use. 
 
And I’m advised by the officials of the Department of Finance 
that thus far they have not seen a great deal of abuse with 
respect to this; that the First Nations are in fact trying to 
monitor this very, very closely. Because they know that if they 
don’t monitor it closely — get the treaty number, and if you 
don’t present a card, you don’t make the purchase — and if they 
sell more to somebody than that person would reasonably 
consume, the First Nations themselves know that this 
arrangement won’t work. And so we haven’t seen evidence of a 
great deal of smuggling. 
 

Now I can’t guarantee and nobody can guarantee that a First 
Nations person who is a non-smoker won’t go in and buy 
tobacco under their number and sell it to somebody else. 
Nobody can guarantee that. But I can tell you that if there was a 
significant amount of that or if it was done in a large volume, 
then we wouldn’t pay the rebate because we do monitor it to 
make sure that the consumption patterns are what you would 
expect per individual. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to 
clarify, Mr. Minister, what, what you’ve indicated and please, 
please confirm that this is the correct interpretation. What 
you’ve indicated is that a business on-reserve would pay the 
provincial tax upfront. And then they would be selling the 
product on-reserve and they may sell it to a member of a First 
Nations who has a treaty card or to someone who isn’t. 
 
If they are selling the package of cigarettes to a person who has 
a treaty number, then that person would indicate at the time of 
purchase that they have a treaty number and therefore there is a 
reduced price that would not include the value of the provincial 
tax. If the person was not . . . did not have a treaty number, they 
would pay the full tax now. So that means that the business has 
recouped the provincial tax that they had to pay upfront for that 
individual that paid it. 
 
Now I didn’t quite understand what you were saying when you 
said that the business now has to send to you a listing of the 
people who have purchased that product, that tobacco product, 
and their treaty number. Could you clarify what that type of 
control would do versus the person that paid the tax and 
obviously didn’t have a treaty number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. The way the member described it is 
correct, Mr. Chair. If I go in onto the First Nation and I buy 
tobacco, I simply pay the normal price and the vendor of the 
tobacco would just keep all that money because the vendor has 
already paid the tax upfront to the provincial government when 
he or she goes to the wholesaler. But if I’m a First Nations 
person, the vendor has paid the tax for that package of tobacco 
to the wholesaler who then pays it to the provincial government. 
But when I go in to buy that tobacco, I don’t pay the provincial 
tax. So the vendor is out that provincial tax which he or she has 
paid to the wholesaler. 
 
And so the vendor has to turn around and say to us in the 
Department of Finance, okay, Joe Blow came in and bought a 
package of tobacco, his treaty number is such and such, and you 
owe me the provincial tax that I’ve paid you for that package of 
tobacco because I didn’t collect that tax. And then we then 
send, on a monthly basis, a rebate cheque to the vendor for the 
tax that he or she has paid but which has not been collected. 
And then that way we have a list of the names and treaty 
numbers of the people who the vendor is claiming purchased 
tobacco but did not remit the tax to him or her. And if 
everything looks to be in order, then we send a cheque on a 
monthly basis to make that up. 
 
I should add, by the way, that there’s a little bit of flexibility 
here on the part of the Indian band or the First Nation in this 
sense — that some of them have decided that some of the tax 
will be collected from the First Nation person and then that tax 
will go toward the First Nation government. 



1720 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

So that for example at Creeway gas in Saskatoon — which is 
part of a First Nation although it’s located in the Sutherland 
area in Saskatoon — when I go in and purchase gas as a First 
Nations person, whereas the provincial sales tax on a litre of gas 
is 15 cents per litre, as the member knows, I believe Creeway 
will charge the individual 9 cents. And that 9 cents will go to 
the Muskeg Lake First Nation and they will use it for programs 
for urban youth and recreational programs on the First Nation 
and so on, so that we won’t get that money. And we’ll rebate 
the tax back to the vendor who’s paid the tax, whether on gas or 
tobacco. But in some cases the First Nations have started 
saying, well, no, I mean, our people should pay some tax. The 
difference really is, is that that tax ends up going to the First 
Nation for their purposes. 
 
So it isn’t always the case that the First Nation individual will 
purchase gas or tobacco totally tax free. I think in most cases 
they do, but in some cases the First Nations are deciding that 
some of that money will be paid and it will come to the First 
Nation government. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, let’s 
use those two examples of tobacco and gasoline. And I’m 
hearing you state that when the vendor is purchasing the fuel or 
the tobacco, they are paying the provincial tax upfront. 
 
And in fact now they’re trying to either collect it back from a 
person who is not a member of a First Nations and does not 
have a treaty card or if they are selling it . . . Could you clarify 
this part that says that if they’re selling it to a member of First 
Nations with some tax on it — the 9 cents example that you use 
or maybe in the sale of tobacco products there is some portion 
— will you . . . will your department, the Department of 
Finance, rebate the 15 cents per litre for every litre purchased 
by a member or will you be rebating 15 minus 9, which is 6 
cents? 
 
Could you explain what type of process would happen for the 
fuel and, indeed, if this is occurring for tobacco products as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we would make the same rebate in any 
of those situations, so that the First Nations person might be 
paying 9 cents tax per litre. We would still rebate back 15 cents 
to the retailer because the retailer would have given us 15 cents 
and we are not allowed to tax for that gas that has been 
purchased by a First Nations person on-reserve, so we have to 
give the 15 cents back. But the individual may have paid 9 cents 
to the retailer, and the retailer would then be required to give 
that to the First Nation. 
 
And I’m advised by the officials that probably half of the First 
Nations who have entered into agreements with the province 
with respect to these arrangements — and I think the number of 
those agreements is approaching 50 — but half of those First 
Nations roughly have arrangements where, in effect, some tax is 
paid to the First Nation in the way I’ve described and the other 
half, simply there is no tax paid. We rebate it to the vendor but 
the vendor isn’t required to give anything to the First Nation. 
 
But this is a very new system in the sense that we started doing 
this I believe a little over a year ago. And I suspect that as time 
goes on, that arrangements will evolve as between the First 

Nations, the vendors, and the province in that regard, although 
it is entirely within the jurisdiction of the First Nation to decide 
whether they wish some of that money to come to them. Half of 
them are and half of them are not at this time. But it’s a fairly 
new system. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
I can see that the plan that you put in place then means that the 
vendor who has collected a portion of a tax from the First 
Nations person then remits that to the First Nations and 
therefore still has to obtain the entire rebate back from you. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this similar . . . And I guess not gasoline but 
more so purchasing of tobacco products off-reserve — what 
type of policy’s in place for rebating the vendor there for people 
who present a treaty number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There is no rebate in that situation. 
Because what we did I think two budgets ago — or was it 
three? — where we said that First Nations people would have to 
pay the PST (provincial sales tax) for off-reserve purchases. 
And so if a First Nations person goes into any business 
establishment off-reserve, they would pay the PST or the gas 
tax for that matter in any situation where . . . well in the same 
way that anyone else would. 
 
The only tax break that they get is if they make a purchase 
on-reserve, in which case they don’t have to pay the PST or the 
gas tax or the tobacco tax. 
 
But in many other instances they would be making purchases 
off-reserve and they are required then to pay those taxes. 
 
And I might say — not for the member’s benefit, Mr. Chair, but 
anyone who’s watching because often this is misunderstood — 
there are three groups of Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan, 
generally speaking: the treaty Indians, the non-status Indians, 
and the Métis people. And with respect to those latter two 
groups, the non-status Indians and the Métis people, they 
receive absolutely no tax break that anyone else would get. And 
sometimes people misunderstand that. They think that if you’re 
an Aboriginal person, Métis or non-status, that you don’t pay 
taxes which of course is totally untrue. 
 
And then I always point out also — not for the member’s 
benefit because the member know this, but for the general 
public — that with respect to the treaty Indians, in almost every 
case they pay taxes the same way that everybody else does. 
 
You know, sometimes I hear people say if a First Nations 
person works for the school board, isn’t that nice, they don’t 
pay income tax. I always point out well no, they pay income tax 
like everybody else. It’s only when they work for a reserve 
organization that they don’t. And they pay property tax if they 
own a house in the city; they pay liquor tax, you know, and all 
kinds of other taxes that governments charge. 
 
But with respect to on-reserve purchases, a First Nations 
person, one group of Aboriginal people, can get some breaks 
for what they buy on-reserve. And one of the things I have to 
point out to people who sometimes ask me to change this is, it 



May 30, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1721 

 

isn’t a matter for me to change or the provincial government to 
change or this legislature to change because that is a federal 
law. 
 
And under the Constitution of Canada the federal government 
has jurisdiction over First Nations people and reserves and they 
have passed a law in the Indian Act that says that the province 
cannot impose the gas tax, the tobacco tax, the sales tax 
on-reserve, or any other tax for that matter. So we’re complying 
with the law of the land. 
 
And I might add that when we made that change in the budget a 
few years ago, I guess it was really the first time for a long time 
that the laws of our province then complied with the federal 
laws. 
 
And one of the realizations was that, as we were facing already 
at that time about nine lawsuits suing us for charging taxes that 
we were told were illegal, we realized we had to make a change 
to cut off the liability that was potentially building up there too, 
where if we were doing something wrong, then we had to stop 
doing it because we could be racking up a huge bill for the 
future people to pay if somebody wanted to take us to court as 
First Nations developed more businesses on-reserve — which 
we encourage, by the way, because it’s economic development 
and jobs for them. 
 
Sorry to be so long-winded with that answer. It goes beyond 
what the member asked but I thought it was important to 
explain why we’re in the system that we happen to be in. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I do appreciate 
your explanation and I’m sure many people who are watching 
or will have the opportunity to review Hansard will appreciate 
your explanation. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you clarify what occurred with retailers on 
the day — or I believe it was at midnight — when the price of 
tobacco changed. What kinds of things were retailers having . . . 
or what kinds of rules were retailers having to follow who had 
purchased tobacco products prior to that date and obviously had 
paid a particular tax — maybe the tax that was in force on the 
date — and then sold the product the next day at a different, at a 
different rate that included a different tax? Could you explain 
what kinds of rules were put in place for those retailers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The tax change applies effective midnight 
on budget night as between the retailer and the wholesaler. So 
that the retailer, if he goes or she goes to the wholesaler after 
midnight budget night, will pay with the new tax included for 
the tobacco. But the retailer may have tobacco that has been 
purchased before midnight on budget night. And with respect to 
that tobacco, they are not required to charge the consumer the 
new tax. 
 
So that I could go in the day after budget day and buy cigarettes 
— which I wouldn’t do, but say I did — I could go in and the 
retailer could take a package of tobacco, and if the retailer had 
purchased that tobacco from the wholesaler before budget day, 
the retailer could sell that tobacco to me at his or her cost with 
the old tax. He or she would not be required to charge the new 
tax. The new tax is required to be charged on the tobacco that 
came from the wholesaler after midnight on budget night. 

But I think you can appreciate what may happen in the retail 
setting, which is that I go in to the retailer, I don’t know as the 
consumer whether the retailer had this tobacco before or after 
budget night, and it may be possible that some retailers may — 
I’m not saying they do or all of them would do — but some of 
them may simply say the price has gone up, the tax is higher, 
now the price is such and such. 
 
That tobacco may have been purchased from the wholesaler 
before the budget or after the budget and it will be up to the 
retailer to decide what price to sell the tobacco at because we 
don’t have, you know, legislated price controls. We have a 
certain tax we’re required to be paid. And whatever else the 
retailer wants to charge for tobacco, he or she is free to do so. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s an 
interesting explanation. I’m not sure that I saw . . . and I’m not 
a consumer of tobacco products. As you’ve indicated, you’re in 
the same position. I’m not sure that I saw two prices in the 
week following budget day that said that this was the price of 
tobacco products purchased before budget day, and this is the 
price after. So I’m interested to hear your comments. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other questions that I have had 
addressed to me is regarding the actual or very specific tobacco 
product and that’s cigars. And in your amendments to the Bill 
you’ve indicated that the tobacco will be 35 . . . greater of 35 
cents per cigar, and 95 per cent of the estimated retail price. 
Ninety-five per cent seems like an awfully high tax to be paying 
on the price of a cigar. 
 
Is this tax competitive with other provinces, Mr. Minister? I 
haven’t had the opportunity to review what the tax is in the 
province of Manitoba or British Columbia, and I’m wondering 
if you could clarify why such a . . . what seems such a high 
percentage of taxes applied to cigars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re actually not the highest in Canada 
with respect to the tax on cigars. I should say that it’s 95 per 
cent up to a maximum of $5. And I’m told that in Alberta the 
figure would be 103 per cent . . . 183 per cent of the retail 
selling price, and in Newfoundland it is 125 per cent. 
 
Taxes are high on cigars all across the country, and ours is not 
the highest but it is what the member has stated up till . . . up to 
$5 per cigar. So it’s nothing unusual in this country. And we’re 
the third highest tax on cigar, and I suppose the reasoning is 
cigars are partly a luxury item, and also a hazard to one’s health 
every bit as much, if not more so, than cigarettes. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the 
opposition for their co-operation with respect to moving the Bill 
along, and also the officials for their assistance here today. And 
with that I’d like to move that the committee report the Bill 
without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(16:45) 



1722 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2002 

 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 16:50 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 2 - The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child 

Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act 
Bill No. 8 - The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 

2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur 
les prestations alimentaires familiales 

Bill No. 26 - The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens procurations 

Bill No. 27 - The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la 
Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances 
alimentaires procurations 

Bill No. 28 - The Interjurisdictional Support Orders Act/Loi 
sur les ordonnances alimentaires interterritoriales 

Bill No. 11 - The Urban Municipal Administrators 
Amendment Act, 2002 

Bill No. 10 - The Tax Enforcement Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 5 - The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 

Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Bill No. 12 - The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 
2002 

Bill No. 15 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2002/Loi 
de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur la Cour du 
Banc de la Reine 

Bill No. 24 - The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 
sur les procurations 

Bill No. 16 - The Independent Officers’ Remuneration 
(Amendment) Act, 2002 

Bill No. 23 - The Registered Plan (Retirement Income) 
Exemption Act/Loi portant insaisissabilité des 
régimes enregistrés (revenu de retraite) 

Bill No. 17 - The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment 
Act, 2002 

Bill No. 18 - The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 
2002 

Bill No. 19 - The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Amendment Act, 2002 

Bill No. 31 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 64 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2003 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:54. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 


