















































Hansard: June 27, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2375 
 June 27, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
once again today to present petitions on behalf of people in and 
around the Humboldt area who would like to see the Humboldt 
territory operations office for Saskatchewan Housing Authority 
remain in the city of Humboldt. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning 
on behalf of citizens concerned about the shortcomings of the 
current tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this morning, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Saskatoon and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Bredenbury, Rosthern, Saskatoon, and Waldron. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding overfishing and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the communities of Langenburg, Tantallon, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition regarding the 
condition of Highway 42. And the prayer reads as: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
This petition is signed by the people of the Riverhurst area. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this morning to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
deplorable and dangerous condition of Highway No. 58. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make the necessary repairs to 
Highway No. 58 in order to avoid serious injury and 
property damage. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Chaplin and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are concerned about crop insurance. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and 
Fillmore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and 
also to prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Brownlee, Central Butte, and 
Eyebrow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents concerned 
with the new boundaries of the regional health authority. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 
coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the regional 
health authority as opposed to the Saskatoon health 
authority. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Strasbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 11, 22, 23, 31, 59, 157, 165, 169, and no. 174. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Special Committee on Regulations 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 
member from Regina Dewdney: 
 

That the first report of the Special Committee on 
Regulations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 76 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many complaints did the 
labour . . . Department of Labour have concerning labour 
standards in the hog industry in 1999 and what was the 

nature of these complaints? 
 
And the same questions for 2000 and 2001. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 76 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: regarding Highway No. 8 
from Carievale to the North Dakota border, in view of the 
tremendous economic impact on small businesses and 
border towns, and the fact that material has been stockpiled 
for several years, when will construction commence on 
Highway No. 8 from Carievale to the American border? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature two special guests who are in the west gallery. Oda 
Wood — and I’d ask Oda to stand — and her grandma, Elaine 
Wood, are visiting. 
 
Oda lives in Oslo, Norway, but she has many connections to 
Saskatchewan. Her great-grandmother worked in the 
Legislative Library here in 1928. Her grandpa, Elaine Wood’s 
husband, worked for the Department of Finance — that’s Oda’s 
grandfather — and her father actually worked for a while in the 
auditor’s office here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And also her grandmother, who is with her today, Elaine, 
worked in one of the minister’s offices and she has been 
working in my constituency office. 
 
We welcome Oda here, who is going to spend the summer 
learning about her roots in Saskatchewan and also further 
building those connections between Saskatchewan and Norway. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Celebrate Regina 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — There is a gathering dedicated to capturing 
the hearts and minds of Regina that is worth talking about, Mr. 
Speaker — a meeting with booths set up by Tourism Regina, 
Tourism Saskatchewan, the Regina Chamber of Commerce, the 
Regina REDA (regional economic development authority), the 
Regina Health District, the Street Culture Kidz, and more. 
 
It could serve also as a template for all Saskatchewan towns and 
cities to hold their banner high. I’m talking of course about the 
launch tomorrow morning at the Saskatchewan Centre of the 
Arts of the campaign to celebrate our Queen City — “Canada’s 
greatest city,” as the slogan proudly announces. 
 
The purpose of the campaign is to celebrate our love for our 
city, to welcome new and returning residents to Regina, and to 
announce to the world why the capital city is the place to live, 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

 

work, play, and raise a family. 
 
A host of worthy Regina and Saskatchewan citizens will be 
there to begin the campaign, including our Premier, our Mayor 
Fiacco, our MP (Member of Parliament), Mr. Goodale, and Paul 
Martin, Chair of the Regina REDA, plus many, many more. 
 
This is an excellent way to kick off the holiday weekend. And, 
Mr. Speaker, in typical Regina fashion, this is a 
community-driven project with tremendous support from 
corporate sponsors and volunteers. 
 
So tomorrow morning at 11:45, I invite all Regina to be at the 
Centre of the Arts to have free refreshments, to greet new 
Reginans, to welcome back those who have come home, and to 
express our deep affection for our proud city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Restructuring of Southeast Regional College 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Tuesday evening some 24 community leaders from Grenfell, 
Broadview, Cowessess First Nation, Wapella, and Estevan 
gathered in Whitewood to discuss a very important issue to 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Southeast Regional College recently announced a 
major restructuring of their programming. Needless to say, this 
raised a great deal of consternation in the Whitewood area as 
municipal and business leaders along with local area residents 
became very concerned about the longevity of programming 
and employment in their college. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regional colleges have and continue to provide, a 
much needed educational opportunity for local residents. And 
recently the Whitewood college held their special care aide 
graduation. Of the 15 graduates, 14 already have employment 
opportunities, pointing to the effectiveness of the program. 
 
On Tuesday evening, Mr. Art Whetstone, president of the 
college, and Mr. Ed Haye, chairman of the board, attended the 
meeting to explain the college’s rationale for the restructuring. 
While assurances from Mr. Whetstone of continued and 
possibly new programming along with the hope that contractual 
agreements with the union will not result in as severe a staff 
reduction as earlier thought, may have alleviated some of the 
local concerns, the community leaders trust that indeed their 
concerns have been heard and the regional college will have an 
ongoing presence in their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all involved for their support for 
the program. And I place this petition of over 500 names on the 
Table on their behalf. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SunBridge Wind Power Project Officially Opens 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
is truly an exciting day because later this afternoon, at the town 
of Gull Lake, our government in conjunction with officials from 
Suncor and Enbridge and the federal government is going to be 

opening Saskatchewan’s first wind power project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — And, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be the first of 
many. In fact the second project is already under construction. 
 
But this morning, Mr. Speaker, I want to focus on the 
SunBridge project, a $22 million investment with three 
important partners, Mr. Speaker . . . with Suncor, Enbridge, and 
with the Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker — a four-way 
partnership. 
 
And this morning I want to express the appreciation of our 
government to our partners, to Suncor and Enbridge for their 
work with us and to the Government of Canada for the $12 
million contribution they’ve made to this project, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re not only going to be selling electricity to federal 
government buildings, but through our own initiative at the 
provincial level, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be making a GreenPower 
option available to customers right across this province from 
this wind power project. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Armed Forces Day 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’m honoured to rise in the Assembly to ask all members 
of the House to formally recognize Armed Forces Day this 
Saturday, June 29. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Armed Forces have played an extremely 
important role in representing Canada on the global stage over 
the past number of decades and continue to do so today. 
Although no war has been fought on Canadian soil since 1812, 
our forces are still relied upon to provide security for our 
borders. Following the events of September 11, their dedication 
to Canadian security efforts is even more crucial. 
 
Canadians fought with distinction in both wars, the Korean 
War, and most recently the Gulf War, the Balkans war, and 
currently in Afghanistan. In addition to this they are involved in 
numerous peacekeeping efforts around the world in some noted 
trouble spots. 
 
The Canadian military is one of the most well-respected 
militaries in the world, known for their professionalism, 
dedication, and tenacity. Even with outdated equipment caused 
by chronic underfunding, the Canadian Armed Forces have 
continued to perform with distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan there’s a substantial military 
contingent in the form of the base at 15 Wing Moose Jaw, as 
well as a number of reserve units around the province. And 
also, as everyone I’m sure knows, 15 Wing is the home of the 
world renowned aerobatic team, the Snowbirds. 
 
I ask all members to join with me and recognize the 
contribution of the Canadian military and their service to 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

Saskatoon Hosts Fourth Agricultural Biotechnology 
International Conference 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From September 15 to 
18, 2002, the world will look to Saskatoon as it hosts the fourth 
Agricultural Biotechnology International Conference. This 
year’s theme is agbiotech: cultivating convergence, and will 
highlight the coming together of agricultural biotechnology. 
This year’s conference will showcase the industry’s growing 
strengths and exciting new directions in bio products. The 
conference will also provide important insights on global 
stewardship and benefit sharing. 
 
Peter McCann, president of the Ag Biotech Inc. and official 
host of ABIC (Agricultural Biotechnology International 
Conference) 2002, is enthusiastic about the calibre of the 
conference program and the opportunity it will offer delegates, 
visitors, and the industry as a whole. As a world-class 
conference this is the . . . a must-attend event for the industry 
and those interested in it. ABIC will bring together world 
renowned scientists, investors, industry leaders, and policy 
makers. It will also provide a tremendous opportunity to learn 
about the latest life science technology. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the ABIC foundation has established 
two travel bursaries to enable promising young international 
scientists in developing nations to attend the conference — an 
inspiring demonstration that this province has a name for itself 
on the international stage and is on the way up. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Beach Educator Receives Award 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise now today to talk about a 
constituent of mine from the town of Regina Beach. On May 2, 
Mrs. Brenda Edwards was presented with the Saskatchewan 
Council on Educational Administration Administrative 
Excellence Award, 2002. 
 
The award recognizes outstanding educational administrative 
leadership throughout the previous year. The award was a pastel 
drawing by student Christie Looker of the Weyburn 
Comprehensive School. 
 
Brenda was nominated for the reward by representative Terry 
Kuz, who also serves as vice-principal to Lumsden Elementary 
School. Terry spoke about Mrs. Edwards with high praise as he 
described her noble career in education over the years. 
 
She has had a significant amount of experience serving as a 
vice-principal, superintendent, and acting director in the Buffalo 
Plains School Division. It is not uncommon for this 
hard-working educator to be found working late in her office 
throughout the week. This remarkable person is a very good 
model of an individual dedicated to the educational field across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Brenda is entering her 23rd year as an educator, 19 of which 
have been spent in the role of educational administrator. She 
began her teaching career in the community of Strasbourg 

followed by a return to the University of Regina where she 
completed her Bachelor of Education degree. Her teaching 
career continued with time spent in Weyburn, Edenwold, White 
City, and finally as principal of the South Shore Elementary 
School in Regina Beach. 
 
In 1994, Brenda completed her master’s degree which is 
followed by her employment as superintendent of instruction 
for the Buffalo Plains School. 
 
I would ask that all members of the House join me in 
congratulating Mrs. Brenda Edwards for her remarkable 
achievement in the field of education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Royal University Hospital Awards 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Legislative Assembly Office recognized some of its employees 
for their 5, 10, and 20 years of service. Two days ago the Royal 
University Hospital Foundation in Saskatoon awarded its 
annual spirit award to Joyce Foulger, who has worked at the 
hospital for 32 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Foulger is a dedicated community volunteer and former 
board member of Autism Treatment Services of Saskatchewan. 
She was honoured Tuesday as the 10th recipient of the Tony 
Dagnone Spirit Award. 
 
The award, established in 1992, recognizes the outstanding 
25-year term of leadership by former RUH (Royal University 
Hospital) president, Tony Dagnone. 
 
In addition to her work at the hospital Ms. Foulger is an active 
canvasser for two health-related charities and has worked on 
behalf of the annual Saskatoon Children’s Festival and the 1989 
Jeux Canada Games. Co-workers have described Ms. Foulger 
as the embodiment of the value of respect and well deserving of 
this award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RUH Foundation presented a number of other 
awards on Tuesday. Lorrie Alberts, a registered nurse in the 
pediatric unit, received the Bernice A. England scholarship for 
advancement in clinical nursing. The F.P. Bourgault memorial 
scholarship for education in nursing went to Cybelle Oscvirk, 
an RN (registered nurse) in the neonatal intensive care unit. 
Tracey McCaig-Beattie, a nurse in the emergency department, 
received the F. J. Gathercole memorial scholarship. 
 
Recent College of Medicine graduate, Mark Fenton, was 
awarded the Ali Rajput Prize for Excellence in Neurology. The 
RUH foundation also recognized four other nurses with 
foundation scholarships: Colleen Buehler, Andrea Clinton, 
Peter Graham, and Dianna Lange. 
 
These award recipients are all working on furthering their 
education and in turn making themselves even more valuable to 
the hospital they work with. 
 
Congratulations to all of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Financial Assistance for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is 
in Halifax at the Ag ministers’ meeting and we’re wondering if 
the Premier can give us an update on how that’s going; which 
provinces plan on signing the federal government’s ag policy 
framework, which provinces are not going to sign the 
agreement? And has there been any progress made on getting 
the federal government to live up to its responsibilities and fund 
the entire cost of a trade injury program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I had opportunity to speak 
with the Minister of Agriculture yesterday after their initial 
discussions with other provincial ministers. I think as the 
members know it’s only, as we speak, it’s only today that the 
ministers are sitting down with the federal minister. And I 
anticipate a call later this day from the Minister of Agriculture, 
reporting. 
 
Generally, I may say a number of provinces have agreed to 
continue the fight for 100 per cent funding for trade injury 
argument. We’ve got a challenge here, Mr. Speaker, in that our 
own federal government seems to want now to deny there is 
even an issue around trade injury. They want to describe the 
monies available in some other fashion. 
 
They’re not fooling us and they’re not fooling the Canadian 
producers. Our producers are being injured by trade actions 
taken in Washington and the European Union, and that needs to 
be recognized in this package. The money needs to be more and 
it needs to be 100 per cent federally funded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Premier could 
tell us which provinces, or how many provinces are still saying 
that they’re not about to sign the agreement? And if we do not 
sign the agriculture — new agriculture framework, the question 
that farmers are asking, what exactly that’s going to mean for 
Saskatchewan farmers. Is Saskatchewan going to participate in 
part of the framework, and not in other parts? Are they just 
going to not participate in the trade injury? Will Saskatchewan 
receive the federal share of the $1.2 billion emergency funding 
even if the province does not sign on? How much of the new 
funding is going to come to Saskatchewan; how much will be 
paid out to the farmers? And could the Premier please answer a 
few of those questions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, one of the challenges 
facing our Minister of Agriculture and other ministers of 
Agriculture in the meeting today is some of the lack of detail 
being provided by the federal government, answers to some of 
the questions that I believe the Agriculture critic appropriately 
raises. These are questions we all share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat the meeting is happening as we speak. We 
do not have an update from the course of the meeting. 

But here’s where we’re at, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to be 
signing a program, one where we don’t know the detail. We’re 
not going to be signing a program that isn’t going to be of value 
to Saskatchewan producers. 
 
We have said from the beginning of this . . . if the Leader of the 
Opposition would care to listen, we have said from the 
beginning that we want to be a constructive player and partner 
in determining and developing the long-term agricultural 
strategy. We have been there, our Minister of Agriculture 
particularly has given Canadian leadership on this file. 
 
But I don’t believe there’s a taxpayer in Saskatchewan, I don’t 
believe there’s a taxpayer in Saskatchewan that wants their 
government today to sign on when the detail is not available to 
us, or to sign on while a federal government denies its 
responsibility for trade injury to our farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, could 
the Premier please tell us if our Agriculture minister has 
contacted all of the different Agriculture ministers and found 
out prior to today — prior to the signing, does he know which 
ones are considering signing, and which ones are saying no they 
will not sign? And if so, could he share some of that 
information with us today? 
 
And in . . . also the story in today’s paper says the federal 
government plans to axe its income support program. Can we 
assume that that means the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) program? Is that what the federal government is 
proposing to doing? And if the federal government does get rid 
of the CFIP, do they plan on replacing it with some other 
income support program? Do they plan on putting money into 
crop insurance and NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) in 
the future, or is simply that amount of the federal funding going 
to disappear in the new framework? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no denying that the 
member opposite asks some very good questions. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m hoping, I’m hoping that her cousins and 
colleagues in Ottawa, the Alliance/Reform members in Ottawa 
are asking some of these very same questions. I know New 
Democrats in the House of Commons have been asking some of 
these very same questions. 
 
The fact of the matter is I am unable to speak on behalf of other 
governments. I am unable to speak on behalf of other ministers 
of Agriculture. I can speak on behalf of this government and I 
will speak on behalf of this Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Our position has not changed, and with the member opposite, 
we await from our federal government some of the detail that 
she asks that we ask that producers across Canada are asking 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, indeed we’re 
asking and the producers of the province are asking, and we’re 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

hoping that our Minister of Agriculture is asking because it 
doesn’t seem to be too many answers coming back here. 
 
Many of the news headlines have been grossly deceptive, and 
so the Saskatchewan farmers are wondering how much of the 
federal government new ag policy is actually going to the 
farmers. Because the bulk of the federal money seems to be 
targeted towards things like food safety and environment 
concerns. 
 
So we’re wondering how much is actually going to find its way 
into the farm family, and do we have any idea at this point how 
that will be paid out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We’ve heard, I think all Canadians have 
heard a variety of proposals that have been made by the federal 
government. It is precisely to determine these questions that we 
have our Minister of Agriculture and provincial ministers of 
Agriculture from across Canada sitting down, as we speak in 
this House, with the federal Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the member has a series of questions, which we 
share, that’s fair enough. But we’ve been pretty upfront, Mr. 
Speaker, about our, our plan, our policy, our position on these 
issues. But I think it’s time now we heard is, in addition to the 
questions, are some comments and suggestions from the 
opposition party in this House. 
 
What is their position on programming for farmers in 
Saskatchewan? What is their position on the federal proposals 
now laid out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 

Funding for New Contract with Teachers 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Learning. Yesterday the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, which represents all boards of education in the 
province, publicly criticized this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government for not making a commitment to cover all the costs 
from a new contract for our teachers. 
 
The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) wrote 
to the minister in May stating their concerns of how these 
additional costs were going to be covered in the 2002 budgets. 
In response, the minister told the SSTA that the government 
will assess the cost implications after a new agreement is 
reached and only then will they decide additional funding that 
can be made available to school divisions for this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this non-commitment from the government and its 
shrugging off of its responsibilities is just not good enough for 
the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, will the NDP 
government commit today to cover any additional costs for 
school boards that is going to result from the collective 
agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, negotiations with 
teachers in this province have been going on for some time 
now. They started in March. 
 
We’ve had a process that has been in existence for almost 30 
years and I can inform the members opposite that, over those 30 
years, there has been a collective agreement signed on every 
occasion that bargaining occurred. And these have been signed 
successfully. 
 
And what I said and what I have said and what we said when 
our budget was released in March is that, at the time a collective 
agreement is signed and ratified by the membership, then we 
would be prepared to look at that. 
 
But I will also mention, Mr. Speaker, that, in the last agreement, 
we provided a special warrant to cover the costs and we also 
covered 100 per cent of the pension and benefits increase to 
teachers. 
 
And all . . . all I can say today, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
government is prepared to put the money behind our actions 
when we have a chance to look at what those actions will be, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about the 
agreement that was signed previously. We’re talking about the 
agreement we’re working on right now. Everything is working 
well except this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SSTA has the responsibility for paying the 
bills and handling the budgets for the school divisions. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the SSTA has the responsibility 
for paying the bills and handling the budgets for the school 
divisions. But the government has the majority control and the 
final say on the management committee which is negotiating a 
new agreement. So here’s a government negotiating a new 
teachers’ contract, yet not committing to funding any of the 
increases and costs due to that new contract. 
 
The NDP is telling school boards and ultimately the taxpayers 
across this province that the government will agree to a new 
deal but school boards will have to take what they’re given and 
the property taxpayers are just going to have to pick up the rest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government in negotiating a new contract with 
teachers and they won’t commit to paying an increased cost that 
will result from this wage settlement. Has the NDP already 
decided that the property taxpayers in Saskatchewan are going 
to get another bill? And will the minister tell property taxpayers 
today whether the responsibility is going to fall on them again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, there’s only one 
taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan and we recognize that 
we have a shared responsibility with school boards to provide 
public education in the K to 12 system. And we have a shared 
responsibility; where the provincial government has delegated 
authority to school divisions to tax the local tax base, they have 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

 

ratepayers. The provincial government then uses general funds 
to provide the remaining costs on an equalization basis. 
 
But I can tell the members opposite that since 1999 we have 
increased our foundation operating grant 20 per cent, far 
exceeding the rate of inflation. Mr. Speaker, we have covered 
100 per cent of the improvements to pension and benefits for 
teachers, all absorbed by the general revenue. And I can tell the 
members opposite that in their platform they promised not one 
penny. 
 
And where would their offloading occur? I can tell you that not 
one penny would have resulted in offloading of nearly $70 
million in our Learning budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if that minister would 
care to tell the House what he . . . his platform said about 
education funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister and his NDP 
government were truly committed to education, they would 
have put aside money to deal with the contract negotiations. 
The minister knew that bargaining was going to happen this 
year. The minister knew that they have the final clout on the 
decision for the increases because they make up the majority of 
the bargaining team. The minister knew that the wage increases 
for teachers have to happen if we’re going to recruit and retain 
teachers in this province. And yet the minister won’t commit to 
any of the money it’s going to take. 
 
This is the same government that can find $80 million to invest 
in Australia; the same government that can find $70 million to 
invest in a computerized land titles system that won’t work. 
And now they plan on dumping $70 million into a fantasy TV 
cable company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t this minister insist to his cabinet 
colleagues that investing in our children is a better way to grow 
Saskatchewan than investing in risky business deals across this 
country? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, day in and 
day out for some time now the members opposite say why are 
we spending taxpayers’ dollars in investments? Well the reality 
is that when we make investments we use dollars that are not 
coming from the General Revenue Fund, but I can guarantee to 
the members opposite that every single cent of those dollars that 
come back here are spent in Saskatchewan to support public 
education, to support health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And when you look at the members 
opposite in their platform, Mr. Speaker, not one penny, not one 
penny for education . . . 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 

Conflict of Interest Guidelines for Senior Civil Servants 
 
Mr. Wall: — The problem, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
problem is, is that all of these investment schemes all over the 
world are losing taxpayer dollars. That’s the problem with the 
argument. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister for 
the Crown Investments . . . 
 
The Speaker: — There may be a question but I’ve got to be 
able to hear it, members. Ask all members to tone it down. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investment Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 1998 
investigation into corruption, scandal, and the multi-million 
dollar losses in the NDP’s operation and sale of Channel Lake 
Petroleum in 1998, the Crown Corporations Committee made a 
number of recommendations to guard against such as scandal 
happening again. 
 
Recommendation 21 in the 1998 Channel Lake report says, and 
I quote: 
 

It is recommended that . . . Crown Corporations and 
Government of Saskatchewan require conflict of interest 
guidelines for senior employees both during their years of 
service and upon leaving the public service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, has the NDP implemented conflict 
of interest rules for senior Crown corporation employees 
recommended in the wake of the Channel Lake scandal in 
1998? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as Government House 
Leader, I want to inform the member from Swift Current that 
the NDP can be found at 1122 Saskatchewan Drive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
official opposition, thanks for the update. Thanks for the 
update. And that’s where they’re . . . that’s about the only place 
they’re going to be found after the next election. They’re won’t 
be any over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the question for the minister 
now that he’s done with his little geographical lesson. 
 
The Channel Lake report recommended that this NDP 
government implement conflict of interest guidelines for senior 
civil service employees both during their years of service and 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

quote, “upon leaving the public service.” Have they 
implemented that recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
government, I can say yes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we would ask, through 
you, we’d ask the government to table those conflict of interest 
guidelines. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we would also like to ask a question with 
respect to a recent development involving the former CEO 
(chief executive officer) of the Information Services 
Corporation. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP appointed Fraser 
Nicholson president of ISC (Information Services Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) when the government set up the Crown in 
January of 2000. Since that time ISC has paid more than $7 
million to contracts with EDS (Electronic Data Systems) as a 
major project consultant. 
 
The Leader-Post is reporting this morning that Mr. Nicholson is 
going to go work for EDS now after he blew, with the NDP 
approval, $60 million on this particular project and travelled the 
world without making a single sale. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister just stood up in the House and 
said that they have conflict of interest guidelines for senior 
employees, both while they’re working for the government and 
upon their exit. Were these conflict of interest guidelines 
examined in the context of Mr. Nicholson’s leaving ISC and 
joining a company that benefited greatly from ISC while he was 
there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in short, the 
answer to the member’s question is yes. 
 
And perhaps he’d like to read the second page of the article he 
quoted from in the Leader-Post today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, members. 
 

North Battleford Water Inquiry 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s now three months 
since the North Battleford Water Inquiry was wrapped up and 
made its final report — wrapped up except for one small detail. 
According to the Saskatchewan government Web site, the 
special adviser to the North Battleford Water Inquiry continues 
on the job. 
 
Constituents are asking me, in view of the fact there was no 
competition for this position, where can they too apply to get a 
$100,000 job advising an inquiry that doesn’t exist? What 

education and training is required in order to advise a defunct 
inquiry? What are the duties? Where do they get an application 
form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this province initiated a 
water strategy that’s very comprehensive, Mr. Speaker. It talks 
about partnerships. And, Mr. Speaker, the most important 
lesson that we’ve learned is that we can’t take safe water for 
granted. That’s where the focus should be, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s where the focus is at with this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, in the name of economy, this 
government laid off civil servants earning half and a third what 
this special adviser to a non-existent commission is making. 
 
Well my question is for the Premier. Last year the Premier told 
North Battleford, I will be there for you. Last week, the 
Minister of Environment told the North Battleford City Council 
they were getting nothing; they should look to their reserves 
and pay everything out of their reserves because they would get 
no help from the provincial government. 
 
Who speaks for this government? The Premier who says there 
will be help to municipalities facing water problems or the 
Minister of Environment who tells municipalities to go fly a 
kite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that 
we maintain the partnership approach to this whole process. We 
have always maintained that’s very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we talk about a partnership, we say municipalities, 
towns and villages, and RMs (rural municipality) all have a role 
to play. We’ve been very forthright and very honest with that 
approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:45) 
 
And I would remind that member not to play politics with this 
very important issue. Why? Because we can turn around and we 
can say, Mr. Speaker, November 29, 1995 an article in the 
North Battleford News-Optimist, and I quote: 
 

Councillor Jack Hillson inquired whether the small increase 
was necessary with reserves of $1.2 million . . . (inaudible) 
. . . pointed out there are major capital projects over the 
next five years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as a former councillor he knew very well that it’s 
always, always necessary to put money in reserves to make sure 
water and sewer systems are very carefully monitored and 
built-up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the Environment 
talks about partnership, but that’s not what he said to the city 
council. He said they would get nothing on a $13 million 
project, and as he just quoted 1 million in reserves is going to 
pay for that $13 million project. 
 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s chances in North Battleford are 
somewhere between slim and none, and I think slim just rode 
out of town. 
 
Will the Premier, will the Premier tell us why his Minister of 
the Environment says there will be no help for municipalities 
with water problems, but he still keeps on a special adviser 
earning $111,000 a year to advise an inquiry that doesn’t exist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government takes 
their role in water strategy very important. That’s why in a 
partnership forum we have never pointed fingers, Mr. Speaker. 
We have always maintained the partnership approach is the best 
way to handle this water strategy. 
 
And by way of that, Mr. Speaker, what we have done as a 
province, as municipalities, and certainly as . . . and the federal 
government’s involvement, we have announced a five-year 
$170 million program to assist in waste water and water 
projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have not said is we have not challenged the 
communities. We have not said to them, raise your rates. We 
have said, make sure that your systems are fair; make sure that 
you’re paying a fair amount for your water, Mr. Speaker. And 
what we’re trying to do is engage the communities. 
 
And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve got to do is tell 
people out there that when it comes to this particular challenge 
of trying to play politics with water, I have a request for them. 
And that request, Mr. Speaker, it’s a song called “Hit the Road, 
Jack.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would just, before we proceed 
any further, remind . . . Order. I would, before we go any 
further, I would just want to remind the minister of Sask Water 
that in his comments any referrals to members sitting in the 
Assembly should be only through their title . . . Order. Or their 
constituency. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Fortieth Anniversary of Medicare 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 
40th anniversary of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the roots of medicare as we 
know it today are here in this province. Forty years ago in the 
summer of 1962 we saw the introduction of universal, publicly 
funded, compulsory medical insurance in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the beginning of this health care reform was in 
1946 when the citizens of Swift Current established the first 
public health insurance program in North America. This 
program allowed approximately 18,000 families in 
southwestern Saskatchewan to receive coverage for doctor’s 
fees, child dental care, and most of the costs of hospitalization. 
 

In 1947, Mr. Speaker, then premier T.C. Douglas and his CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) government took the 
Swift Current example an enormous step forward by modelling 
the first provincial hospital insurance program in Canada after 
this concept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program meant that every Saskatchewan 
resident, regardless of ability to pay, was entitled to hospital 
care paid for by the provincial government. In 1961, Mr. 
Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan passed the medicare 
Act, the first of its kind in North America. 
 
This Act provided for publicly administered, prepaid, universal 
health care coverage in this province. It took 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker, before medicare was a reality for the rest of Canada, 
and all Canadians were then secure in the knowledge that they 
too would receive the medical care they needed regardless of 
their ability to pay. 
 
That is not to say, Mr. Speaker, that the passing of 
Saskatchewan’s medicare Act in 1962 was without controversy. 
But all Saskatchewan’s health care partners made a 
commitment at that time. And today, Mr. Speaker, we are proud 
in this province of our legacy to the health and well-being of all 
Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This province was the first to create a 
health care system of universal accessibility. Mr. Speaker, our 
province is again leading the way in Canada in health care 
reform. Premier Calvert and I, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale and I, were proud to introduce the Action Plan for 
Saskatchewan Health Care in December last year — a blueprint 
to secure the future of health care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1962, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan formed 
the first publicly funded, publicly administered health care 
system with universal medical coverage for all residents. Forty 
years later, Mr. Speaker, we have introduced a health plan to 
strengthen medicare. This government has recognized a need 
for a made-in-Saskatchewan approach to providing health care 
services. We support good health for every resident of our 
province. Healthy people and healthy communities, that was the 
goal in 1962 with the introduction of the medicare Act. It 
remains our goal today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to stand in the 
legislature today to celebrate the 40th anniversary of medicare 
and to share my optimism for the future of health care in this 
country. By working together with health care providers and the 
people of Saskatchewan, we will build a new sense of pride in 
our publicly funded system of medicare. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to 
respond to the ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Member will proceed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

a pleasure for me to respond to the minister’s statement on the 
40th anniversary of medicare in Canada. Mr. Speaker, indeed 
this has been a milestone — not only in Saskatchewan but in 
Canada — and in many countries of the world they look at the 
Canadian system of medicare as an example of a very quality 
health care system that was founded on some very strong 
principles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to also recognize and to 
point out that the whole system started from the very southwest 
corner of our province in Swift Current in 1946 where people 
realized that there would be a benefit to their communities if 
they banded together to provide basic health care coverage. And 
the government of the day, Mr. Douglas’s government, 
recognized that this was indeed a good model and I think that 
that is an important recognition. It took until 1962 to really 
bring the medical care act into Saskatchewan which served as 
the basis of the Canada Health Act which we now have in our 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our system of medicare and the publicly funded 
medical system has been a cornerstone of what Canada has been 
all about and how we consider ourselves as Canadians. It was 
interesting to watch the comments across the country as Mr. 
Romanow, who is currently one of the people that are reviewing 
the health care system, solicited input from Canadians across 
this country both by way of polling and by direct representation. 
And one of the common comments that you heard across this 
country is that how Canadians value the health care system that 
is rather unique in the world and something that we as 
Canadians use as a benchmark of who we are and how we care 
about each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think all Canadians, not only those of us in 
Saskatchewan but in every province, of every political stripe 
and background, recognize the importance of the fundamentals 
of the Canadian health care system. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s universally accepted as well that that system cannot remain 
static and cannot remain as it has been 40 years ago and survive 
the challenges of the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the health . . . when the medicare system 
was first developed, it was primary a system that was 
responding to the need for acute care and trauma care. It didn’t 
provide for outreaches in a positive sense to the community in 
terms of dealing with the fundamental principles and indicators 
of health and to look forward in a proactive way in terms of 
how we can prevent diseases rather than just manage its 
treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is an ongoing challenge for all of us as 
Canadians. And while this government certainly likes to bask in 
the decisions that were made 40 years ago, the challenge is 
today to meet the future of the next generation in the next 40 
years. And in many instances, Mr. Speaker, this government in 
Saskatchewan has not been living up to the expectation of 40 
years ago created by Mr. Douglas’s government. 
 
We sit in this province and we look at having the longest 
waiting lists in the country. We have a drastic and a serious 
shortage of health care professionals that has been exacerbated 
by this government’s decisions to cut back on training programs 
over the last decade. 

Mr. Speaker, while these individuals opposite in the NDP 
government of today like to bask in the decisions that were 
made 40 years ago, the people of Saskatchewan are going to 
hold them accountable for the decisions they’ve made in the last 
10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, looking forward to the future, 
I think that people in this country, in this province know that 
there’s going to have to be important decisions made, and we 
look forward to being the government in this province that 
builds the health care system for the 21st century. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone on his feet? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. With leave 
to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Prebble: — . . . Mr. Speaker, and my thanks to my 
colleagues in the Assembly. It’s my pleasure this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, to introduce three guests who are all deeply committed 
to our publicly funded health care system in the province. 
 
I’m pleased to draw to your attention in the Speaker’s gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, three representatives from Service Employees’ 
International Union. The first, to your left, Mr. Speaker, is 
Shawna Colpitts from SEIU (Service Employees’ International 
Union). And sitting next to her in the middle, Mr. Speaker, is 
Maureen Fryett, who is the national representative of SEIU and 
is also, Mr. Speaker, a resident of my constituency and a good 
friend and is involved in many, many community activities in 
Saskatoon. And sitting next to her, Mr. Speaker, is Sharleen 
Stewart, who’s the Canadian vice-president of SEIU. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members will join me in 
extending to our three guests a very, very warm welcome and 
our appreciation for all the work that they’re doing in the health 
care system, in the trade union movement, and in our 
communities. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 393 through 410 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 393 through 410 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

 

inclusive have been submitted. 
 
(11:00) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 57 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 57. This is 
an interesting Bill and it’s been an interesting day so far so 
we’ll try and keep the interest factor up. 
 
It was kind of interesting when we went through the question 
period, Mr. Speaker, and all that we got was the NDP address. 
I’m not sure if that was a fundraiser. I think on doing some 
research in the interim we found out that the actual address of 
the NDP is 666 Chaos Drive. And we’ll just see how much 
money they collected at that particular address. But that’s for 
the public to go ahead and send their notes to because it’ll be 
about as important as where they’ll go to in any other situation. 
 
Bill No. 57, dealing with the new change to the no-fault system. 
And what I would like to do, Mr. Speaker, is at some length 
look at the background to the whole no-fault concept, and then 
looking at where this government is today in the whole idea of 
no-fault, and then back to this Bill. Because if we don’t go 
through the history of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we’ll tend to make 
a lot of mistakes that have been made before and repeat them. 
 
And so even though Henry Ford said that history was dull bunk, 
I think we’ve also been told by people who probably knew 
more about history than Henry Ford did, that if we don’t look 
carefully at it we’re bound to repeat the same mistakes all over 
again. 
 
Concept of no-fault. This is one of those things that was 
developed to a large extent in Saskatchewan and then moved 
throughout the rest of Canada in some form or other. And I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, in all cases provinces have moved away 
from it because it’s become a system that actually doesn’t work. 
 
It is a real strange concept when you look at it, that you have an 
accident, one vehicle goes through a red light or a stop sign, hits 
another vehicle, and then the NDP would say, and we have a 
no-fault system. 
 
Now how in the world can you have a no-fault system when 
someone ploughs through a red light or stop sign and hits 
someone else? Only in Saskatchewan in a system where you 
have an NDP government could you dream up something that 
would actually say that that is no-fault. 
 
It comes back from an NDP government that is extremely and 
totally paternalistic. They have this idea that it’s their job to wet 

nurse the whole province. That without them, there is no 
opportunity for people to take care of themselves. That they are 
the ones and only the ones that can go ahead and take care of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But that’s not true, but that is a typical NDP attitude. The fact is 
the NDP would have made great colonial . . . colonizers. So 
they could then run it from on high, whatever address they gave 
today. They could run the whole system, centralize government, 
and just tell everybody else what to do. 
 
And that is exactly what’s been happening in Saskatchewan. 
This NDP government is a colonizing type of government. 
They’re paternalistic in their attitude, thinking that they have to 
tell absolutely everyone what to say. 
 
And I think we have to follow that concept through a little bit, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. You see our Premier is probably the best 
of these socialistic colonizers. The idea that it’s his job to take 
care of everything, that nobody else in this province possibly 
has any opportunity, any abilities, any intellect to go ahead and 
take care of their own affairs. That’s the kind of Premier we 
have, and he’s done this. 
 
Visualize this, Mr. Speaker, with us: that at the helm of the 
good ship Saskatchewan is captain Calvert guiding the ship 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And there he is at the helm of the 
good ship Saskatchewan, one hand on the wheel, and in the 
other hand guiding his . . . his guiding light is the Regina 
Manifesto. 
 
And then we wonder, Mr. Speaker, with that picture that we 
each visualize, why this particular province could go so wildly 
amuck in this particular millennium — in this particular 
millennium. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, interesting as that picture is, that picture 
isn’t quite correct — it isn’t quite correct. Because what we’ve 
seen from this session, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to want to 
go into this a little bit this morning, because if we don’t go into 
it we won’t quite understand this government, where it’s 
coming from, and what it’s all about. 
 
Actually the good ship Saskatchewan is not steered by the 
Premier. This good ship Saskatchewan is very much at sea. The 
only place you can find the good Premier is up in the crow’s 
nest. No control of where the ship’s going; no plan on where it 
should go. He can comment from time to time about where 
they’re at on an immediate situation on a day-to-day basis. He’s 
not steering. He just doesn’t have a vision, but he can sort of 
report. And we had that in question period today. 
 
He reported in question period that he talked to the Minister of 
Agriculture. But was there any information? No. No idea of 
what was going on; no idea of what they were doing; no idea of 
where they were going to go. 
 
It’s that kind of leadership of the good ship Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that has led to no-fault and the concepts that 
are out here right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting as we’re discussing this, we have the 
member from Cumberland, from his corner again, doing what 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

he does so often. Well I suggest that instead of sitting there, as a 
cabinet minister with no work to do, he should go down to the 
library and read a very impressive tome that was written in the 
spring of this year, discussing how well the NDP has done in 
northern Saskatchewan, called . . . about the CCF and the NDP 
colonialism in northern Saskatchewan, saying very well exactly 
why his government and his constituency is doing as poorly as 
it is; is doing as poorly as it is. 
 
And I would suggest that instead of chirping from their corners, 
they would do very well to read that document. Admittedly it’s 
some 2 or 300 pages and it’s very well documented. And he’d 
find out something very well that would lead him to understand 
why some of the difficulties that exist in his constituency are 
there. It’s because of NDP-CCF (New Democratic 
Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) rule since the 
1940s. That’s what it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let’s go back to what we’re all about this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill No. 57. This government is totally at sea. Where 
are they today? This no-fault mentality. Let’s just follow that 
through because there is a mentality there, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
been demonstrated very much this spring. And once we finished 
demonstrating this no-fault mentality, Mr. Speaker, we’ll go 
into some of the specifics in Bill No. 57 and how they indicate 
that. 
 
Let’s just look what happened. Well we had the member from 
Nutana at a meeting in Cypress Hills some time ago, had a 
major falling apart with the rest of the cabinet. So what should 
the Premier have done? The Premier should have moved that 
member to the back row out of cabinet. But instead we just had 
a sideways shuffle to the left — that’s all, that’s all. 
 
Let’s look at a few other things that indicate that they’re very 
much at sea and how the no-fault mentality follows this 
through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had the Minister of Justice, we had the Minister of Justice 
— we’re talking no-fault — Minister of Justice basically sign 
off on a particular document saying that malicious prosecution 
took place and has signed away $1.3 million. Then a day or two 
later in this House, Mr. Speaker, in this House he stood in his 
place and read a prepared statement — we’re not sure who 
prepared it yet but I think we’ll find out — read a prepared 
statement saying that oh, he was wrong on this and there really 
was no-fault to the prosecutors. There was no-fault and that 
actually he was totally wrong and he hadn’t meant to say what 
he said, and anyone that had heard what he said should forget 
what he said because it wasn’t what he meant. And so he still 
sits in his place. 
 
Now we have some hope for the Minister of Justice because, as 
we’ve discussed earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s made it well 
known that, as July 1, he’s going to be entering into a new 
sphere of influence. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be very 
interesting to see, when we come back after the break that we’re 
taking, whether he’s actually still here, whether he’s in his 
place, or whether he’s here in the legislature at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyways, Bill No. 57 dealing with the automobile accident 
insurance. Now, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll come back to some of 
these things about the mentality of no-fault, how pervasive it is 

in the NDP cabinet and how it shows itself in this particular 
piece of legislation. 
 
Now over the past two years there have been across this 
province numbers of meetings held by an organization called 
the Victims of No Fault. Because the Victims of No Fault 
looked at the old no-fault insurance situation and said there are 
many issues that involve no-fault, issues that the people of 
Saskatchewan actually suffer because of, because the legislation 
that was there under no-fault weren't adequate, or actually 
allowed that particular Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, to do 
things with the citizens of Saskatchewan that were totally 
unfair. 
 
And so as the Victims of No Fault met around this province, 
Mr. Speaker, I was one of many Sask Party MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) that attended those meetings. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I only missed two across the whole 
province. 
 
And it was interesting because as we went from location to 
location to location, it was the local people, it was the local 
people that came there and presented their concerns. At no time 
did we have the same people presenting the same concern over 
and over again, which is what happens, Mr. Speaker, when the 
NDP run their little dog and pony shows around the province. 
 
Because they’ll have the NFU (National Farmers Union) and 
Nettie Wiebe show up time after time after time, giving the 
same presentation. And the real grassroots never comes up to 
have an opportunity to speak to the NDP, Mr. Speaker. They 
never have that opportunity. 
 
But the Victims of No Fault did an admirable job in going 
across the province and hearing from new people in those 
particular areas of the province presenting their concerns. And 
there were some very serious concerns that they had, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the concerns was that when there was an accident who 
should be making some of the decisions in the no-fault 
situation? Who should be making the decisions as to what 
treatment takes place and who is at fault and how is this whole 
system going to work? 
 
And one of the concerns that came through in many, many 
cases is that the family doctors, the ones who knew the victims 
of that accident the best had very little say and almost no real 
input, Mr. Speaker, almost no real input into what was 
happening with the victim themselves. 
 
And so it would happen, Mr. Speaker, is that the victim would 
suffer an injury and then the doctor that would treat them would 
make a particular statement about it and then who would make 
the final decision? It would be, Mr. Speaker — and this sounds 
somewhat bizarre, Mr. Speaker, but it’s true — in many cases it 
would be the adjuster. The adjuster would be the ones who 
would be making final decisions on health care and treatment. 
The family doctor could not make that final decision. 
 
The person who knew the medical history could not make that 
final decision. The person who had been at the bedside in many 
situations with this individual could not make that decision. It 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

 

happened to be not a medical person but an adjuster. 
 
That is utterly bizarre, Mr. Speaker. It’s very much the same 
situation that happens very often in WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board). And we’ve had workers who’ve come 
through, who’ve been injured and come through WCB, and 
said, I want my family doctor to have some input. That family 
doctor has very little opportunity to have an input and virtually 
no opportunity to have any final decision-making say in WCB. 
And it’s the same in victims of no-fault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many areas there should be an opportunity for 
the victim to have some choice of treatment, because which 
treatment works is very often a subjective sort of a thing. And 
as we well know, if we believe that a treatment’s going to work 
and there are two or three treatments that probably all would 
have an equal opportunity of being successful, if the person has 
trust and respect and faith in a particular treatment it’s much 
more likely to work and be successful than if that person has to 
go to a treatment that they say I have no faith in this particular 
treatment and fact is, I think it’s absolutely a painful treatment, 
my situation is actually getting worse. Why would they not 
allow the victim to have some choice in what their treatment’s 
going to be? 
 
(11:15) 
 
But no, it would be the adjuster, Mr. Speaker, not the family 
doctor, not an expert, but adjuster would be making that 
decision. That, Mr. Speaker, is obviously and clearly an 
infraction of giving any respect to the intelligence of the victim, 
to the family doctor, to the family, to those people who know 
the situation the best. 
 
Those are the stories that we heard around this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We heard them from very many people. And it was 
sort of an underlying theme that would run through. 
 
There were situations, Mr. Speaker, where people said, here’s a 
settlement that I received, a cash settlement, and it is nowheres 
near adequate to what I have suffered, it is nowheres near 
adequate. And those things need to be addressed as well. 
 
Point in fact, Mr. Speaker. If an individual had just purchased a 
business that had been highly successful over the years, and this 
person had purchased this business and was going to take over 
and run that business starting tomorrow, and on this particular 
day, today, they were driving across this province to take over 
that business and they were hurt in an accident — seriously hurt 
so they could not perform the duties required in that new 
business — what would SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) say? They would say, we’ll take you back to what 
you were earning before. What you would have very likely 
earned, what is almost a sure thing you would have earned, that 
is not at all part of the picture. That is not at all part of the 
picture. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is an example that did occur in this province. 
Exactly that example. Totally unfair. These are decisions made 
by adjusters who were not concerned about the individual, who 
were not concerned about the medical history, who were not 
concerned about the family, what the family physician had to 
say. They were concerned only on trying to have a good case 

record. That’s all. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, coming from the NDP-CCF who claim they 
have a social conscience. We would have thought exactly the 
opposite of them where they would say, well let’s look at the 
individual, see the kind of situation they’re actually in, and let’s 
have a bit of the milk of human kindness. But not from a 
socialist government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We won’t find that 
from them. In those cases they can be the most hard-hearted 
group you’re going to run across anywheres. 
 
We had a fire in our community, Mr. Speaker, early this spring. 
Fortunately the individual had insurance other than through the 
government system. He could go there and, Mr. Speaker, he put 
the whole plan on the table with that particular adjuster and 
said, here’s what I all want to have happen. Ordinarily as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, money is doled out bit by bit as the process 
takes place, as the cleanup takes place, as the new basement’s 
built, as the new house is put on. But this individual went to his 
insurance company and said I’d like to do this in a different sort 
of a way. 
 
That insurance company — a private insurance company — sat 
down with him over the table and said we’re quite prepared to 
deal with this. They sat down at one sitting on that table, drew 
up the final settlement, and the whole thing was settled. They 
were very happy, they were very impressed. 
 
You wouldn’t find that with the system that the CCF-NDP set 
up. You wouldn’t find that because they wouldn’t be prepared 
to say okay here’s an individual, let’s deal with him as an 
individual and if he has a little different concept let’s listen to 
some common sense, to some reality. And maybe we can 
accomplish what we as a company need to accomplish and meet 
the needs of the individual that happen. It wouldn’t happen with 
a Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we travelled around the province with the 
Victims of No Fault there were many stories. Stories that told of 
rough treatment where the treatment that was prescribed — and 
they had to be there — if the treatment became that painful that 
they felt we just couldn’t possibly survive another one of those 
treatments, there was no alternative because the adjuster would 
say you be there or we cut you off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a situation just like that in my home 
constituency going on today. There’s a woman who was hurt 
very seriously in an accident, some very serious back and neck 
injuries, almost totally incapable of movement, requires oxygen 
almost at all times to survive . . . was supposed to go Saskatoon 
to the University Hospital for some treatment, needed two 
people basically, Mr. Speaker, to get her there. That’s as serious 
as her condition is. 
 
But what did her adjuster say? And again underline this, Mr. 
Speaker, what did her adjuster say? It wasn’t her family 
physician who made this recommendation. Her adjuster says, 
you go down to Calgary and get a particular assessment made. 
But she can’t travel in her condition, Mr. Speaker. She cannot 
travel. 
 
The adjuster says, you get there or you’re cut off. That’s the 
situation she finds herself in. That’s no-fault, that’s the reality 



2388 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

of no-fault. That’s the reality of no-fault, Mr. Speaker, taking 
place today in Saskatchewan with the citizens of this particular 
province. 
 
Yes it needed to be looked at, Mr. Speaker, there was no doubt 
about that. The victims of no-fault underline that time and 
again. One of the concerns that the Victims of No Fault 
underline — and we weren’t even sure if it was as serious as 
they said it was — and that, Mr. Speaker, came to the concept 
of being spied on. And to what extent, and what purpose, and 
why. And so we’ve raised that in the House this particular 
spring session, Mr. Speaker. Every insurance company, Mr. 
Speaker, every insurance company has to ensure that fraud 
doesn’t take place. And they have to make sure that they’re very 
vigilant in those areas. But under what circumstances, what 
criteria? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the insurance industry has very 
definite criteria. These are not secretive documents, Mr. 
Speaker. These are documents that are readily available. It’s the 
insurance industry has very definite criteria on what their 
surveillance regulations, rules, criteria are. 
 
Now when we ask this government what is the NDP’s criteria 
they said, well we don’t know what they are, we don’t know if 
we have them, we don’t know if they’re broken. We remember 
the minister very well getting up in the House saying one thing, 
and then he hid in his vestibule back there, Mr. Speaker, he hid 
in his vestibule for 45 minutes to an hour before going out to 
talk to the media. And then he would talk to the media and he 
had a different story than he had in here. And then at the end of 
the day we found out he wasn’t sure which was right. 
 
He didn’t know what he was talking about. Neither did his 
advisers back there know what they were talking about. So we 
spent about $50,000 to find out what happened. And you know 
what, lo and behold, he managed to be able to blame his 
advisers, that they gave him bad information. But they’re still 
there giving him advice. Well I can see why when he comes in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, he huddles behind his desk and 
doesn’t want to be seen. He’s hoping that we’re not going to ask 
him another question. Because when he goes back to check with 
his advisers, he still doesn’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
kind of information they’re actually giving him. 
 
So we asked that question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 
surveillance. But no, they didn’t know what the criteria were. 
So then we brought in an example. We brought an example of 
people that SGI had hired to do some investigation and some 
surveillance. Now remember, Mr. Speaker, the person that 
needed to be surveilled — if anyone did need to be surveilled, 
and we don’t know because we’re not sure of their criteria — 
most of the individuals on that tape of surveillance were people 
other than the individual involved in the accident. They 
followed all sorts of other people around. They followed all 
kinds of other individuals. They followed around family 
members. They followed around friends. They basically had an 
hour to two hours of tape of people other — other — than the 
client themselves; other than the client themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now under what — what — criteria would the NDP start 
investigating and surveilling citizens of this province that had 

absolutely nothing to do with the accident? 
 
It just follows the big brother, colonial, paternalistic attitude 
that a CCF government has in all cases. They feel they need to 
know everything about everybody all the time, and they don’t 
know why. When we asked them why, what was their criteria, 
they had absolutely no idea. They still have no idea. 
 
This individual, Mr. Speaker, is getting about $80 a month in 
health care help. They spent over $3,000 in surveillance to 
surveil all kinds of other people but the client themselves. And 
then, Mr. Speaker, when this client asked their insuring agent, is 
there any surveillance going on, the insurance agent said no. 
That was another SGI person. That’s the kind of system the SGI 
runs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No wonder the people of this province asked for a change. No 
wonder Victims of No Fault could get the crowds they got all 
across this province saying that it’s time to look . . . re-look at 
the insurance system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s just look at what happens, Mr. Speaker, when we look at 
something very simple like a fender-bender. Let’s take 
something very concrete and solid. Now a previous minister 
that they had in charge of SGI said that the cost of insurance 
went up because now they’re dealing in big parts like fenders. 
Big parts like fenders. That was the expensive thing. Well it 
shows the knowledge of the NDP-CCF, that the expensive part 
on a car would be a fender; a fender, Mr. Speaker, 2, 3, $400. A 
lot of the other garnish parts, electronic parts run into thousands 
of dollars immediately. But the minister got up and said oh, SGI 
is so expensive because now we’re putting on big parts like 
fenders. It was a totally ludicrous answer. But it was, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the best answer that a CCF-NDP could give 
and it shows how much they actually know about the particular 
system. 
 
What happens if you have a disagreement with your adjuster on 
the metal parts, the metal parts, the fix-up parts on a car? We’re 
not dealing with human people right now. This should be easily 
addressed. 
 
So let’s say if there is a disagreement, and the owner of the 
damaged vehicle says you want to write this vehicle off, you 
want to call it a total write-off, but I think that my vehicle is 
worth more than yours is. 
 
So what happens then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that both sides 
will get an individual to represent themselves, and sort of plead 
the case in front of the adjuster, but the adjuster gets to pick 
who he wants on his side. This happened in my hometown in 
the last three weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The SGI representative came up with a list of values for this 
vehicle. And where did he get his list from, Mr. Speaker? From 
the Leader-Post, vehicles for sale, from dealerships in 
Saskatchewan, from The StarPhoenix, from the Wakaw 
Recorder? No, they got the list, Mr. Speaker, from Florida. The 
SGI representative had this big long list of cars for sale — 
happened to be a Mercedes, by the way — and on that list were 
vehicles for sale in Florida. Now what a ludicrous way to go 
ahead and try and find out what an individual’s value on a 
vehicle actually is. 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2389 

 

You take a vehicle from Florida. You have to be able to get 
down there to bring it back. You’ve got the cost of bringing it 
back. You’ve got to bring it across the border. You’ve got to 
pay the taxes. You’ve got to give it the safety inspection. Now 
you have all those variable costs. 
 
And SGI wanted to use the cost of a vehicle in Florida to pay 
out the damage on a vehicle from a Saskatchewan citizen. That 
shows you how totally out of touch SGI and the CCF is in 
running SGI and Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill has had a whole lot of 
attention. This particular speaker . . . this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP a day or two ago was going to make a big 
issue about why the Saskatchewan Party wasn’t going to pass 
this thing before July 1. Because if it didn’t get passed by July 
1, Mr. Speaker, then what was going to happen is all those 
people who were hoping to get a break on their drivers’ 
licences, because that’s where your good driving record actually 
shows up in a reduction of premiums . . . And I’m proud to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that when I received my document just a week or 
so ago, I’ll actually be getting a substantial reduction because 
the people on this side, the Saskatchewan Party people, are 
good drivers, Mr. Speaker. We are responsible people — we are 
responsible people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I get a reduction too. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I have the Minister of Finance saying he gets 
a reduction as well. And I could see that, Mr. Speaker, because 
the Minister of Finance, the only way to balance his budget will 
be that if SGI doesn’t incur another $100 in cost. So that’s fine. 
 
(11:30) 
 
But anyways, they said that if we didn’t pass this thing, and 
they were making a big issue of it. They contacted the media 
and said, guess what, because the Saskatchewan Party isn’t 
going to pass this piece of legislation by the long weekend, 
we’re going to have all the people who renew their licences in 
July aren’t going to get their premium. 
 
Well first of all, that was a shylock piece of information they 
passed around. Because in actuality they have created an 
omnibus Bill, Mr. Speaker. And you know what an omnibus 
Bill is, is where a government has a good piece of legislation, 
then they slide another piece of legislation over top and say, 
you have to pass these two together, so you get all or nothing. 
And so they’re going to make the big media issue on that one 
little piece. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what happened. We made a very 
definite statement that the Sask Party was quite prepared to 
listen to any amendments to accommodate this piece of 
legislation so that all those citizens who would have had that 
reduction, that premium reduced because of good driving 
during the month of July, would get it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, just to make sure that the NDP knew what 
they were talking about, we made a phone call to the head of 
SGI. And he said, well we knew this piece of legislation 
probably wasn’t going to pass before July 1 so we’ve already 
made accommodations for that. 

This government was so out of touch with SGI that the SGI 
president had to take care of the legislation as it was going 
through this House to accommodate the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, but the NDP wasn’t going to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation needs a lot of discussion. I 
have just barely touched on some of the things that need to be 
said. I have a lot to say and a number of parties have a lot to say 
about the no-fault mentality. 
 
And I talked about that when I talked about the Minister of 
Justice and the fault that showed up in cabinet. I could say 
something about the Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) and bad water. I 
could even talk about the Whip, the Whip, who just about a 
year ago, his ineptitude resulted in the government losing a vote 
for the first time in this millennium, Mr. Speaker — the first 
time in this millennium. 
 
We have very much more to say on this Bill. And for that 
reason, Mr. Speaker, I at this time move adjournment of Bill 
No. 57. 
 
The division bells rang from 11:33 until 11:43. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 22 
 
Hermanson Heppner  
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order, please. Order. I would ask members to remain in order 
throughout the entire voting procedure so that the Clerk is able 
to get the voting correctly. And I will insist on that, members. 
Order. 
 
Julé Draude Gantefoer 
Bjornerud Toth Wakefield 
Stewart McMorris D’Autremont 
Bakken Wall Brkich 
Wiberg Weekes Harpauer 
Hart Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert Hillson  
 

Nays — 27 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Melenchuk 
Cline Osika Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise to join the debate on the automobile . . . 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

Bill No. 57, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely important bit of legislation 
and it absolutely amazes me that this government does not want 
to allow proper time for due consultation and investigation of 
the implications of this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I recall, no-fault accident insurance legislation 
was introduced some seven or eight years ago. We’ve been 
operating under this no-fault system for the last seven years and 
it’s taken all of this time and all of the hearings and all of the 
meetings that were held across this province by one group or 
the other to finally get it through this government’s thick heads 
that this legislation had serious faults in it. 
 
And it took this government seven years to wake up to that fact 
and, Mr. Speaker, now they want to ram it through in a couple 
of days. Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of heavy-handed, 
autocratic attitude that this government has on the way they 
think government should be conducted. Their attitude, Mr. 
Speaker, is they know best and everybody else — the ordinary 
folks right through this province — know absolutely nothing 
compared to the supreme wisdom of this NDP government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, quite simply that’s dead wrong. This 
government is dead wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I am dismayed 
by the attitude of this government. On one hand they take 
forever to be brought to reality about the mistaken direction that 
their legislation has taken this province’s situation for people 
and victims of serious accidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they got this into their heads seven or eight years 
ago that they had the great enlightenment of the world and their 
new system was going to be best. Come hell or high water they 
were going to stick to it and see to it that it was going to be 
something everybody had to live with. 
 
And gradually, gradually, gradually as people from all corners 
of this province expressed the concerns that they had about the 
unfairness and the arbitrary way in which victims were being 
dealt with, finally — finally — it sunk through this 
government’s head is that their single-minded devotion to the 
one option was simply not going to be accepted to the people of 
this province. 
 
And all of a sudden just as if they found inspiration on the road 
to Damascus, all of a sudden they come up with a changed plan 
for consideration by the people of the province. And good that 
finally they did that. Good for them that finally they smartened 
up after seven years. 
 
The Minister of Finance sits there and smiles as if this is a great 
improvement. Well it is some improvement, the question is why 
did it take you so long? Why did it take you so long to smarten 
up? Why is the government so thick headed about these kinds 
of decisions that they will not listen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer: — And then, Mr. Speaker, and then, Mr. 
Speaker, when finally, when finally they do catch on, finally 
they realize that there’s something wrong with it and maybe it’s 
the reality of the fact that all the polling that is showing that 
their government is falling apart in the estimation of 
Saskatchewan people, maybe that’s what’s led to the 
conversion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Because even the Liberals, when they poll 
all of their 35 members in the province, realize that they’re 
falling out of favour, Mr. Speaker. Everybody understands that 
this government’s agenda is falling off the rails, Mr. Speaker. 
And maybe that’s what explains a sudden willingness to 
change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then when they finally realize that they’ve been on the 
wrong track, then they want to jam this thing through before the 
long weekend. They want to make sure that they jam this thing 
through without proper time for scrutiny and debate. And quite 
simply, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will no longer 
tolerate that kind of heavy handedness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, democracy 
simply cannot be ignored by this NDP government. This 
official opposition and the third party member simply will stand 
here and say this issue needs to be debated. This issue needs to 
be discussed. This issue needs to be talked about so that people 
of this province can understand the ramifications of the system 
we had in the past and where this potentially is going. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we on this side of the House will see to it that that 
happens in a proper and effective way as the official opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you would think that the government would 
actually learn something. I mean, they tried to ram through 
earlier in this session arbitrary and totally unacceptable changes 
to the long-term care fee structure. And only after day after day 
and week after week of telling them that they were wrong, after 
mobilizing people across this province to write in and send 
petitions, finally they backed off of that track. Mr. Speaker, 
why are they so determined to try to push through legislation 
that the people of this province do not have time to look at and 
scrutinize and have a due process of proper investigation? Mr. 
Speaker, it’s wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise my voice to some of the 
issues that are implied in the . . . where we’ve been over the last 
seven years with no-fault and to raise some concerns and to 
point out some issues that people need to think about in the way 
this legislation is being presented. Mr. Speaker, I am concerned 
about a fundamental attitude that I see in the no-fault system 
and I have also seen in the way this government is moving in 
many fronts on the legislative agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about what seems to be the 
attitude of this NDP government is that for some reason they 
have been granted some special kind of enlightenment in this 
province that no one else in the province has. They’ve been 
somehow destined to have this great wisdom about what’s 
needed for the people of this province, and it doesn’t matter if 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

 

the people of this province do not agree with it, do not like it, 
do not accept it. They are going to make sure that their will be 
done no matter what, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
fundamental problem and it is entirely disconnected with the 
real people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government 
and any government should know that the only way that you 
can properly relate and provide good governance for people of 
their jurisdiction is to remain connected with the needs and 
desires and dreams, and be connected to what people’s 
aspirations and dreams are for the province. You can’t . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — You can’t sit in this ivory tower in the 
high-rises of government department buildings in Regina and 
sit there in isolation and say, I’m sorry people of Saskatchewan, 
you’re dead wrong and we’re absolutely right so get used to it, 
we’re going to decide what’s best for you. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that attitude has not only been an attitude 
that we see exhibited in their approach to no-fault. It is going 
into the health system. It’s going into the education system. It’s 
going into the way this government is coming into a bunker 
mentality almost and saying it doesn’t matter what people think. 
 
What matters is what we decide. And we’re going to go to our 
little meetings with each other in an increasingly small group of 
people because everybody is either leaving or supporting the 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And this small little cadre of people who 
have all this wisdom in the world are making decisions because 
they know what’s best. Well I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
know what’s best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I think that they’ve just been 
there too long. They’ve lost touch and connection with the 
people that they need to serve and the people are going to make 
adjustments to that situation soon enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they put in no-fault, they again had this 
attitude and they said we know what’s best for you. If you’re a 
victim of no-fault and you’re an accident victim, many times — 
in almost all instances — these people have had varying 
degrees of injury as a result of an accident. And in some 
instances . . . in many instances the degree of injury was very 
severe. 
 
And this government said we know what’s best for you; it’s no 
problem. We’re going to take care of you because we know 
better what’s best for you than your parents or your spouse or 
your family. We know better what’s best for you than the 
family physician or the specialist that may have been consulted 
on the referral of the family physician. We know what’s best for 
you. 

No matter what all of this other evidence is, we know what is 
best and to make sure you’re going to listen to our advice, we 
control the purse strings. We’re going to decide what’s going to 
be paid for and what’s going to be covered. Where you’re going 
to go to get this service, who you’re going to talk to, and what 
referrals are going to be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this closed shop attitude is simply not in the spirit 
of the way this system should work. Mr. Speaker, there needs to 
be meaningful consultation and input from the family members, 
from the health care providers, from the family physicians and 
the referred-to specialists. And not just a small group of medical 
people who are more answerable to the system than they are 
answerable to the clients that they should be serving. Mr. 
Speaker, time and time again across this province, people have 
come forward and expressed the fact that this was a 
fundamental flaw in the no-fault system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you end up with that kind of a situation, you 
end up with the government — in many cases SGI insurance 
representatives, client representatives — making decisions that 
could impact negatively on a person’s long-term health 
outcomes. They might be making decisions that are based on 
short-term financial expediency, and that could have 
tremendous long-term implications on an individual’s health. 
And that potentially is again one of those things that aren’t in 
the best interests for the client but are in the best interest of 
SGI. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think that that issue has come to 
the fore time and time again as people have said this system, in 
its current configuration, is unacceptable to us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, far too often in my experience as the official 
opposition Health critic, I have seen that decisions have been 
made that have been expedient in the short term and have had 
serious long-term ramifications not only to the individual but on 
to the health care system. And it’s ended up with a situation 
where what seemed to be a short-term expedient decision has 
ended up impacting in a significant way on a person’s 
long-term care or long-term health outcomes and have impacted 
very negatively on the very expensive requirements for further 
interventions that have been only made necessary by poor 
decisions that were made in the short term. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m concerned about that. 
 
We have a situation where we have tremendous waiting lists. 
We have tremendous pressures on our medical professionals. 
And we simply have got to do everything we can to make sure 
that decisions that are made today are going to be good 
decisions for the long term. And they have to be thoughtful and 
they have to be done collaboratively, not just with a small 
exclusive group of people that have come to the favour of the 
SGI system, but of their referred-to professionals and family 
physicians and the family members themselves. We got to think 
about what the ramifications of this are on the long term. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important when we discuss 
this legislation and its serious implications and ramifications for 
the health outcomes and the health status of people who are 
affected by the no-fault system, we’ve got to think about it in 
terms of the bigger picture and the larger parameters. It just 
simply is not good enough to take it into a little narrow thing 
and to look at a bit of legislation that is over 100 pages in length 
and think that we can do this in a day or two. We need proper 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

time to discuss it and debate it. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing that has been told to us when we 
talk to people that have been affected by the no-fault system, 
they’re saying that even if the decisions are working in terms of 
the health outcome, I have to do every single thing that big 
brother government and SGI client service representatives are 
going to decide for me. There is no latitude on a personal level 
or on a family level or on an adult individual, to make some 
decisions for themselves. Everything is funnelled through big 
brother in the centralized decision-making core, and these 
people then make these decisions. 
 
And so you create an environment of total dependence and 
reliance on someone else making these decisions, rather than 
empowering people and allowing them to make some decisions 
for themselves about their future and their needs as a victim of 
no-fault, all of this is done for them by this great centralized 
bureaucratic system that this NDP government loves so much. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that simply is not where the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people are going to be found. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what this 
legislation envisages is at least moving to some extent into a 
parallel system that will allow options for people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t know why it has taken so long to open up any 
opportunities for a parallel path. I understand that for a number 
of years now, that people that had proposed a premiere option 
that was going to create a balance between what the current 
system had and what was going to be a system that allowed 
more flexibility, but the government just couldn’t accept this 
good advice. They just couldn’t simply say, you know the 
people of the province have looked at this issue and they’ve 
come up with a good plan. They’ve got to come up with their 
own system that’s now going to create I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a fair bit of confusion in the system. 
 
As the legislation outlines, each individual who is going to 
register with their driver’s licence is going to have to make a 
decision as to if they’re going to stay under the no-fault system 
as being proposed or in the new tort system that is going to be 
the option. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, everybody is going to rely on the impartial 
advice that’s going to come from SGI adjusters and client 
representatives to weigh out all the factors that need to be 
considered in deciding which system to go to. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to require that there’s proper consultation and 
there’s proper discussion about this legislation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a shame that this government’s 
attitude has been one to say we know what’s best for you, we 
are going to decide for you. We are going to centralize all the 
decision making about this and every other aspect of your life. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, quite simply, the people of this 
province will have no more of it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this legislation needs proper 

time and an opportunity for members in this House to properly 
debate and discuss this resolution. And I certainly was pleased 
to state today, by my vote not to adjourn this debate, to voice 
my concern that proper debate should not be stifled and that 
reasonable, practical solutions to the time realities should be 
met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the government said yesterday, I 
believe, that we have to pass this by July 1 in order to have 
people who are going to qualify for deductions, because of a 
good driving record, to apply. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
simply is nonsense. 
 
We talked to Mr. Fogg, the head of SGI, who said that isn’t the 
big deal problem. We can easily put in an amendment that will 
make this particular clause of the legislation, will be retroactive 
to July 1, so everybody that qualifies for a deduction on their 
premium is going to get a deduction on their premium on July 1 
as planned. And we not only accepted that advice from Mr. 
Fogg in our speech yesterday, we actually proposed that. And 
we said to the government here’s a suggestion from the head of 
SGI as to how to take care of the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the speaker because — the member who has the floor 
— because of individual conversations. So I would ask all hon. 
members to stay in order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we listened to what Mr. Fogg said, the 
president of SGI. And yesterday the member from Cannington, 
in his speech, said, look it, members opposite, NDP 
government, we think that this is a practical solution. Obviously 
the president of SGI thinks it’s a good solution. It’s something 
that’s easy to work, we’ve said that we as the official opposition 
would support that kind of an amendment. We said if the 
government is always so worried about getting credit for 
everything, even if they haven’t had an original idea in the last 
decade . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — We can . . . we’re prepared to let you do it 
as a House amendment. We will support a House amendment 
that’ll make this provision retroactive to July 1, no problem. 
And so this absolutely takes away any need to have this 
legislation rammed through this legislature. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not see or understand why 
this government is so determined to limit debate on this issue. I 
don’t see why they’re in such a big hurry to ram this thing 
forward, to not allow proper time for discussion and interaction 
between members of this Assembly and the people of this 
province about such an important piece of legislation — 
legislation that’s taken the government opposite seven years to 
even get to this point. Now they want to have it over in two 
days of debate. Well, Mr. Speaker, you know and I know, we 
all know that that’s simply unacceptable. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we proposed a practical alternative. We 
consulted with Mr. Fogg about the implications and he said this 
is a very legitimate and a good idea. We offered it to the 
government to say we’ll support that as a House amendment so 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

 

that there’s proper time for discussion of this important piece of 
legislation to occur in this House. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I was proud to stand in this House 
today and not let the government shut off debate on this issue. 
I’m proud to have taken my place and be able to debate it. And 
I trust that other members of this House will rise in their place 
as well to debate this important issue and make sure that this 
government does not limit the debate and cannot shut this 
legislation down so people of this province will not have a 
chance to have any input. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government can try to ram this stuff 
down the people of Saskatchewan’s throats. But the people will 
have the final say. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been two years. 
It’s been two years since the No-Fault Review Committee 
reported. It took this government two years to make a decision 
and come up with legislation. Now after taking two years, they 
finally wait two months into this session before they bring 
down the amendments — amendments that were . . . (inaudible) 
. . . down several months ago. So it takes them two months to 
bring in amendments after two years when they got the report. 
 
And now they’re saying they have to get it passed immediately. 
There’s no time for consultation to the people involved. There’s 
no time for consultation with Saskatchewan motorists and the 
opposition must be muzzled. 
 
Now we can take our sweet time. We can take two years, they 
tell us, two years from the report. We can have this legislature 
sitting for a couple of months without seeing the amendments. 
They won’t let us see the amendments. They hold them back, 
even though we know they’ve been done but they hold them 
back. But, by golly, once they come down, it’s imperative that 
they be passed and passed now because they’re not going to 
allow any consultation. They’re not going to allow any 
deliberation. 
 
Well this, Mr. Speaker, just doesn’t make sense. We should 
have had these amendments before us on day one of the session. 
They should have been before us last year when the government 
already had plenty of time from the review committee’s report. 
 
They can take all the time in the world but the opposition, the 
stakeholders, and Saskatchewan motorists and licence holders, 
they are not allowed the same luxury as this government. 
 
I think we also have to look at what is in, what is . . . I think 
what is in this Act also tells us a lot about the way this 
government operates. Now first of all let me say there are some 
good things here. We know that after no-fault came in, some 
outrageous court decisions came down as a result of the loopy 
writing of the original legislation. 
 
The original legislation was so flawed that we had one case 
where a man used his motor vehicle, used his car as a weapon 
to run down a woman. This was not an accident. There was no 
accident involved. This was a deliberate assault, a deliberate 
attempt to run down a woman who could not sue because of the 

no-fault legislation. 
 
Now this was outrageous but this was a situation created by the 
original flawed wording of the original Act. It needed to be 
corrected. Well finally, finally the government has moved to 
correct that judgment and correct the wrong wording in the 
initial legislation. Why it’s taken so long I don’t know, but at 
least we have to say better late than never. 
 
Another, another court decision again arising out of the flawed 
wording of the original Act provided that when there is 
manufacturer’s defect, that you cannot sue for a defect in the 
manufacture of a motor vehicle. Again because of the no-fault 
legislation. Well clearly it was outrageous that no-fault 
legislation was being used to protect car companies who had 
put a defective vehicle on the market. And yet that was the 
situation. 
 
Well again this was a crazy situation which came about because 
of the defective wording of the initial legislation. Finally, 
finally, finally the government is moving to correct it, and I 
congratulate them for it. I still wonder why it took so long and I 
still wonder why, when they take so long to move, they say that 
the opposition is playing games when they want more than a 
couple of weeks to talk to stakeholders, to talk to Saskatchewan 
motorists. 
 
They’ve also told us that they’re worried about the rebate 
program. But the rebate program too, Mr. Speaker, is terribly 
flawed because it hasn’t been properly thought out. Under the 
rebate program, and I have a situation now with constituents in 
this category, if you hold a licence jointly, even if both of you 
qualify for the maximum, you get nothing. 
 
Now I don’t know if you can get your mind around that, Mr. 
Speaker, I can’t — I can’t. How is it that this program is so 
flawed, so badly worded, so badly drafted that because they 
hold their licence plates jointly there is no rebate, but both of 
them if they held a licence plate in their own name solely would 
qualify for the maximum rebate. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously we want the July people to get the 
rebate, and we will support that — personally I’d like the 
February people to get the rebate — but I think that this is 
another example of where the government would do well to go 
back to the drawing board and get this cleaned up, because here 
is another example of bad drafting has resulted in I think a 
situation they can’t possibly have intended. It’s too loony for 
even them. And so when you have joint title, joint ownership of 
a licence plate, where both owners qualify for the maximum, 
surely they should get the maximum rather than be told because 
it’s joint they can get zero. 
 
So here’s another thing, if you’ve got an extra few days in this 
debate, here’s another thing you can look at. This gives you a 
chance to clean up the mess before it’s passed. So why don’t 
you go about and do your work and then when it does get 
passed, it will hopefully be . . . you’ll get it right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s I think in November that the government 
announced the changes they were going to bring about to the 
no-fault legislation. And I think the changes they announced 
speak volumes about this government. I think we have all 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

worried that this government is directionless, it is aimless, it 
lacks any program. They obviously don’t want an election. Now 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale says they don’t want an 
election because of the polls. That’s probably part of the story 
but I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that another reason 
why there can’t be an election is they have no program to 
present to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(12:15) 
 
So one of the problems with having an election is that normally 
in an election you present a program, an agenda to the people of 
Saskatchewan and ask them to support your vision of where this 
province should be moving. But we all know this government 
doesn’t have an agenda, doesn’t have a program. They have 
sailed out into the middle of the ocean and thrown the compass 
overboard. And now they’re all wondering where to go from 
here and nobody, nobody has any idea. 
 
So what they did in the case of no-fault, Mr. Speaker, was they 
couldn’t decide whether to endorse no-fault, to modify no-fault, 
or to move back to the old tort system. And so when anybody 
doesn’t know what direction they’re going, when any . . . when 
someone doesn’t know what they should be doing, when 
somebody sees a . . . sees two ways of going and doesn’t know 
which way to take, they do what this government did. They 
bring in an amendment that says, well we’ll have tort and we’ll 
have no-fault. 
 
You know, they’re clearly following the advice of Yogi Berra 
who once said, “When you come to a fork in the road, take it.” 
And that’s what they’ve done. This is no-fault if necessary, but 
not necessarily no-fault. And I don’t know . . . I don’t know 
who coined that one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well here is a government that doesn’t know where it’s headed. 
It doesn’t have a program. It doesn’t have a direction. So they 
came up . . . they come up with amendments that give no 
direction, no plan. And I think this is a microcosm, I think this 
is a microcosm of where the government is headed or not 
headed generally. This is a government that simply doesn’t 
know what it’s about, doesn’t know where it’s headed, and it 
thinks that by trying to please everyone, they can somehow get 
out of this. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we know that when you try and please 
everyone, you usually end up pleasing no one. Because you 
don’t stand for anything. You don’t have a program. You don’t 
have an agenda. You don’t have an idea as to how to build this 
province, how to move us forward. And that is, as I say, that is 
very clear in the lack of direction, the lack of courage, the lack 
of conviction we see in these amendments to the no-fault Bill, a 
no-fault Bill that is neither fish nor fowl, that simply cannot 
decide what the government wants to do with its program. 
 
I also suggest that this is an example of where the government 
is saying they’re offering something that they really aren’t 
offering. I think the intention is that ultimately those who opt 
for the old tort system will be charged premiums as to make it 
unattractive. That is my prediction. That this is an attempt to set 
up the tort system to be an unattractive option so that it will fail. 
I think it’s designed to fail so that they can stick with the 
no-fault. 

Well I’ve talked as a MLA, I’ve talked to so many people who 
were through the no-fault system, that it seems to me that one of 
the major issues which is not addressed in this Bill, one of the 
major issues, is that those who have been through claims as a 
result of a motor vehicle mishap, so many of them have stories 
about insensitive, thoughtless adjusters who seemed to take the 
view that everybody’s whining and complaining about aches 
and pains no matter how severely injured they were. 
 
And these stories about insensitivity, these stories of how they 
were mistreated and insulted by the people with whom they 
dealt, I’ve heard so many of them that I have to conclude that it 
isn’t just one bad experience. 
 
I mean we all know that in any program, any program in the 
world, somebody somewhere is going to have a bad experience 
with some person. Maybe it was an off-day for that official or 
whatever, these things happen. 
 
But what has struck me in the case of the no-fault program is I 
just hear these tales from my constituents and from others 
again, and again, and again. That they say that they were dealt 
with by people who were unsympathetic, and insensitive, and 
bureaucratic, and they just didn’t seem to receive any 
consideration or empathy for the problems that they were 
suffering. In fact they came away with the feeling that they 
were being written off as malingerers, complainers, and not 
people who had truly suffered injury here. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the government says they want questions, 
they’ve got them. The government says they listened and in the 
case of nursing homes, beat them over the head enough and I 
guess they did finally listen. 
 
But on this one they have taken so long to bring the legislation 
down, now they say it’s rush, rush, rush. The reason it’s rushed 
is because of a rebate program which I submit needs to be 
looked at again because there’s some clear unfairness and 
inequity in the rebate program as well. 
 
So let’s have a look at this. Let’s talk to the stakeholders. Let’s 
talk to Saskatchewan motorists and let’s come up with an 
insurance program that really has the confidence of 
Saskatchewan people and can serve the needs of Saskatchewan 
motorists, both in terms of paying premiums and in terms of 
insurance coverage. 
 
I don’t know what’s so offensive about that to the government. 
I don’t know why it took so long after the PIPP (personal injury 
protection plan) report came down before they finally prepared 
legislation. I don’t know why, I don’t know why we didn’t have 
these amendments before us on the first day of the House. I 
don’t know why they had to come down only a few . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the member who has the floor. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the 
intervention but I have to admit I’ve already said what I had to 
say. And I apologize to the House. I realize this hasn’t lasted 
nearly as long as the hon. member for Saskatoon Meewasin 
who had . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well that, yes. I hear . . . 
The member for Prince Albert says just repeat it. That’s of 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

 

course what the member for Saskatoon Meewasin did. 
 
I wondered how you can make, how you can make a speech for 
two hours with no material, and we all found out this week. 
What you do is you have five minutes of material but then you 
keep repeating 120 times and magically it becomes two hours. 
 
But in this case, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said what I have to say. 
These are cogent arguments. These are points the government 
would do well to take into account. And so with that, rather 
than repeat it again and again and again, I’m going to sit down 
to give other members a chance to enter this debate. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
take a few moments to speak to the Bill before this Assembly 
this afternoon. And I think and I believe and my colleagues 
believe, that this piece of legislation is certainly one of the more 
in-depth pieces of legislation that we’ve seen in this Assembly 
for this past spring and currently. And it certainly demands a lot 
more time and effort and in-depth review by members than the 
government would appear that it would like to allow the 
Assembly. 
 
In fact when you look at the Bill, you look at Bill No. 57, you 
look at its implications, you look at the length of the Bill, and 
the fact that we’ve been sitting here since the third week in 
March, and yet the Bill didn’t come forward to the Assembly 
until May 28. And then the government would argue today that 
we have had more than ample time to debate the Bill. But it was 
introduced on May 28, Mr. Speaker, second reading was given 
on 7th. It was brought forward once more on the 14th and the 
19th, and then until yesterday and today it has not been raised 
or brought forward in this Assembly by the government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the government actually 
controls if you will, what comes forward and they propose what 
they would like to see on the order paper. And on many 
occasions the Government House Leader could have moved this 
specific Bill to the forefront for debate over the past number of 
weeks. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this piece of 
legislation, and we take a careful look at it, this piece of 
legislation is just another way to try and address a major 
problem that this government brought for themselves when they 
introduced the no-fault Bill back in 1995 or ’94. And then the 
resulting problems that have arisen with the Bill, and then the 
government’s commitment to a review of the no-fault piece of 
legislation, and their commitment to address the inequities that 
were in that piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every MLA in this Assembly today is 
aware of many people throughout their ridings, throughout this 
province, who have been dealt a serious blow in their lives and 
in their livelihoods as a result of the no-fault legislation. 
 
We know of a family here in the city of Regina who — the 
husband was a firefighter in this city — and they were on their 
way to watch their daughter curl in the provincial curling 
championships, and tragically involved in a very serious 
accident that claimed their younger daughter and then injured 

significantly the husband. Resulting in his inability, even after 
many attempts, to find gainful and full-time employment back 
with the firefighters service that he had worked with for so long 
and so hard. A family that really was devoted to their children, 
really had a commitment to their family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and as a result of the no-fault legislation they’re livelihoods 
were just put in total turmoil and uncertainty. 
 
And as I chatted with the family and as we lobbied on behalf of 
the government in regards to this family, Mr. Speaker, it just 
seemed that no matter what efforts we made or what efforts 
they made and the lobbying they did to address the many 
physical and painful problems that they were facing in their 
lives and the struggles they had to try and maintain the 
household and their house at the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
everything they did seemed to fall on a cold shoulder. 
 
And of course, the minister of the day and the government of 
the day continued to say well, you got to deal with SGI, it’s 
their problem. Well the unfortunate part, as some of my 
colleagues have already related, when you’re dealing with what 
appears to be and what has happened to be over the past number 
of years a very cold-hearted Crown corporation in dealing with 
individuals like this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can understand 
why people have become so frustrated. 
 
I’ve had people in my own constituency. They’ve struggled in 
their lives. They’ve struggled with the ongoing programming 
that they’ve been asked to be involved in, with therapy sessions 
and what have you, to try and put their lives back together, to 
try and bring some . . . an ability, a physical ability to actually 
go out and find full-time employment that would give them the 
same opportunities that would . . . presented themselves prior to 
their accident, Mr. Deputy Speaker, only to find that no level of 
and ongoing therapy was going to give them back what they 
had prior to that injury. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this piece of legislation is just 
what it would appear to be, a flawed attempt to address a total 
inequity in the former legislation, the no-fault legislation that 
has become an eyesore for this government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And as a result, we have Bill 57 before us, a piece of 
legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is trying to address those 
inequities. 
 
And unfortunately, the government has also brought forward 
another piece of . . . part to this legislation that they’re trying to 
sell the public of Saskatchewan on, saying that it is good for 
you because we’re going to offer you an opportunity whereby 
you can actually create some . . . raise some credits through the 
good driving program and therefore reduce your . . . the cost of 
your . . . of licensing your vehicle in the year or each and every 
year as . . . based on the number of credits that you build for 
yourself through a period of good driving habits in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(12:30) 
 
So on one hand, we have an attempt to address a major problem 
and a major flaw and, in trying to do that, rather than bringing 
in a separate piece of legislation to say to the . . . as the minister 
I think indicated in his second reading speech through . . . he 
says: 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

. . . through a formal customer feedback campaign . . . 
directly asked its customers how SGI could serve them 
better. 

 
He mentions: 
 

. . . (one of) the first . . . amendments . . . (we) would like to 
outline today will allow SGI to respond to the number one 
desire of its customers — the introduction of discounts on 
vehicle insurance premiums. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we believe that is . . . we commend 
SGI and we commend the government for recognizing the fact 
that maybe, maybe good drivers need to receive some credit for 
their good driving habits. And as a result of those credits, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, part of this piece of legislation is going to 
recognize those good driving habits. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many members in this Assembly 
have probably been asked already when . . . and I think 
certainly have been brought . . . it’s been brought to my 
attention, I believe the letter that went out to customers came 
out sometime in May indicating that this program was in place 
and that it will be . . . that you . . . If you looked at the letter that 
you received, you will have been given a list of the credits 
you’ve attained as a result of the good driving that you have 
done over the past number of years. 
 
And I think most people, when they received the letter, were 
under the impression that they were now . . . would qualify for 
up to seven . . . a 7 per cent reduction in the licensing of their 
vehicle. Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will not take 
place until July 1. 
 
Now the government is arguing, if this piece of legislation isn’t 
moved forward that they’re going to lose that and it’s going to 
be delayed for maybe another even three months. Rather than 
July 1 it could be September 1. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been in this Assembly for a long 
time; I’ve been here for a number of years. And on many 
occasions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government has, and 
upfront they have actually designed into legislation the fact that 
certain portions of that legislation will be retroactive to a time 
period when they have indicated — whether the Premier has or 
whether a minister has at times — that we’re going to introduce 
a Bill in this upcoming session and while the Bill may not get 
passed before the time period in which we want to implement 
the piece of legislation, we’ve made provisions by bringing 
forward an amendment that would allow for the . . . that portion 
of the legislation to be retroactive to a period in time that we 
said we would . . . that that piece of legislation would become 
law. 
 
So if the government wants to argue that we’re holding up the 
Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the facts are we need to debate . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Regina South 
is asking why we’re holding up this Bill? And the answer is, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there’s an important debate that 
needs to take place in regards to this Bill. And I invite the 
member from Regina South, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to enter the 
debate and to stand up and to speak on behalf of his constituents 
and represent his constituents in regards to the debate on Bill 

No. 57. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the facts are whether it’s July 1, there 
are many people across this province who would argue that if 
the government was going to come forward with a credit 
recognition for good driving, that they should have 
implemented that good driving credit program, made back to 
April 1, which is the beginning of the fiscal year for the 
government . . . province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it would seem to me that would have been the 
appropriate thing to do. 
 
However having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will agree 
with the fact that this Bill comes into force on July 1, whether 
or not it’s passed before July 15 or whatever day down the road 
that this Bill is actually passed through this Assembly and 
receives Royal Assent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And a simple 
amendment just addresses that concern. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there . . . we need to address the 
problems of the no-fault and the tort options that the 
government is bringing forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may have — and I know many 
members in this Assembly have — been contacted by a number 
of SGI agents across this province or insurance agencies that 
handle SGI registrations. And one of the big concerns that is 
coming, that has been brought to my attention, is what kind of 
information am I going to have and will I be able to . . . When a 
customer comes to me and basically to renew their licence and 
they ask to know, what should I do? Should I choose tort or 
should I just stay with the no-fault? And Mr. Speaker, that’s . . . 
Deputy Speaker, that is a good question. 
 
And the agents have been saying, why should it be left up to me 
to try to counsel a customer that . . . as to the benefits of the 
no-fault system versus the benefits of the tort system and say, 
well I think, I think in your case maybe you’d be just as well off 
to stay with no-fault or, I think in your case, maybe you should, 
maybe you should choose the tort option, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The facts are that in many cases no-fault is a good option. But 
as we’ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the tort system is a . . . will 
be a real benefit to, I would suggest, a small minority of the 
population. And I believe as we’ve debated being . . . been 
debating this before, that with some slight changes even to the 
no-fault insurance, we could have addressed the areas within the 
piece of legislation that have been a major downfall to many 
customers across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the individuals who are really speaking 
out against the no-fault program, while they’re a . . . and the 
government argued, well they’re just a small portion of the 
province, of the population. There’s only a small percentage, 5 
to 10 per cent. The facts are, it’s had a major impact on their 
lives and it’s created a major problem for them. 
 
As I was talking about this family earlier, the Markwart family 
and the problems they faced. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can 
say this: they have found, through this ongoing process, that a 
deep faith has helped them to get beyond where they were and 
to help them actually bring some stability and to rebuild their 
lives. And we want to compliment them for that. 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s no reason why they 
should have had to continue to argue with SGI and continue to 
lobby for a fairer way of dealing with the complications that 
have been brought to their lives as a result of the no-fault 
legislation. 
 
And I just don’t understand why SGI themselves could not have 
sat down and said, you know, we’ve got a major problem here. 
And rather than wait — well we’re going to review this piece of 
legislation in five years time to see how well it has worked in 
the province of Saskatchewan and then after the review we will 
decide whether or not we need to bring amendments to our 
legislation forward, which we now have before this Assembly 
in Bill No. 57 — I don’t know why SGI could not have sat 
down and started to take a serious look at the problems that the 
no-fault piece of legislation was bringing forward and address 
those concerns directly. 
 
Why take seven years to come forward with a piece of 
legislation that in many ways does not address those problems 
and in fact is going to complicate the whole process as people 
begin to try to understand what this Bill No. 57 means to them? 
What it will mean when they go in to renew their licences. 
What decisions they’re going to be forced to make. Whether or 
not they continue to just stay with the no fault piece of 
legislation or they would adopt the tort system of addressing an 
accident problem. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s unfortunate that SGI could not have 
taken a very careful look prior to this and come forward with a 
very simple response to the problems that the no-fault Bill has 
created for themselves and dealt with the questions that have 
been coming forward by the individuals who have been 
bringing forward the problems that have been brought to their 
attention through the years. 
 
And it’s not just people that have been standing up, defending 
and trying to assist people who have been caught in no-fault 
problem, people who have had their lives disrupted, but, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, many individuals who’ve been 
forced through no fault of their own to deal with SGI and how it 
treats people when it . . . when they are forced into a situation of 
having to turn to the insurance company that they insured their 
lives with, and were expecting that company would treat them 
fairly, and, Mr. Deputy . . . Mr. Speaker, find that actually that 
insurance company has turned its back on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker these past number of weeks we’ve had a debate in 
this Assembly about SGI surveillance. And our caucus has 
spoken up and we . . . And, Mr. Speaker, we are not opposed to 
the fact that SGI needs to be frugal and they need to ensure that 
when they are handing out insurance to individuals that the 
insurance is going to those who desperately need it and that 
they are very careful that there are not people that . . . not taking 
advantage of their insurance program. Because we know that if 
individuals take advantage of a program, at the end of the day, 
it becomes a costlier problem for the rest of . . . all consumers 
and it results in higher premiums. So, Mr. Speaker, SGI finds 
themselves in the position of making sure they verify that the 
claimants indeed are worthy of the insurance adjustments that 
have been made on their behalf. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve been trying to point out is 

the way SGI goes about determining who they’re going to 
create surveillance on, who they’re going to follow, who they’re 
going to watch. And that’s what my colleague, the member 
from Rosthern, was trying to ask of the minister. What is the 
criteria? What criteria do they follow? What game plan do they 
follow? What rules and guidelines do they follow so that they 
aren’t maliciously attacking the goodwill of individuals in 
doing surveillance on individuals? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is not one that should 
be taken lightly. It’s imperative that as members we debate this 
piece of legislation at length. And it’s not new, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s happened in the past and no doubt it will happen in the 
future when a government, as they get through a legislative 
session and as they look forward to the pieces of legislation or 
the number of Bills they want to present to the House, that — as 
I believe we have somewhere in the neighbourhood of close to 
80 pieces of legislation before this Assembly today — that 
some of those pieces of legislation will be somewhat 
controversial. 
 
And what happens, Mr. Speaker, is through the process of time 
— we’ve seen it — governments will hold back on those pieces 
of legislation that they may find would be somewhat 
controversial. Because they would want to limit the debate, and 
limit the exposure in this Assembly in regards to the ability of 
the opposition to quiz the government and ask them why they 
would hold off and why they would try to ram through a Bill of 
such serious consequences in just a few days. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fact that they put . . . they 
introduce the discounts in this piece of legislation is just . . . 
appears to be a deliberate attempt by a government trying to 
address the problem they created seven years ago and trying to 
move it through hastily so that they can get behind them the 
problems that they’ve created, and not allow the opposition the 
opportunity, and people across this province the opportunity to 
look seriously at the Bill to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that this 
Bill addresses the inequities and the problems that were created 
by the no-fault legislation. It’s imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we 
take the time, that we take the time to address this 
appropriately, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at the individuals who’ve been 
affected by no-fault, they’ve waited seven years. And if I 
understand correctly, there are some provisions in the Bill that 
actually will allow members to go back to 1995 and that the 
attempt will be to try to correct some of those inequities that 
were created at the time to address some of the problems that 
were brought forward at that time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if the government wants to argue that you’re 
putting on hold the well-being of these individuals and that 
you’re just delaying the process of addressing those problems, 
Mr. Speaker, one would have to say what’s the difference of a 
day or two when . . . And most SGI complainants I’m sure 
would say the same thing. What’s the difference of one or two 
more days versus the seven years it’s taken for this government 
to come forward and address this problem and correct the 
problems that the no-fault insurance created on their behalf? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one has to shake their head when you look at how 
this government operates. And you take a look at where the 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

government is today. I can see why the government would want 
to move this Bill forward. I can see why the government wants 
to get this piece of legislation passed. 
 
It’s not just Bill 57, Mr. Speaker. It’s a fact that they want this 
House to close down. They want to get out of here because, Mr. 
Speaker, Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, assisted by 
thousands of people in the province of Saskatchewan, have 
been holding this government’s feet to the fire. And we want to 
thank the government and her ministers for every opportunity 
that they have afforded to the opposition and the media to 
criticize this government and this Premier for their inability and 
lack of direction that they are giving the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You wonder why, Mr. Speaker, we see people leaving the 
province. Well a good example is the type of legislation and 
lack of leadership that we are seeing coming from that side of 
the House at this time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Toth: — And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with that lack of 
leadership it hasn’t been very difficult for the opposition to 
raise these concerns, to bring forward the concerns of 
individuals. And I can see why this House Leader and why this 
Premier wants to close the House down and, Mr. Speaker, 
maybe they need Bill No. 57 for their bus tour. 
 
They want to make sure that they’ve got all the problems with 
SGI addressed before . . . addressed before they get their bus on 
the road and have to drive on the roads across the . . . and across 
this province of Saskatchewan. Especially if they were to 
choose to drive down Highway No. 47 in the constituency of 
Moosomin, they better make sure they’ve got a good insurance 
plan on that bus, Mr. Speaker, and on themselves. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . And I hear the Minister 
of Finance talking about buffalo. Yes, they better be careful 
when they’re driving down these roads because you never know 
what may appear in front of you and the problems that you 
could run into, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . we need to be careful. And Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition wants to make sure that we have 
addressed all of the concerns. And my colleague, the member 
from Swift Current, the critic for CIC, responsible for SGI, has 
sent a number of letters out and we’ve had a number of 
responses. We . . . (inaudible) . . . have a number of groups. 
 
The Law Society, for example, the insurance agents, insurance 
brokers across this province want to . . . are asking us to make 
sure that we address this Bill fairly, that we address each clause; 
that we don’t allow something to slip through that they’re going 
to have to deal with in the future that again puts the residents of 
this province at risk through an insurance program that they 
thought they were buying that would protect them in the need 
. . . in the event of an accident in the . . . that they may find 
themselves in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one looks forward to being in an accident. No 

one asks to be in an accident. No one . . . There isn’t a member 
in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that would want to see even a 
family member involved in an accident. But should they be 
involved in an accident, Mr. Speaker, they want and they hope 
and they believe that the insurance company that they’re, that 
they’re carrying their accident insurance on and risk insurance 
on is going to be there to protect them, not turn a cold shoulder 
when they seek assistance from that insurance company to 
address the problems that they are facing — whether they be 
mental, whether they be physical, whether they disrupt the lives 
of individuals, and take away from them their ability to 
continue to provide for themselves and provide for their family. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we can see why this government wants to 
move on. We can see why this government wants to wind this 
session up. But, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you — I can assure 
you — that my colleagues and I are prepared to sit in this 
Legislative Assembly as long as it takes for this government to 
recognize that the problems they have created are theirs and 
theirs alone. And we want to make . . . we want to assure them 
and we want to assure the residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan that we will do whatever is necessary, with their 
help, to hold this government accountable for their actions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill No. 57, what is Bill No. 
57 doing? Is Bill No. 57 actually addressing all the problems? Is 
Bill No. 57 going to say to the Markwarts, well they finally 
recognized that the problems that we have had to put up with, 
the delays in actually getting our lives back, trying to renew our 
lives, that this piece of legislation is going to correct a fault that 
individuals down the road will not have to go through as a 
result of their accidents versus where we are today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister states that there is some 
improvements to the current no-fault plan. He says 
improvements that, the minister states, will give an injured 
person the right to sue at no-fault a convicted impaired driver 
for pain and suffering. 
 
He says, there’s also a change, for the injured person will now 
have the right to sue for pain and suffering in cases where the 
driver is convicted of using their vehicle to deliberately injure 
someone. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these are positive attempts. And the member 
from North Battleford just spoke about that a few minutes ago 
as well. And I know my colleague, the member from Swift 
Current, and the member from Rosthern, just raised those 
points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some positive points to this piece of 
legislation and we agree with them. But, Mr. Speaker, as we 
look through the legislation, we want to make sure that this 
legislation addresses all of the problems that have arisen over 
the past seven years. 
 
And, as I said, Mr. Speaker, you have to ask ourselves why it 
has taken this government and this Premier seven years to 
address those problems. Mr. Speaker, I know we need to 
address some major concerns. We need to address the concerns 
that have been brought forward by individuals. 
 



June 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

 

And we need to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of the 
day this piece of legislation corrects all of the problems that are 
out there so that people like the Markwarts and like Brenda 
Kienas from Grenfell do not have to . . . individuals down the 
road do not have to stall . . . face the same pitfalls and the same 
concerns and the same hurtles just trying to get their lives back 
on track as a result of an accident that they didn’t ask for. They 
weren’t looking for it. And yet, Mr. Speaker, they were hope 
. . . when the accident happened, they were hoping that the 
insurance agency that was . . . that they had looked to for 
protection would be there to provide for them, to protect them 
in the time of need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this Bill do it? This Bill goes a long ways to 
addressing those concerns. Yes, it does. But it also . . . it’s 
imperative that we take the time to address other problems 
within this piece of legislation. And the member from . . . the 
Government House Leader says, every day we will have the 
opportunity. 
 
And I can assure the member from North Battleford that we will 
take every opportunity given to us to address these concerns. 
And whether it takes us into August, whether it takes us into 
September, we will use every opportunity to address those 
problems and to make sure that this piece of legislation, before 
it finally moves through this Assembly, is indeed a piece of 
legislation that will protect the people of Saskatchewan, that the 
people of Saskatchewan can look forward to. 
 
And if they choose SGI as the vehicle of . . . And in this 
province, really, we don’t have any other opportunity when it 
comes to vehicle insurance, SGI is basically the only coverer. 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative that we hold the 
government accountable for their actions and for the changes to 
this legislation to make sure that it addresses every concern 
that’s been brought forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one has to, one has to look at this 
legislation and when . . . I believe it’s somewhere around 100 
pages or so, 100 so of pages. This, Mr. Speaker, is not a piece 
of legislation. We’ve seen some pieces of legislation in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that are maybe two or three, two or 
three pages. And in a very simple way, they make corrections to 
former pieces of legislation and bring them up to date. But this, 
Mr. Speaker, is a piece of legislation that has some 100 pages of 
clauses and sections that need to be looked at very carefully. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I . . . the member from Swift Current is 
taking his time to do that and, as his colleagues, we are just 
offering him every piece of support that he can to make sure 
that this government is held accountable for their actions. That 
when we get out of this Assembly today and we leave for the 
long weekend, Mr. Speaker, that the insurance, the insurance 
that we have that is covering our vehicle and that is covering 
each and every one of us and for everything . . . every 
Saskatchewan resident who will be travelling this weekend, that 
their insurance policy will indeed protect them should they, 
unfortunately — unfortunately, Mr. Speaker — find themselves 
involved in a mishap or a situation that forces them to call upon 
their insurance to protect them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know as members of the Legislative 
Assembly and cabinet ministers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, at the end of the day when a person runs into a 
problem, runs into a problem dealing with government, who do 
they come to? Do they run to SGI? Do they run to their 
insurance agent? No. They come to us as legislators. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because at the end of the day, each and every one of 
us in this Assembly are responsible for the legislation . . . 
legislative pieces that are passed and moved through the 
Assembly. And we’re responsible to make sure that their voice 
is heard. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that’s why my colleagues and I 
have received many letters of complaint regarding the no-fault 
insurance program. And the committee that has been addressing 
these problems, Mr. Speaker, have come forward offering many 
positive suggestions and ideas that could address the problems 
with no-fault and bring them up to speed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we look through Bill No. 57, I’m not 
exactly sure that all of the problems are being addressed. And I 
don’t know why, Mr. Speaker, an individual in the province of 
Saskatchewan should have to — when they go to fill out their 
licence — have to decide when there’s . . . when they’re filling 
out their licence, when they’re applying for a licence renewal, 
should have to decide okay, now do I take no-fault or do I take 
tort? Which is going to best serve me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one has to ask themselves . . . I wonder if the Minister of 
Finance has the ability to stand in an office and to counsel a 
customer and say, well I think you should take the no-fault; I 
think that will work for you best. Or, you know, maybe you’re 
the type of person that maybe you should settle for the tort 
situation because that might serve you best down the road, 
should you find yourself unfortunately in an accident situation; 
and I’m just guessing that that might be the best avenue that is 
open to you, and maybe that’s what you need to choose. 
 
And those are the questions, Mr. Speaker, that the constituents 
of Moosomin — individuals who have been looking at this 
legislation, individuals who have had family members that have 
been impacted very significantly by the old no-fault insurance 
— they’ve been asking, asking myself, and I’m sure my 
colleagues have faced the same question as we look at this 
legislation. Is Bill No. 57 going to actually correct the problems 
that no-fault has done through the years? Is Bill No. 57 going to 
address those concerns and actually make sure that I don’t face 
the same problems that a family member of mine has had to go 
through the past seven years, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s imperative that we correct those problems 
today and that we don’t look . . . have to look at, a year or two 
down the road, and find that Bill No. 57 didn’t go far enough 
and address all of the concerns, and then we’re back in this 
Assembly changing the legislation again because we failed to 
address all those concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that’s why my 
colleagues and I feel so strongly about this. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, we feel that it’s time to debate it and no government is 
going to tell us that, you’re going to pass this in a day or two 
because we’re going to criticize you for addressing that problem 
of the vehicle insurance premiums that could be addressed . . . 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard June 27, 2002 

 

credit on premiums, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Premier needs to take responsibility for his 
actions and the actions of his government. And my colleagues 
and the member from Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the 
Opposition, and the members on this side of the House are 
going to hold this Premier, his feet to the fire over the actions or 
the inaction that we have seen as a result of his failure to give 
leadership in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I 
— and I think you’ve sensed that over the time of this debate — 
have spoken very passionately because people have come to us 
with very difficult circumstances. 
 
In fact I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, other members have felt the same 
thing. They’ve had people come to us in tears because of the 
pain and the suffering that has been afflicted upon them, upon 
their families, upon their lives, as a result of a cold and callous 
government that hasn’t given any real leadership in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — And it’s time, Mr. Speaker, it’s time, Mr. 
Speaker, if what it takes to cause this government to call an 
election and to allow a political party that has a vision to grow 
the province, if what it takes is to hold up this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, for this Premier to call an election and 
give the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity to have a voice, 
then, Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to do that today. 
 
We’re prepared to stand in this Assembly and debate this piece 
of legislation, calling on this Premier to call an election and 
allow the people of Saskatchewan to finally look at the options 
as they’re asking people to do in regards to the tort and the 
no-fault, ask us . . . give the people of Saskatchewan the same 
opportunity to look at the options and say, I think I’m going to 
choose the Saskatchewan Party this time round. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — I think they’ve got a plan to grow this province of 
Saskatchewan. I think the Saskatchewan Party has a vision as to 
how we can deal with the no-fault problem, Mr. Speaker. And I 
believe they seem to be a party that has a heart, that appears to 
have a heart; that certainly shows they have a heart and have the 
conscience of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(13:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. It now being past the 
time set for adjournment, first I would like to wish all members 
of the Assembly a pleasant Canada Day weekend at home with 
their family and friends, and secondly declare that this House 
stands adjourned until Tuesday, July 2 at . . . to reconvene at 
1:30 p.m. 

The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 
 
 


