















































Hansard: April 03, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 387 
 April 3, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of people of the Cypress 
Hills area asking that a halt be brought to crop insurance 
premium hikes and coverage reductions and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt due to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by producers in the Golden Prairie, 
Maple Creek, Richmound, and Leader areas. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens throughout the 
province who are really concerned about the rise in the 
deductible for prescription drugs and the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Prince Albert, Rosthern, Humboldt, and Alida. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
the citizens concerned about the clause in the current tobacco 
legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
The signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, come from 
the communities of Archerwill, Tisdale, Naicam, and Nipawin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations’ representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Langenburg and the city of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present of behalf of the citizens of the province. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Weyburn, 
Rocanville, Estevan, Qu’Appelle, Regina, and Tyvan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the new tobacco legislation and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by residents of Regina and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
residents of Swift Current and area concerned about crop 
insurance in the province of Saskatchewan. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plans to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current and the town of Stewart Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about certain 
inadequacies in the provincial tobacco legislation. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the citizens of Carrot River, Yorkton, 
and Arborfield. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: —Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with . . . from 
citizens who are concerned about the deplorable condition of 
Highway No. 15, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway No. 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the petition is signed from the good people from Watrous, 
Semans, Simpson, Battleford, and even some people from 
Prince Edward Island were quite shocked by this highway, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned with 
the recent changes to the crop insurance program. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And the signators to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received: 
 

A petition concerning maintenance of service levels at 
Davidson and Craik health centres and addendums to 
previously tabled petitions, being sessional papers 7, 8, 11, 
17, and 18. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: will the waterfowl and 
wildlife damage compensation program continue to be 
offered to farmers in the 2002-2003 fiscal year? 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: what are the guidelines, 
regulation rules, and all other determining factors set up by 
the Department of Learning in order for school divisions to 
implement the SchoolPLUS model? 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: for the year 2001, what was the 
total cost incurred by the Workers’ Compensation Board 
for providing out-of-province MRIs to claimants; and 
further to this, what provinces were those individuals sent 
to and what were the travel costs and travel expenses, 
including meals and incidentals claimed? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’ll also have a similar 
question: 
 

For the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: for the 
year 2001, what was the total cost incurred by SGI for 
providing out-of-province MRIs to claimants; and further 
to this, what provinces were these individuals sent to and 
what were the travel costs and travel expenses, including 
meals and incidentals claimed? 

 
I also have a similar question for the year 2000. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 18 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming: could 
you please provide a list of all the communities in 
Saskatchewan where VLT machines are operating; the 
number of VLT machines in each community; and the total 
revenue that is generated from VLTs in each of these 
communities? 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

 

How many ministerial assistants, executive assistants, 
secretaries, and all other support staff are employed in the 
office of the minister for the Crown Investments 
Corporation? For each one, what is their name, their title, 
and their annual salary? 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 18 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: in the 2001-2002 fiscal year, 
how much did school boards in Saskatchewan pay for 
high-speed Internet usage under the government’s 
CommunityNet program? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 18 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many CT scans were 
operating in the province in 2001; how many hours total 
did the CT scans operate in 2001; how many hours per day 
on average did each CT scan operate; and how many CT 
tests were conducted in 2001? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — In your gallery are two visiting 
scholars from China. They are studying at the University of 
Regina for one year. Jane Cui and Mei Dai are accompanied by 
Beth Ross from the office of International Co-operation and 
Development at the University of Regina. 
 
Ms. Cui is the Wan Li visiting scholar. The Wan Li Scholarship 
has been offered by the University of Regina since 1993, and 
each year a qualified and highly recommended person from the 
State Administration comes to Regina for a one-year period. 
 
Ms. Cui is a nurse by profession and for several years she 
taught nursing at the Second Military Medical University. Since 
1989 she has worked with the State Administration for Foreign 
Expert Affairs. In her current position she is in charge of 
organizing and sending Chinese training delegations abroad. 
 
While at the University of Regina she will be working with 
Dean Garnet Garven of the Faculty of Administration in 
preparation for a joint project between the Chinese government 
and the University of Regina. 
 
Ms. Mei Dai studied English at Beijing Foreign Studies 
University, and since 1985 has been working for the Foreign 
Affairs Department, National People’s Congress. She has been 
involved in the hosting of international delegations. 
 
Ms. Dai arrived in Regina in August of 2001 to become the 
current Qiao Shi Fellow. The Qiao Shi Fellowship was first 
offered in 1998 and each year one person is recommended by 
the National People’s Congress to come to Regina for a 
12-month period. While here in Regina, Ms. Dai has been 
auditing Faculty of Administration courses and has also taken 
one semester at the English as a second language centre to 
upgrade her English skills. 
 
Ms. Cui and Ms. Dai are very interested in how public 
administration works here in Canada and greatly appreciate this 

opportunity to see democratic government in action. And I 
would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Ms. Cui 
and Ms. Dai, along with Mrs. Ross, to the House this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Minister of Learning in welcoming our guests 
from China here this afternoon to witness today’s proceedings 
in the legislature. 
 
I know we on this side of the House will try and make their visit 
this afternoon as interesting as possible. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you I 
would like to introduce to the members of the legislature two of 
my constituents who are sitting in your gallery — Lois Zelmer 
and Adam Zelmer. 
 
They’re here today because Adam is wanting to see how this 
place works. He was part of the model legislature as a delegate 
from Campbell Collegiate when the last model legislature was 
held here and I know that he plans to come again when it’s held 
here. He is interested in politics and he lives very close by to 
this place, and so I know that this is a big part of his life. 
 
So welcome, both Adam and Lois. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, there is 
somebody sitting in your gallery that’s very precious to me. She 
is the mother of my three sons. She’s also the grandmother of 
our two granddaughters. 
 
And I would like the Assembly to please welcome my wife 
Sheila. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to introduce to you and the members of the Assembly 
today. Seated in your gallery in the upper level is the Aitken 
family — Bill Aitken and Rhonda Aitken and their daughters 
Courtney and Deirdre. 
 
Bill is a long-time firefighter in the city of Yorkton — been 
there now for 25 years — serving our community as a 
firefighter. Wife Rhonda works at the credit union, looking after 
the financial affairs of the people in Yorkton. 
 
And their two daughters — Courtney is in grade 7 and Deirdre 
is in grade 5 at the St. Michael’s School in Yorkton. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And just for the information of the House, Mr. Speaker, the St. 
Michael’s School is the very first joint school facility that was 
announced in the province by the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

So I want to welcome this afternoon the Aitken family to the 
Assembly. I know it’s a school break right now and they’re here 
to enjoy the festivity of the House this afternoon. Welcome to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to welcome to the House someone who is no stranger to this 
House, Bob Long, who is seated behind me. A former member 
and cabinet minister and now Chair of the Highway Traffic 
Board. He’s doing a tremendous job there. 
 
I would like all to join me in welcoming Bob to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members here, a group of 26 air 
cadets that are in from Davidson and surrounding communities. 
The surrounding communities are Bladworth, Craik, Loreburn, 
Hawarden, Kenaston, Hanley, and Simpson. 
 
The group is 553 Sherlock. It’s based in Davidson and the 
commanding officer is Wayne Morrison. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, as I was introducing our 
earlier guest, a couple more guests came in. A friend from my 
constituency, Ron Hitchcock, who is seated up in the gallery in 
the west. And with him is Gord Gunoff, both with IBEW 
(International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers). And I would 
like all members to join me in welcoming them to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Hoopla Championship Basketball Tournament 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on March 
14 through to the 16 the city of Regina hosted the annual 
Hoopla Championship Basketball Tournament. Appearing once 
again at the provincial finals was the Wynyard High School 
girls basketball team, the Golden Bears. 
 
The Bears, competing in the 2A division, were back to defend 
their gold medal from last year. In order to defend their title 
they had to first battle teams from Outlook and Shaunavon, and 
then once again they came face to face with the Notre Dame 
Hounds. These two teams, Mr. Speaker, have competed against 
each other for the gold medal in the last three years. 
 
In the championship game the Bears were down 11 points with 
only 11 minutes to go. In that short space of time the girls 
scored a total of 23 points and only allowing the Hounds to 
score two points. Their amazing turnaround won them the game 
and the gold medal, with a final score of 77 to 66. 
 
Once again I must congratulate the hard-working and dedicated 
youth in my constituency. Keep up the good work girls, and we 
hope to see you there again next year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

McDermid School Wins International Award 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. McDermid School has 
been selected as the provincial winner of the 2001-2002 
International Reading Association Exemplary Reading Program 
Award. This award recognizes outstanding reading and 
language arts programs at all grade levels. Its mandate is to 
draw the public’s attention to outstanding programs in schools 
throughout North America. 
 
Teachers Bonie Banting and Mary Ann Sjogren-Branch have 
worked on the program for five years and are very enthused 
about their work and have said, “We’re thrilled to be recognized 
for what we’re doing.” To them the greatest reward is, “The 
progress we see day to day with the students.” 
 
Sjogren-Branch and Banting plan to attend the International 
Reading Association’s annual conference in San Francisco in 
late April to receive the international award and present their 
innovative program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all members wish to extend their 
congratulations to McDermid School on their fine 
accomplishments. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Constituent Elected President of the Canadian 
Cattlemen’s Association 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Neil Yahnke who 
ranches at Gouldtown in my constituency with his wife, 
Marilyn, was recently elected president of the Canadian 
Cattlemen’s Association at their convention in Ottawa. 
 
The Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, Mr. Speaker, represents 
the interests of Canada’s 100,000 cattle producers. And the 
CCA (Canadian Cattlemen’s Association) under Neil’s 
leadership will continue work in the areas of animal health, 
trade, and the environment. 
 
Neil was recently presented the Saskatchewan Order of Merit in 
recognition of his leadership in the beef industry. He’s also past 
president of the Saskatchewan Stockgrowers Association and 
the Saskatchewan Livestock Association. Neil was a founding 
chairman of the Western Beef Development Centre and a 
former chairman of the Canada Beef Export Federation. 
 
Congratulations, Neil. And as a cattleman I know that under 
your leadership I will be well represented at the national level 
and that cattle issues will be advanced on the federal 
government’s agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sod Turning in Montmartre 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to draw the House’s attention to a good event that happened in 
rural Saskatchewan — a sod turning — as Saskatchewan 
continues to develop. In Montmartre construction is already 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

 

begun on a new 4,000 square foot building that will house the 
regional library, the RM (rural municipality), and the village 
offices in Montmartre. It is anticipated that it will be ready by 
the end of May. 
 
The library will have a new home with the assistance of a 
$60,000 grant from the province’s Centenary Fund. This will 
roughly triple the size of the library from the present 56 square 
metre space and it will accommodate additional resources and 
community programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will remember that the Centenary Fund was 
created by this government to accelerate and demonstrate our 
support for important infrastructure projects like this one that 
are happening over the next three years leading up to the 
province’s centenary in 2005. Mayor Paul Hamelin said, “The 
new library is important to Montmartre as it contributes to the 
social and economic well-being of . . . (the) community (of 
Montmartre).” 
 
So we congratulate them on this new building and on the 
continual building of their community. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assiniboia Team Wins 
Provincial Hockey Championship 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Assiniboia Southern Rebels hockey team once again have 
become the provincial Junior B hockey champions. Their 
season consisted of 38 games, of which they won the last 27 
straight games. 
 
The Rebels won four games against Pilot Butte, four games 
against St. Philips Rangers to win the south Junior B title, then 
they went on to the Junior B provincial championships by 
winning in three games against the Saskatoon Chiefs. 
 
This is the 10th year of the organization, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Assiniboia Southern Rebels have won the league six times, 
have won four provincial titles, and the Western Canadian title 
twice. The first time they won the western championship was in 
1995-96, and again last year winning the Keystone Cup. 
 
The next action for the Southern Rebels will be April 11-14 
when they’re hosting the Keystone Cup which will be held in 
Assiniboia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Assiniboia Rebels, 
coaches, and management for the superb job they have done 
with this club. And I’d also like to congratulate an individual, a 
young individual on the team whose name I can pronounce, is 
my nephew, Denny Huyghebaert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Receives Prestigious Scholarship 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
bring to the attention of this Assembly a remarkable student in 
my constituency of Saskatoon Fairview and at the same time to 

congratulate him for receiving this country’s most valuable 
university scholarship. 
 
Mark Taylor is a grade 12 student who attends Bedford Road 
Collegiate. He was one of 10 Saskatchewan students who were 
finalists for the Canadian Merit Scholarship Foundation — one 
of 3,800 competing students across Canada. Only 32 awards are 
given annually, each of which pays for all of four years of 
tuition and residence at any Canadian university. 
 
I know you’re a teacher yourself, Mr. Speaker, so you’ll 
recognize how remarkable this student is. He attained an overall 
average through high school of 98 per cent. But the award is 
more . . . it’s for more than marks, exceptional as they are. 
 
Mark is active in his church, has built homes for Habitat for 
Humanity. He’s president of the SRC (student representative 
council), columnist for his school’s paper, a member of his 
school’s football and basketball teams, and an audiovisual whiz 
for his school’s drama productions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both his father, Glenn, and Mark contribute the 
success of all of his children in part to our excellent public 
school system. As well with any Canadian university as his 
choice, Mark will be attending the University of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, that decision speaks volumes about our city, our 
university, and our province. 
 
And I know all members will join me in wishing Mark well as 
he continues his studies. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Cowboy Association Finals Rodeo 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to talk today 
about a remarkable young man from the Bladworth area who 
late last fall won the national bull riding championship at the 
Canadian Cowboy Association’s finals rodeo. 
 
Eighteen-year-old Vincent Northrop won the 2001 
championship on October 28 in Saskatoon. If anyone deserved 
to win the championship it was Vincent, who has been riding 
various stocks since his early childhood. 
 
Vincent, who is currently a first-year student at Dickinson State 
University in North Dakota, decided to compete the CCA 
(Canadian Cowboy Association) rodeo finals, hoping that he 
would finish somewhere in the middle of the 10 competitive 
bull riders in this category. However, his great abilities and 
relaxed manner resulted in an overwhelming victory for Mr. 
Northrop. 
 
Vincent’s father, Mr. Bill Northrop, is very proud of his son for 
capturing this championship and says: 
 

I’ve always thought he’s been a good rider. I’ve heard from 
experienced cowboys, since he was a junior steer rider, who 
have said that he was going to make a great bull rider 
someday and he has. 

 
You know, Mr. Speaker, climbing aboard a raging bull takes a 
lot of courage, but for Vincent riding bulls is a natural fit. At his 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

father’s automotive shop in Davidson, Vincent’s trophy saddle 
is on display for customers and friends to admire. This recent 
championship is one of which the Northrop family and the 
members of this House should be very proud. 
 
I would ask that the members join me in congratulating Vincent 
Northrop on achieving such a high level achievement in the bull 
riding arena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Air Transport Association of Canada 
2001 Innovation Award 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Air Transport 
Association of Canada has recognized the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Technology, Kelsey campus, and the 
Saskatchewan Aviation Council’s innovative approach to 
commercial pilot training. 
 
These partners have received the ATAC (Air Transport 
Association of Canada) 2001 Innovation Award for its 
commercial pilot diploma program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this innovation award recognizes Canadian flight 
schools, air taxi, and charter operators that have demonstrated 
innovative best practices for increasing safety and product 
quality that serves as an example for others to follow and learn 
from. 
 
Claude Naud, vice president of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) programs said: 
 

The national award speaks well of our ability to respond 
quickly to the needs of business and industry and our 
continued commitment to quality programming. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, need I say more? But I think I will. It is a 
real accomplishment to receive this award, Mr. Speaker, since 
this is the first year of the operation of this program. 
Commercial pilot program instructors are leaders in 
Saskatchewan aviation industry. 
 
Currently there are 23 students completing ground school 
training and Janet Keim, the president of the Saskatchewan 
Aviation Council commented that: 
 

Through a unique partnership of Saskatchewan flying 
schools, charter and airline operators, and SIAST, we are 
providing a first-class program with close ties to provincial 
aviation employers. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Water Quality Improvements 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister of Sask Water announced that Justice 
Laing’s report from the public inquiry investigating the 

contamination of North Battleford’s water supply would be 
released this Friday in North Battleford. The announcement 
even took the mayor of North Battleford by surprise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says that when he releases the inquiry 
report on Friday, he will also reveal the NDP’s plan to deal with 
the many water quality concerns of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Well we already know what the plan is — the plan is cut 
funding to Sask Water in this provincial budget by over $1 
million. 
 
To the minister: how is it that Sask Water is going to do more to 
improve water infrastructure and water quality for 
Saskatchewan communities when Sask Water has $1 million 
less to work with? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, for that member’s 
information, a meeting has been arranged with the mayor 
tomorrow afternoon at 3 o’clock. The mayor has agreed to the 
meeting and all the information will be shared with the mayor at 
that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Friday we’ll be releasing the report, and it’ll be certainly 
putting forward our response by this government to begin 
working in partnership to again address some of the challenges 
that we have in the water quality in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for the record, the $1 million cut in Sask 
Water is for infrastructure work on our dam system. We have 
50 dams in this province, Mr. Speaker; that dam system will be 
downgraded in terms of some of the work that is needed this 
year, Mr. Speaker. So the cuts clearly are not related to water 
quality work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I realize there are a 
lot of people that would agree with the minister’s assessment of 
his system. Mr. Speaker, the contamination of North 
Battleford’s water supply left thousands of people ill — no 
laughing matter. 
 
Presently SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) says there are 50 communities in the province 
under boil-water advisories or boil-water orders, and that there 
are 33 communities that lack minimum water treatment 
facilities. 
 
Yet a report compiled by the minister’s own department last 
year indicates that 90 per cent of the province’s small towns 
need to upgrade their drinking water systems to meet minimum 
health requirements and guidelines. The report says 460 small 
towns and four smaller cities need some form of water 
treatment upgrade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is it that after the water crisis in North 
Battleford, all of the concerns expressed by Saskatchewan 
residents and communities, and Sask Water’s own report 
indicating the supply and treatment of drinking water is a 
concern for the people of this province, how is it that the NDP 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

 

(New Democratic Party) can still cut not only Sask Water’s 
budget by a million dollars but the entire budget of 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management by over 
$10 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, day after day in this 
Assembly we hear that opposition party criticizing the 
government and wanting more money for highways, they want 
more money for health care, they want more tax cuts, they want 
more agriculture support, Mr. Speaker, and they want $300 
million from this province to meet some of the water 
challenges. 
 
There’s more and more and more and more, Mr. Speaker. And 
what I’d tell that member on this whole water quality file is, we 
are working in partnership with the community and we’ll meet 
some of those challenges over time. And I would ask that 
member to stop playing silly politics and start being fair, Mr. 
Speaker, with this whole challenge of water quality. 
 
And I’ll point out in our whole effort, Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to be fair to the people of Saskatchewan to make sure 
they have a good, decent cost for meeting some of the water 
quality objectives of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP have known for well over 10 years that this province 
was facing serious water concerns. They had a cabinet 
document that warned them. They had officials in SERM, Sask 
Water, Municipal Affairs, and Sask Health warning them. 
They’ve had communities across this province requesting 
assistance for water treatment upgrades, for help with testing 
and training, and for a few dollars to help them haul water while 
their wells were down. 
 
Now they’ve cut the water quality budget; they’ve cut SERM’s 
budget. They are telling people, get ready to pay three times 
more for your water and they refuse to take one ounce of 
responsibility for the water infrastructure disaster we are facing 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP dumping the entire financial 
burden of water quality and treatment of infrastructure onto 
municipalities in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this government for the 
past 10 years have been cleaning up that party’s mess, Mr. 
Speaker. And certainly meeting some of the challenges in 
concert with the communities in safe water quality is something 
that we want to make sure we continue doing; and it make take 
us another 10 years, Mr. Speaker. This is not an overnight 
solution. We’ve maintained that time and time again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is we want to be fair 
to all the people of Saskatchewan. Sixty-five to 70 per cent of 
our residents get their good quality water now, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s another 30 per cent that may or may not have . . . 
(inaudible) . . . challenges. We want to concentrate any 
resources we have in concert with these communities to make 
sure that 100 per cent of our communities are served with good 
quality water. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, it has been a tough climb 
ahead for this province to come back from that deficit that party 
left this province in the early ’90s. And we will continue 
building on the legacy of managing the finances of this 
province well, and continue building on this partnership, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely amazing that 
after 10 years of dithering we now have the insult that is this 
NDP government’s budget for safe drinking water. 
 
You know, the minister went even further yesterday. He said 
that water bills for residents whose communities didn’t have 
adequate water treatment facilities will double or even triple. 
 
Once again, it is clear the NDP government plans to pass the 
buck; to download the costs of safe water infrastructure onto 
municipalities and taxpayers. 
 
Now we know there’s a cost to their don’t worry, be happy 
strategy. At least 460 communities need infrastructure upgrades 
according to Sask Water. Are all of these towns and villages 
going to be hit? And what about the residents of the city of 
North Battleford. Is the minister saying their water bills are 
going to triple because they were unfortunate enough to get 
sick? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll point out not only that 
that party put us in debt in the early ’80s, and not only now do 
they vote they want money spent all over the place, Mr. 
Speaker, but now they get up, and they stand in their place, and 
they vote against any budget that we have to improve SERM or 
Sask Water’s ability to serve the people of Saskatchewan. That 
is a confused lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to not 
download onto our partners — the villages and the towns and 
the cities — we are going to work with them to upgrade their 
facilities so they’re able to serve the people of Saskatchewan 
with good, safe water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Gaming Agreement with First Nations 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming. The NDP government is currently 
negotiating a new gaming agreement with First Nations. 
 
The whole issue of gaming in Saskatchewan received intense 
scrutiny after the financial scandal at SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority). And there are still huge questions 
about the Liquor and Gaming department’s role in the 
controversy. 
 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

Yet we hear that an agreement is close at hand and it will be for 
a very long term, a term of 25 years. I wonder if the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan are comfortable with this government locking 
them into a 25-year contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the concerns over the recent problems, 
both with Liquor and Gaming, and SIGA, I would like the 
minister to explain why they are negotiating a 25-year 
agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I welcome 
the question from the member opposite, although she will 
recognize and realize that it’s not a public forum to negotiate 
any agreements that are currently being negotiated in good 
faith. 
 
But I would like to remind the member also that we’ve come a 
long way since 2000 when people recognized there was a 
problem. That problem’s been fixed. 
 
We have every confidence in the SIGA Board. We are 
negotiating in good faith. They have achieved the benchmarks 
that were set by this government after moving swiftly to ensure 
that the Provincial Auditor became involved; and now that 
those benchmarks are being achieved, we continue to negotiate 
in good faith, and we will have a good agreement with our 
partners and our friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we realize that a 
new agreement with First Nations people has not yet been 
signed. It is safe to assume though that perhaps the monetary 
issues have already been settled. 
 
On page 61 of the budget document in Estimates of 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, it shows that last 
year the government paid 14 million to the First Nations for the 
gaming agreement. But for this budget year, Mr. Speaker, the 
estimates show the government will be contributing 10 million 
more for a total of $24 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: has the new gaming 
agreement been finalized and is the additional $10 million a 
result of the new agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the short 
answer to the member opposite is no. It has not been signed. 
 
But I can tell the House, Mr. Speaker, and I want to tell 
anybody that’s listening. Throughout the negotiations that we 
undertook last summer, we have continued to negotiate in good 
faith. And the progress that SIGA has made has been excellent. 
We have every confidence in out partners. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m somewhat surprised. Perhaps there is a 
lack of communication in the members opposite, because there 
is an article of March 1 in The StarPhoenix: 
 

In a departure from his party’s previous comments of the 
activities of Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority . . . 
(and I’m quoting), Hermanson praised the FSIN for 
running a successful gambling business and complimented 
it for addressing the “governance challenges” at SIGA (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
What’s going on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
reported that the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) would like to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is reported that the 
FSIN would like to have this new agreement signed before the 
end of April and the Premier has said a deal is close . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The member may start 
over. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it is reported that the FSIN 
would like to have this new agreement signed before the end of 
April and the Premier has said a deal is close. Yet there are still 
many questions about the police investigation into the activities 
of former SIGA members. And there are questions about the 
Liquor and Gaming Authority role in the events as well. 
 
The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) have concluded 
their work and turned the results over to the Justice department. 
But the Justice department says no decision will be made on 
any charges until the fall because of a change in Crown 
prosecutors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Justice Minister explain why a new 
Crown prosecutor was assigned to this case after the report was 
received from the RCMP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I think the member needs to be aware that the economic 
opportunities for First Nations people in this province are 
limited, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, she should make sure — she should make 
sure, Mr. Speaker — that she’s part of the solution to economic 
development and opportunities for First Nations people, and not 
forever, Mr. Speaker, pick on negative aspects of what might be 
taking place. She should be upbeat about the opportunities and 
work with First Nations people and not be opposed to them as 
she obviously is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the reason we raise these issues 
is because the people on this side of the House are concerned 
about the dollars that go to the First Nation Fund and to the 
First Nations people of this province. 
 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, as long as there are unanswered 
questions about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, as long as there are unanswered 
questions about what was going on at SIGA during the tenure of 
Dutch Lerat and about how much the NDP government knew 
about it, there will be a cloud over any new gaming agreement 
that is reached. It would be in the best interests of the new 
SIGA Board, First Nations people, the provincial government, 
and all taxpayers of Saskatchewan that this province lift it 
before any new agreement is reached. 
 
The minister told the media that it is unfair to link the SIGA 
investigation with the new gaming agreement. But it is already 
linked in the public’s mind because the two parties involved, 
SIGA and SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority), are also the two parties involved now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government intent to sign a new 
gaming agreement before the results of investigation are made 
public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
want to let the opposition know, I want to let the members of 
this House know that we are negotiating an agreement with 
SIGA. And it will be a good agreement with our partners and 
our friends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am somewhat amazed. I quoted earlier what the Leader of the 
Opposition is saying. I’d like to quote further from what the 
Leader of the Opposition said. That’s why I’m a little confused 
about the questioning. 
 

I may . . . (and this is a quote) I may surprise some people 
by saying that I believe the financial success of the 
Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority . . . is one of the 
great and largely untold business success stories in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I have had the opportunity to meet with SIGA CEO Ed 
Bellegarde and I am impressed . . . (by) the direct and 
business-like approach both SIGA and . . . FSIN have taken 
in addressing the governance challenges that arose in 2001. 

 
I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, whether they’re talking to one 
another over there, but we know what we’re doing on this side 
of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is so sure that this 
new gaming agreement can be in no way linked to the SIGA 
scandal, will he stand in the House today and say that no one 
negotiating this new agreement for SIGA or the FSIN and no 
one negotiating on behalf of the provincial government is or 
was in any way involved with the RCMP investigation into the 
SIGA scandal? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I just want to 
reiterate again — and the member should know — that the 
status of the criminal investigation is under the purview of the 
Department of Justice, and that is still ongoing. 
 
Now I’m going to continue to quote some more, Mr. Speaker, 
because I don’t think they’ve got their lines together. 
 
Quote from the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

Of course, I am not privy to the discussions, but I 
understand SIGA and the FSIN are in negotiation with the 
province on the completion of a new casino operating 
agreement to replace the one that expired last March. I 
recognize the importance of getting a new agreement 
signed as soon as possible (an agreement, an agreement) 
that serves the best interests of both of First Nation peoples 
and the non-Aboriginal communities of our province.” 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Balanced Budget Legislation 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more and more questions are being raised about 
the NDP’s fudge-it budget. Now even Janice MacKinnon is 
refusing to back the government on whether the budget is even 
legal under the NDP’s own balanced budget legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon was asked point-blank whether 
the NDP is breaking its own balanced budget law. And all she 
would say was, “no comment.” 
 
The NDP is violating their own balanced budget law. They have 
to change their Fiscal Stabilization Fund law because the budget 
is breaking this law as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this budget is an honest document, why does the 
NDP have to go to such lengths to skirt around its own laws? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, if the 
opposition would think about what they say one day and then 
the next day, they’d realize that usually what they say is there is 
no Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Today what they say is don’t 
change the legislation to allow you to access the funds in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Well which way is it, Mr. Speaker? It can’t be both ways. 
 
But I want to say to the opposition and to the people of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, that when they say that we should not 
access the savings in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, which the 
member just acknowledged exists, what they’re saying, Mr. 
Speaker, is they don’t agree with a budget that does not increase 
the PST (provincial sales tax). But the people agree with it. 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

They don’t agree with a budget that continues with personal tax 
reductions, but the people agree with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t agree with building the schools, but the people agree 
with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They don’t agree with fixing the roads, but the people agree 
with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister said the Crowns will not have to incur 
more debt in order to pay their dividend to the General Revenue 
Fund. Again, the minister’s own budget doesn’t match his 
words. 
 
In 2001-2002, the government took $200 million dividend from 
the Crowns. During that same period, total Crown debt grew by 
$143 million. So the NDP is just moving debt from one account 
to another account. They’re growing the debt outside the 
General Revenue Fund to hide the deficit inside the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what? They’re really using their Visa 
card to pay for their MasterCard. Anyway you look at it, it’s 
more debt, Mr. Speaker. And according to Janice MacKinnon, 
it’s against the law. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is why is the NDP violating its own 
balanced budget law by hiding debt in the Crowns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — What we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re 
building — we’re building the highways, we’re building the 
schools. And I’ll tell the member opposite and the people of the 
province what the Crowns are doing, Mr. Speaker — they’re 
building too. 
 
We’re on public record as saying that infrastructure in the 
Crowns should be funded by debt, and it should be borrowed, it 
shouldn’t be paid on a cash basis by the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why did the debt of the Crowns go up last year? I’ll tell the 
member why, Mr. Speaker. Because SaskPower built a new 
generation capacity at Cory and Queen Elizabeth to keep up 
with the demands of a growing economy. That’s one reason, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other reason, Mr. Speaker, is because SaskEnergy 
subsidized our heating costs by $70 million. And what I want to 
know from those members, Mr. Speaker, are they opposed to 
the Crowns building electrical, power-generating capacity? Yes 
or no, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister seems to forget about the fact that last year his very 
government sold $220 million worth of Crown assets and put 
them into general revenue and Crown debt. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there’s one way the NDP could give us an honest 
picture of the province’s finances. They could listen to the 
Provincial Auditor and give us a budget that shows the 
complete picture. 
 
The auditor says, and I quote: 
 

It’s time for Saskatchewan to change. The government 
should focus on its overall financial planning information 
on the entire government. 

 
That’s what the auditor says, Mr. Speaker. No more 
phony-baloney transfers from a so-called rainy day fund that 
does not exist. No more borrowing in the Crowns to hide the 
deficit in the General Revenue Fund. All the NDP accounting 
tricks would be eliminated if they just followed the auditor’s 
recommendation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP refusing to give Saskatchewan 
people the complete picture of the government’s finances? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they used to wait at 
least a day before they flipped and flopped, but now it’s 
happening within five minutes. We’re back to having no funds 
in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund again. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, this is 
what the CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce), the 
Bank of Commerce World Markets, says about the governance 
in the Crowns. They say, quote: “they have an enlightened 
dividend policy based on cash flow.” 
 
The Conference Board of Canada says they rate the governance 
structure amongst the best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Institute of Public Administration of Canada awarded the 
Crown sector in Saskatchewan the Governor General’s gold 
medal for our governance and performance management 
systems. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how many medals have those people 
over there received for their financial management? Not very 
many, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 
NDP has nothing to hide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if the 
NDP has nothing to hide, why are they so touchy about 
following the auditor’s recommendation? If the NDP has 
nothing to hide, why are they refusing to give us the complete 
picture of the government’s finances? If the NDP has nothing to 
hide, why do they have to change accounting practices? If the 
NDP has nothing to hide, why won’t Janice MacKinnon back 
up their budget? 
 
Mr. Speaker, where there’s smoke, there’s mirrors. Mr. 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

 

Speaker, why won’t the NDP give the people of Saskatchewan 
a complete and honest picture of the province’s finances? What 
are they hiding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, what I want to know is why 
the opposition is hiding? Why are they grasping at straws? 
Why, Mr. Speaker, don’t they talk about building the schools? 
Or to put it another way, why are they opposed to building 
schools, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Why are they opposed to more money for municipalities, Mr. 
Speaker? Why are they opposed to fixing the highways, Mr. 
Speaker? Why are they opposed to more money for the health 
system, Mr. Speaker? Why are they opposed to more money for 
education, Mr. Speaker? Why are they opposed to personal 
income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker? Why are they opposed to no 
increase in the PST? 
 
Could it be because they wanted our budget to be like the 
Alberta budget, and the BC (British Columbia) budget, to raise 
the PST and raise health care premiums? It didn’t happen. They 
have nothing to complain about and they’re sorely disappointed, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, on a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll entertain the member’s point of order at 
orders for the day. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Pension Benefits Amendment Regulations Announced 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government is committed to fair and efficient marketplace 
regulation. We’re especially committed to a retirement system 
that responds to the evolving needs of Saskatchewan retirees. 
 
Over the last two decades, changes in the marketplace have 
seen a shift from defined benefit pension plans to retirement 
products that allow for more individual control. With this shift, 
attention has come to bear on the limitations the government 
places on pension money and retirement. 
 
This government has received numerous requests from retired 
persons, pension plan members, and financial advisors for 
discretion in accessing locked-in retirement savings in 
retirement. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce we’re taking 
steps to keep pace with these shifting demands. The Pension 
Benefits Amendment Regulations, 2002 were proclaimed on 
April 1, 2002 and these amendments give retirees greater ability 
to manage their own affairs. 
 
People with a locked-in retirement accounts now have the 

option of converting their pension funds into Registered 
Retirement Income Funds, RRIFS, Mr. Speaker, at retirement 
similar to the way RRSPs (Registered Retirements Savings 
Plan) are converted to RRIFS. The option is available to former 
pension plan members who’ve money in a locked-in retirement 
account and are eligible to retire. It’s also available to 
individuals with existing life income fund and locked-in 
retirement income fund contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should point out that these . . . that pension plans 
are permitted, but not required to offer a RRIF as an option at 
retirement. A prescribed RRIF has no maximum retirement 
limit . . . withdrawal limit, rather. Retirees have the ability to 
determine for themselves their level of income and taxes are 
payable on withdrawal only. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve developed these amendments in response to 
requests from retirees seeking greater control over their 
retirement income. We believe these changes demonstrate this 
government’s respect for the ability of retirees to manage their 
own affairs. And we encourage retirees, Mr. Speaker, to contact 
their financial institution, financial advisor, pension plan 
administrator for more information on transferring money to a 
prescribed RRIF. 
 
Information also, Mr. Speaker, concerning these new 
regulations is available on the Saskatchewan Justice Web site. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to respond to the minister’s statement. But first off, I’d like to 
indicate that we do not have a copy of the ministerial statement 
which is, I believe, customary in the House that we would have 
that copy. And I understand that there has been some 
miscommunication and I think that the opposition deserves that 
copy and I hope that this is the first, the first, and last time. 
 
But I do want to make comment to the points raised by the 
minister because, Mr. Speaker, my office, and as Finance critic 
I have been contacted by many people and I . . . During the time 
that the government released its white paper in the fall to obtain 
suggestions from people to . . . for people to consider the 
options that were being put forward, many people recognized 
that indeed there was a time to update the pension regulations to 
ensure that people had the abilities to decide on their own 
monies. Because after all, Mr. Speaker, any monies that are in a 
pension fund are the . . . under the ownership of the individual. 
And people would like to have that freedom. 
 
So in the options that I saw in the white paper, and that many 
people saw, there was anticipated changes that were going to be 
for the better of individuals to plan their financial positions in 
retirement. And I understand from the brief comments that I 
heard from the minister that indeed those regulations have now 
been changed. 
 
As indicated, I think the minister has said that those regulations 
are available on the government Web site. And I would ask that 
any of the people who have contacted opposition members — 
and we have had many people contact us — would indeed 
choose that Web site and obtain all of those regulations and see 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

how those regulations pertain to their own individual 
retirements plans. 
 
So that would be the position that we would take that, indeed, 
until we see the regulations and until we hear from people as to 
how individuals are affected, we would trust that the 
government has indeed made the choices for the betterment of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Public Employees Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 17, The 
Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 18, The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 – The Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 19, The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 
2002, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day and before taking the 
next point of order, I would like to deal with one that’s . . . I 
heard yesterday. 
 
Yesterday the Opposition House Leader, the member for 
Cannington, raised a point of order concerning the procedure 
for addressing points of order with respect to the proceedings of 
question period. In this regard I reviewed the practice of this 
Assembly, as well as the applicable parliamentary authorities. 
 
When question period was instituted as part of the daily routine 
in 1976, it was done so on the recommendations of the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures. The third 
recommendation of that report reads as follows, quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker will not entertain points of order during oral 

question period. Points of Order may be raised on Orders of 
the Day. 

 
A review of the record shows that this recommendation has 
been adhered to without deviation since 1976. Speakers have 
not permitted points of order to be raised by members during 
oral question period. This is to prevent members from 
disrupting questions on substantive issues by raising procedural 
issues. 
 
Nevertheless, while not addressed in that report it is a matter of 
common practice for the Speaker to intervene during question 
period when there is a breach of order. Although the role of the 
Speaker in this regard is noted in two rulings of the Chair, dated 
May 27, 1985 and December 22, 1986, more noteworthy are the 
many interventions the Speaker has made during question 
period over the years. 
 
I will end this ruling with another quote, this time from page 
424 of the House of Commons Procedure and Practice. In 
noting the procedure for points of order, it is stated, quote: 
 

If a situation arises during Question Period that the Speaker 
believes to be sufficiently serious to . . . (recommend) 
immediate consideration, for example unparliamentary 
language, then the matter is addressed at that time. 
 

I hope this ruling clarifies the practice of this Assembly with 
respect to the points of order and the Speaker’s interventions 
during question period. I would like to close by reminding all 
hon. members that the appropriate time for members to raise a 
point of order concerning question period is on orders of the 
day. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my point of order deals with the statement by the minister for 
Sask Water who stated during question period that the Sask 
Party was responsible for the governance of the province during 
the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party was only formed in 1997 
and no one on the opposition side was part of Executive 
Council in either governing party of the 1980s. The problems of 
the 1980s were a result of both the NDP and PC (Progressive 
Conservative) governance, not the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I believe what’s happening here is the 
member knows this is not a point of order; this is a matter of 
debate. The point is not well taken. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I request 
permission to table responses to written questions no. 34 and 
35. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for 34 and 35 have been tabled. 
 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
just have . . . I’ve got a few more comments dealing with the 
budget this year, Mr. Speaker. And when I started yesterday, I 
noted that the Minister of Learning and the Minister of Social 
Services — although they’ll be disappointed that I’ll be coming 
to an end — followed with great enthusiasm yesterday and I 
want to thank them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I read a number of headlines in the 
newspapers across the province, very pessimistic headlines. 
Very pessimistic headlines, Mr. Speaker, dealing with deficit 
budgeting and overall debt increasing in the province. 
 
Today I’d like to change that a little bit, Mr. Speaker, and talk 
about some headlines in the paper that are very optimistic. And 
why they are optimistic is because they deal with the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I’ll just read some of them out to you, Mr. Speaker, and I know 
the ministers that I mentioned before will be quite enthused 
with this also. Sask Party delivers plans . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to 
thank my colleague for giving me a few minutes of his time. 
 
To you and through you to members of the House, I would like 
to welcome in the west gallery, Winston Lewis, a constituent 
from Moose Jaw. Winston is also a business agent with the 
Service Employees’ International Union in Moose Jaw. And it’s 
good to see him here. I hope he enjoys the proceedings this 
afternoon. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
just go over some of the optimistic headlines that we see across 
this province in newspapers. And all of them are dealing with 
Sask Party plans that we have for the future of this province, to 
grow this province, and to grow this province by 100,000 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rosetown Eagle: “A plan to grow Saskatchewan, 
to grow a province, Saskatchewan Party.” “Grow Saskatchewan 
meetings all about sharing ideas,” and I quote Mr. Hermanson. 
 
“Residents inquire about opposition party’s plan to grow 
Saskatchewan,” P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald, Mr. Speaker. Gull 
Lake Advance: “Take control for a brighter future, Sask Party.” 
And it just goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The one thing you’ll notice, Mr. Speaker, connected with the 
Sask Party — its optimism for the province of Saskatchewan, 
something that this party is all about on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gets very tiring to hear all the pessimism coming 
out of that side, all the excuses why, number one, we’re losing 
jobs; number two, we’re losing people; number three, why we 
have to have deficit budgets two years in a row; number four, 
why we have to increase the debt instead of, as they have in the 
past, reducing the debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for once it’s nice to hear some optimism from this 
side of the House in this House about the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that people around this 
province are so optimistic when they talk to people in the 
Saskatchewan Party, number one, is probably the idea of 
lowering incomes taxes further. We talk about reducing taxes 
on growth and productivity, something that would help 
businesses in this province thrive, would bring businesses back 
to Saskatchewan instead of what’s happening now — chasing 
them every which way, whether it’s east, west, or south, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re losing businesses and we’re losing young 
people. 
 
We also talk, Mr. Speaker, about delivering smaller and smarter 
government. We talk about economic expansions, Mr. Speaker. 
We talk about providing quality educational . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see today, Mr. 
Speaker, we have much more enthusiasm on this side. I should 
go on for a while longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s such a good feeling to hear people with 
some optimism in this province of what we can do on this side 
of the House with all the natural resources we have in this 
province — if you look at Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, who would 
give anything to have our natural resources, but on that side 
they’re actually doing better with less because they’ve had less 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

socialist governments in that province of Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on again and I know members on the 
other side would hope I would, but I think I have to come to an 
end now and let some of the other members on this side, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that I cannot support this budget, but 
I certainly can support the amendment to the budget. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for . . . I was going to 
recognize the member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, but I 
want to ask, why is the member for Moose Jaw on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly 
to move a motion in regards to granting a leave of absence to 
certain members. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion at this time cannot be accepted by 
the Chair because we are into a debate on the budget speech. 
And so there’s a motion on the floor. We’d have to have 
adjournment of the motion before we can do that. 
 
So I recognize the member for Regina Qu’Appelle, the Minister 
of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is for me a real honour to be able to stand and speak in favour 
of the budget of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a tremendous amount of very good work has gone 
into developing and producing this budget. It is a budget which 
is designed to build this province. It’s a budget that is based on 
hope. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s also a budget that is grounded 
in reality and part of the reality that we have had to face in this 
past year has been some decline in the economy. We’ve seen — 
worldwide — we’ve seen the effects of September 11. We’ve 
seen a drop in gas and oil revenues. And there have been a 
number of factors which have seriously affected not only this 
government but governments all across the country — actually, 
throughout the world. But all across the country we have seen 
the impact. 
 
We have seen massive cuts in British Columbia, cuts that have 
resulted in thousands of people losing their jobs. We have seen 
budgets cut for highways. We have seen budgets cut for health, 
for all kinds of programs in both Alberta and British Columbia. 
And I have to say that with the hard work that has gone on, the 
long-term planning that has gone on by this government, we are 
not compelled to make those kind of cuts here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been accused by the members opposite of 
all kinds of games around the budget, but I have to say I think 
one of the biggest problems is the confusion and the lack of 
understanding on behalf of the members opposite. They have 
looked at this budget, and I am convinced by the language they 
use, by the things that they’re saying, that they really do not 
have a good grasp of how this budget is developed, how it 

operates — because it sticks within our guidelines. 
 
This is a budget that is based, as I say, on long-range planning. 
We had surplus come in over the past few years. Those 
surpluses were put into a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Now as the 
Minister of Finance alluded to before, we don’t have drawers of 
cash that we put this money into. This money is a budget line, 
Mr. Speaker, and it is available as a surplus. 
 
Now what I want to ask the members opposite when I hear 
them talking about this budget, is how can they on one day say 
that we should be spending this surplus, and on the next day say 
that there is no surplus; there is no Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
And just so that I can remind them, I would like to quote some 
of their confusion. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has said that this 
fund doesn’t exist. And then they have also said that we should 
spend this money. And I would like to quote. In November of 
2000: 
 

Krawetz said he wants a fall session of the legislature to 
debate how to spend the money. 

 
And I would like to quote also from the Moosomin MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) report: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party has called upon the Minister of 
Finance to confirm (if) he is indeed sitting on a secret 
bundle of cash, and if so, recall the Legislature so it can be 
debated . . . how . . . best (to) spend this windfall. 

 
All through that whole season they railed on about this money 
that was in the so-called windfall as they set it up, but was in 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund or was designated for that. 
 
The Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Leader Elwin Hermanson called 
Friday for a special session of the legislature to debate how 
the province’s . . . 370 million oil and gas surplus should be 
spent. 

 
And that was in The StarPhoenix December 2, 2000. Mr. 
Speaker, these quotes show the tremendous confusion that there 
is on that side of the House. 
 
(14:45) 
 
They talked about this government engaging in jiggery-pokery 
when it was putting together its finance . . . its budget, and, Mr. 
Speaker, I would have to say — and I’ll reference my response 
to the Speech from the Throne — I don’t think it’s a matter of 
jiggery-pokery on their side; it’s a matter of piggery-pokery. 
They have been looking at their plan, talking about their plan 
around this province, and saying that they’ve got this plan and 
it’s going to grow Saskatchewan. Well even their own members 
have said there’s no substance to it. 
 
And what I said was that it was a pig in a poke, and yet they 
only have the poke out there — the bag; they don’t show us 
what’s inside. There is no plan, Mr. Speaker. They are 
confused. They are engaged in piggery-pokery with the people 
of the province. 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan — a very clear plan. We 
have a budget that is well grounded and solidly based. 
 
I want to talk about some of the things that we’re doing with 
this. This budget is built on four pillars. And those pillars, Mr. 
Speaker, are meant to grow the economy — to grow our 
environment. We are investing in infrastructure that supports 
economic development. We are ensuring that there will be 
quality education. We have increased the funding for education 
significantly, and we are ensuring that there will be quality 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do this because we have looked around the 
world and we have seen very clearly that we must build the 
human capital in order to build the capital in the economy of 
our province. We look to Ireland and we have seen what they 
did in their planning over there. We don’t have the same kind of 
massive investment of Eurodollars, but we can see some of the 
very positive things that they have done that we can also engage 
in. 
 
And one of those things that we can engage in is shoring up our 
education system — right from pre-kindergarten on through 
post-secondary education. And so we put more money into that. 
 
And we have also, Mr. Speaker, recognized that we need 
facilities in order to develop our education system in this 
province. And we have determined that one of the ways that we 
can enable those facilities to be built is by enabling the 
educational institutions to take out a mortgage-type loan in 
order to build those. Mr. Speaker, this is good, solid financial 
planning. It is engaged in by governments across this country 
and it is the kind of planning that will enable this education 
system to thrive. 
 
The CGAs, (certified general accountant), if I might just quote 
from the column of Bruce Johnstone in The Leader-Post: 
 

. . . the CGAs (looking at this type of financing) say it’s 
fine to finance infrastructure with debt, as long as the 
term of the debt doesn’t exceed the life of the asset being 
funded. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no way that the debt is going to 
outlive the term of these assets that are being built. This kind of 
financing is up front; it is clear to the public that we are 
working to try and build the province and make it strong. We 
are supporting the education structures in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear so much gloom and doom along with the 
confusion from the other side of the House, and one of the 
things we hear is about all the young people that are leaving our 
province. But, Mr. Speaker, we must remember that there have 
been studies done that have shown very clearly that over 75 per 
cent of the graduates of our universities are staying in 
Saskatchewan and finding good jobs and that over 90 per cent 
of the graduates of the SIAST and the technical schools are 
staying in this province and finding good jobs. Why? Because 
we are building a solid economy here and because those jobs 
are available. 
 
Yes, we know that young people do leave the province, Mr. 
Speaker. I was one of those young people who left the province. 

I went off and worked on the oil rigs; I worked in the mines to 
make some money, to have an adventure. But I came to this 
province that I love. I came back here to try and build a good, 
solid province for the future and I am very happy that I’m 
engaged in that task with a government that has a solid 
foundation and is building for the future. 
 
When I ran for this government, Mr. Speaker, when I ran to be 
elected in ’99, one of the things that I was very proud of is that 
we had moved beyond that period in the ’80s where there was 
so much waste, where the money of the people of this province 
was just blown away and threw us into terrible debt. And I was 
proud of the financial stewardship of those people who had 
come into government in the ’90s, the New Democratic Party. 
And I was proud that I had an opportunity to run for this party 
and to carry on that inheritance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re engaged in at this point, is 
carrying on that inheritance, giving sound stewardship, sound 
financial planning that will build a successful province. We 
have been engaged in a number of things, Mr. Speaker, that are 
going to help us in this process. 
 
One of those pieces of work that has been going on out there 
engages the people of our province. It’s called the Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy — ACRE. I was privileged 
to sit on that committee as an elected member. And I have to 
say that there was such a disparate group of people there with 
ideas and political persuasions very different from my own, but 
the ideas and the thoughts and the analysis was brought together 
and the recommendations that are coming forward from the 
ACRE committee are going to be, I think, a tremendous help in 
building a thriving province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that we are doing in this 
province is we are building the highways. We’re building better 
roads in this province because we need an infrastructure that 
will support our economy. And I am privileged and I am 
thankful for the opportunity to serve this province as Minister 
of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Even in these very, very difficult times, Mr. Speaker, we were 
able to generate a budget of $300 million plus this year to be 
able to continue our program of building the highways, 
repairing those rural roads, working with municipal partners to 
make sure that transportation infrastructure is developed that is, 
that is mindful of and supportive of the needs that are there in 
rural Saskatchewan and that are there as we seek to build the 
economy. 
 
One of the wonderful pieces of this work that I’ve discovered is 
that we have throughout the province groups called area 
transportation planning committees. Those groups are made up 
of people in local regions who look at the highways and the 
roads in their areas, and they set priorities. They say that these 
roads, these pieces of the transportation infrastructure need our 
support. Mr. Speaker, this budget enables us to give that kind of 
support to meet those priorities. 
 
The critic opposite, the Highways transportation critic opposite, 
the member from Cypress Hills, was heard to say in Moose Jaw 
at a meeting of their Grow Saskatchewan planning committee, I 
believe it was, he was heard to say that the $300 million for 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

budget . . . for highways was adequate, but what he would do 
would be to make sure that they did more in terms of quality 
instead of quantity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at this province and I look at the 
transportation infrastructure here and we recognize that some 90 
per cent of the traffic is on 7 per cent of the roads in this 
province. 
 
So I wonder when I hear the member opposite talk about doing 
quality instead of quantity is he going to forget about all those 
rural roads out there that need repairs and maintenance that are 
very costly? Is he going to forget about all the kind of 
partnerships that are made with the municipalities that enable us 
to set aside heavy haul roads so that we can repair the thin 
membrane surface highways? Is he going to just focus on a few 
main corridors alone? Is that what he’s talking about when he’s 
talking about quality not quantity? 
 
It makes me wonder. Because I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are focused on trying to build the whole of this province. Yes, 
we set priorities, but I can tell you that in those priority settings 
we are not neglecting those distant rural roads where the few 
people are. We are not neglecting the roads of the North — $34 
million this year; over 10 per cent of the transportation budget 
going into supporting transportation in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this government is very responsible in its 
development of a budget, and I think that the work that has 
gone into this shows that we have a very, very clear plan for the 
future and we will build this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We will build the infrastructure of this 
province. And one of the things that I have to say, I am very 
glad to see is, Mr. Speaker, the insightful and foresightful way 
that we have been dealing with the issues around developing 
ethanol as an industry in this province. A lot of thought and 
work has gone into this process. Myself, Mr. Speaker, I spent 
over a year and a half working on this issue before I was 
appointed as Legislative Secretary last year. A tremendous 
opportunity for our province. 
 
When I was elected, I was elected in a constituency that has 
roughly 20 per cent rural, and I believed that it was very 
important to try and find ways to support that rural part of our 
economy. When I looked around, when I listened to what 
people were saying, I realized that one of the ways that we 
might help do this — though it was not a new idea, but it was 
one that had not developed — was to see if an ethanol 
manufacturing operation would be good for this province. 
 
So I began to study that; and I thank people like Darren Anholt, 
who is with Associated Engineering and lives in my 
constituency, for the support and the work that he gave in 
helping me get an understanding of that in the early part of our 
term back in ’99 and 2000. 
 
And I would also have to say that I’m very thankful for the 
co-operation of caucus, as I was able to do presentations for the 
whole of caucus back then and bring in people like Dr. Keith 
Hutchence from the Research Council who is really an expert 

on this whole issue of ethanol. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with all of that background then, the Premier 
appointed me last year and I was very fortunate to be able to 
meet with a wide range of people throughout the province and 
to help put together a greenprint on ethanol that this 
government could use as a print to help develop this industry in 
the province. 
 
With courage and foresight, our Finance minister helped draft a 
budget that would enable this industry to grow. The cap was 
taken off the 15-cent-a-litre tax on ethanol, and this industry has 
potential to bring a lot of jobs into the province, to bring a 
whole new industry into the province that will help the 
environment. Because even a 10 per cent blend of ethanol with 
gasoline reduces greenhouse emissions by about 30 per cent. 
 
So I have to say again, Mr. Speaker, that the one thing that I am 
very thankful for is that this is a government with a plan, that 
this is a government with a purpose. We are well-grounded 
financially; we have a history of solid financial stewardship; we 
have a budget that is transparent for those who will look with 
eyes to see and who are willing to try and actually understand 
what this budget is about. It is transparent; it is clear. The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, which was set aside for difficult times, is 
being used in difficult times. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you really believe that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
chirps over, do I really believe that. Yes, I absolutely believe 
that and yes, I understand it, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that Fiscal Stabilization Fund is keeping us from having to do 
the kind of things that are being done in the provinces to the 
west of us. 
 
It is enabling us to support our education system. It is enabling 
us to put another $129 million into the health system so that we 
can continue to have good, publicly funded health care for the 
people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it were not for this forward planning that had 
put this Fiscal Stabilization Fund in place, we would have to 
make the same kind of cuts that they’re doing to the west of us, 
that they’re doing in the rest of the country. And we are not 
having to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very thankful for the planning and the work 
that went into building this Fiscal Stabilization Fund and the 
planning that went into enabling this budget to be progressive 
and not a cutting budget. 
 
We see . . . we hear very often that we have to stimulate our 
economy by cutting the taxes. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say 
that we have done a tremendous job so far in cutting those 
taxes: cutting the personal income tax; cutting the corporate tax; 
raising the threshold so that small Saskatchewan businesses 
have a better advantage. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to way that when KPMG does its 
study of the countries in North America, where does Canada’s 
. . . where does Saskatchewan show up there? Right up near the 
top. Saskatoon, Regina, some of the best places in this North 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

 

America to do business. Why? Because we have set the 
conditions so that that can happen. 
 
With those conditions set, we are seeing businesses move into 
this province and we are encouraging that movement. We are 
seeing capital come into this province and, Mr. Speaker, we are 
going to do even more to build this province and to help it 
thrive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that when we look to the North of our 
province we see again the kind of tremendous potential to build. 
And we are working with partners in the North to build the 
economy there. We are seeing tremendous steps forward in 
building plants, wood product plants, in Meadow Lake, in 
Hudson Bay. We are seeing forest industry that, even though it 
was hammered by the softwood disputes and the attacks by the 
United States on our industry, we are seeing that it is still 
moving ahead even with all the impediments that are there. And 
I am thankful for the planning that has gone into helping that 
industry move ahead, and the work that has gone into partnering 
with the First Nations people who live in the North, with the 
Métis people who live in the North, so that there is jobs, so that 
there are . . . so that there is good, adequate education, that there 
is transportation infrastructure that enables these things to move 
ahead. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget will help this province thrive and I am 
happy to be part of a government that is building the province 
and doing it in ways that are thoughtful, creative, and based on 
sound financial management. 
 
The Sask Party, I want to say once more, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite, I believe are very confused on this whole 
front — very confused. They flip one day from there being no 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund to the next wanting to spend it. 
 
And I’d like to quote again Mr. Krawetz . . . pardon me, Mr. 
Speaker, for mentioning his name. I would like to quote the 
member from Canora, he says: 
 

The NDP has been claiming that it is using its so-called 
‘rainy day account’ - the Fiscal Stabilization Fund - to 
balance the budget. Yesterday, in response to questioning 
from the Saskatchewan Party, the Provincial Auditor said 
there is no money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund so the 
government is actually running a deficit. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our Finance minister has said very clearly, 
that if you’re looking at the difference between what we bring 
in in revenue and what we’re spending, yes, there is . . . there is 
a cash deficit. However, however, Mr. Speaker, with that . . . 
with that shortfall, we have a counterbalance that is based on 
long-range planning. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote again from Bruce 
Johnstone’s column where the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants — of which our Provincial Auditor is a member — 
where the Institute of Chartered of Accountants is quoted as 
saying: 
 

. . . this week’s budget is balanced because transfers from 

the Fiscal Stabilization Fund offset . . . (that) 
over-expenditure . . . in the current fiscal year . . . (and it 
will again) in the next fiscal year . . . which is also known 
as . . . 

 
Well, it doesn’t really matter he says. But the fact is, that the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants recognizes that this Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund and this way of budgeting is a very good, 
positive way of budgeting. Mr. Speaker, the confusion reigns 
amongst the green and yellow on the far side over there. We 
have a plan; we understand how this budget works and it will 
work for the good of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many aspects of this budget that I would 
like to speak to. I think that we see in so many ways that it will 
build our province. We see the potentials within the Canadian 
Light Source synchrotron in Saskatoon. We see an institute that 
is being set up to enable that light source to be developed and 
used as fully as possible. We will see tremendous returns from 
this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also see in the Innovation Place in Saskatoon tremendous 
developments. I was fortunate enough to meet with the people 
from the ag-biotech sector and to hear what some of the 
potential is within that sector for helping to build the economy 
in this province. They receive support from this government for 
research and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the same can be said for the research park here in 
Regina where we are looking at technologies to help develop 
recovery for oil and gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is doing many, many wonderful 
things to help build the economy of this province, and again I 
say that is built on good financial stewardship, sound 
management. We have an open and transparent plan that the 
people of this province understand, even if those few who sit 
opposite us do not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity to 
speak on behalf of the budget. I want to say that I will be voting 
in favour of the budget and I certainly will not be voting in 
favour of the amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise today to address the budget speech and to 
speak on behalf of the people of the Cannington constituency 
who I have the privilege to represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For those of you who don’t know where the Cannington 
constituency is, Mr. Speaker, it’s in the very southeast corner of 
the province, an area that has much grain farming, Mr. Speaker, 
both mixed farming, grain and cattle, as well as a large portion 
of Saskatchewan’s oil industry is centred in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because of that we see a number of things happening, Mr. 
Speaker. The people of Cannington constituency and the whole 
of the southeast area of the province, Mr. Speaker, pay a large 
amount of taxes. Those taxes are paid, Mr. Speaker, through 
royalties on the oil, through income taxes on the salaries earned 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

or on the business profits that are made, either farm businesses, 
Mr. Speaker, or commercial businesses, construction 
companies, etc. Fuel taxes, capital taxes and indirectly, Mr. 
Speaker, property taxes. While the provincial government itself 
does not levy those property taxes, they have to be paid to the 
school boards and to the municipalities to offset the money that 
the provinces are no longer supplying to those entities. 
 
And fact is our school division, Mr. Speaker, receives very, 
very little money from the province. You could even say almost 
a token amount of their budget actually comes from the 
provincial government. The major portion, 95 per cent or so, 
comes from the property tax base, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when the people of the Cannington area, when the people 
of Southey, Saskatchewan look at the government services that 
they’re receiving in return for all of those taxes, they wonder 
were the money has gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Roads like 361, highways, it does have a sign there that says 
highway on it. It does have a number; it says 361, Mr. Speaker, 
but it’s not a safe road to drive. It’s full of potholes, it’s full of 
rocks, it’s full of mud in the spring — virtually impassable, Mr. 
Speaker. And what’s happening is a large portion of the traffic 
that travels east/west through my constituency avoid that 
particular highway. They take the grid roads if they have to 
travel, or they swing many miles out of their road to take 
another highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet that is one of the main oil-haul roads generating 
millions and millions and millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, for 
this provincial government in royalties, for this provincial 
government in fuel taxes, and yet, Mr. Speaker, none of it is 
returned to that highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are some of the issues that the people of 
Cannington want me to raise in this House at this time in 
dealing with the budget — the inequities of this provincial 
government and its inadequacies in delivering services to the 
people of Southey, Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve seen, ever since the NDP have come to power, the loss 
of hospitals, health-care services. We’ve seen the diminishing 
of government offices in the areas: Highways, depots have been 
closed down; SaskPower offices have been closed; SaskEnergy 
offices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And that’s progress. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes. And as the Minister of Finance last 
year from his budget used to say, and that’s progress. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it may be NDP progress, but it’s certainly 
not progress for any of the people living in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s much more reminiscent of the turn of the century 
— the 19th, not the 21st, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to deal with some of the realities of 
the budget. The member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley was 
talking about the realities of the budget. But in his fantasy 
world his realities are much different than those faced by the 
real people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle lives in a 
rose-coloured world. It’s all tainted by his philosophy. And it’s 
tainted, Mr. Speaker, by his undying belief in socialism. It has 
nothing to do, Mr. Speaker, with the real world of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read an article that I found in one of the 
local papers — if I can find my notes on it now — that dealt 
with the . . . newspaper from, from Lumsden, Mr. Speaker. And 
I was just looking at that. Oh well, I’ll come back to it later, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s not the one. 
Thanks. It’s the one before that. 
 
It was called “Voodoo Economics,” Mr. Speaker. It was called, 
“Voodoo Economics” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it’s 
not in that one either. And it dealt with putting money, Mr. 
Speaker, in an account. So at the end of this editorial, Mr. 
Speaker . . . and I’d like to read you the whole thing but I’ll 
paraphrase it since I can’t find my piece of paper that dealt with 
it. 
 
It talks about the employee who at the end of the month has an 
additional $200 left in his account. And so what he . . . what 
does he do with it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister 
of Agriculture has it there for me. Unfortunately he’s not 
sending it over, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the employee has $200 left in his account at the 
end of the month. So he has a choice of things to do with this 
money. He can put it in the account and call it a savings 
account, as what the government did last year in formation of 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. They had a little money left — 
700 and some million dollars — and so they put it in their 
savings account. Or they could have, Mr. Speaker, paid down 
the mortgage. 
 
Well the person there says that I’m going to put it in a savings 
account and he tells his spouse about it. So the spouse . . . But 
what he doesn’t tell the spouse, Mr. Speaker, is that he actually 
put the money on the mortgage because he paid down some 
debt. That’s what the government did, Mr. Speaker. They took 
the money they had placed . . . that they had told us about in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund and then paid down the debt — their 
mortgage. 
 
Well the person we were talking about, Mr. Speaker, his spouse 
goes to the bank and says, well my husband says that I’ve got 
$200 left over. She goes into the bank account and there’s no 
money. So I’d like to read actually what the article says, Mr. 
Speaker. And it calls it “Voodoo Economics.” So, Mr. Speaker, 
and to quote: 
 

Most of us would use option B (which was paying down 
the mortgage). But let’s say we . . . used option A like the 
government did. When our spouse went to use the money 
and found the account empty would he or she feel that they 
had been lied to? Probably. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what the government is doing. They 
told us they had a savings account. They said the money is 
there, we’re going to use it for a rainy day, but they turned 
around and paid down the mortgage. Which is a good thing, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not a bad thing to pay down your mortgage; it’s a 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

 

good thing. 
 
But when the people, Mr. Speaker, went to go to that savings 
account there was no money. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The cupboard was bare. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The cupboard was bare. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, they feel like they’ve received the same treatment as 
the spouse in this particular case had been done. And to again, 
to quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

When our spouse went to use the money and found the 
account empty, would he or she feel they’d been lied to? 
Probably. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what this government has been 
doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has used this type of technique 
not just with the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, but also with their 
new Crown Educational Capital Fund. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I remember back in 1991-92 sitting in this 
House when the NDP under Roy Romanow were first elected, 
about half of the members opposite were elected also. Not the 
ones that are chirping right now, but a good number of the 
members that are here were a part of that organization and 
remember these events. 
 
As they were developing the budget, Mr. Speaker, for 1992 
what the government did is they said that, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
right; it’s not proper accounting to have all of these monies out 
there unaccounted for; it’s not right to have amortized debt in 
the school boards for school construction; it’s not right to have 
loan guarantees, Mr. Speaker, that are not accounted for in the 
legislature. 
 
All of those extra things, Mr. Speaker, that deal with the 
Consolidated Fund, that deal with the debt of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, need to be reported to this House and accounted for in 
that year. 
 
So what happened, Mr. Speaker, is the government brought in 
all of this additional debt into the budget of that year correctly, 
Mr. Speaker, and showed it as a part of the consolidated debt of 
this province. 
 
(15:15) 
 
In 1995, under the leadership of Janice MacKinnon, the then 
Finance minister, and the premier, Roy Romanow, they brought 
in a Bill to not allow those kind of things to happen again, Mr. 
Speaker. Unfortunately, this Premier and this Minister of 
Finance are not following the rules as laid out in 1995 under 
that piece of legislation. 
 
And the fact is the ex-minister of Finance, in the newspaper 
today, indicated that she did not agree with the current 
budgeting method and accounting method, Mr. Speaker. That 
she stood by the words that she had talked in 1995, speaking 
against using Crown corporations to finance public debt, Mr. 
Speaker, using those kind of accounting methods that do not 

clearly indicate to the House, to the people of Saskatchewan, 
what the true financial picture of the province of Saskatchewan 
is. 
 
The government could do the things that it’s doing, Mr. 
Speaker, if it provided summary financial statements which 
outline totally and clearly all of the finances of the province of 
Saskatchewan — outlined the consolidated debt, outlined the 
economic activities in the Crown corporations so that you have 
one lump sum, Mr. Speaker, that shows the fiscal position of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Minister of Finance is failing to provide that. He says, 
oh well we’d provide that, Mr. Speaker. But he provides it six 
months to a year and a half later, not at the time that the budget 
is presented, not at the time that he seeks approval from the 
people of Saskatchewan through their elected members of this 
House to approve the expenditures of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It happens later, much later, when 
it becomes less apparent as to what is actually happening, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of issues in this particular 
budget that I think the people of Saskatchewan need to become 
aware of. Mr. Speaker, we have boil-water orders across this 
province in communities that deal with the health of people and 
individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts have not been established but there is one 
incontrovertible fact — Saskatchewan leads in the disease of 
muscular . . . MS (multiple sclerosis), Mr. Speaker. And that in 
a lot of cases, people feel, it is related to our use of groundwater 
as our source of drinking water, Mr. Speaker. And when you 
use groundwater as a source of drinking water, it needs to be 
treated, it needs to be ensured that it is safe. 
 
In cutting back, Mr. Speaker, on the funding to provide for safe 
water and not providing assistance to municipalities to provide 
that safe water, Mr. Speaker, we are endangering — we, as in 
the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, then as the government responsible 
for that, Mr. Speaker — are endangering the lives of people in 
Saskatchewan. And I think it’s unconscionable, Mr. Speaker, 
that they continue to allow this to happen. 
 
The NDP continuously run around this province and proclaim 
themselves to be the protector of the little man and the saviour 
of the province. And yet, Mr. Speaker, their actions do not belie 
their words. And fact is they work exactly counter to the image 
and the words that they like to portray. They are not, Mr. 
Speaker, the people they claim they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one group in our society that we have all 
been taught to respect and to honour. And those are our citizens, 
Mr. Speaker, those are our seniors. And yet as I’ve been in this 
House and listened throughout the 1990s, as I listened from my 
truck radio in the 1980s, not being a member of this House, the 
NDP has traditionally said they were the defenders and the 
protectors of our pioneers and of our seniors. That it was those 
big bad Conservatives or anyone not of the NDP persuasion, 
Mr. Speaker, that were the enemies of seniors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw during the 1980s a change to the 
drug plan as an example. Grant Devine and his government 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

raised the deductible on drugs from zero to $125 a year — $125 
a year. And I remember a number of the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, decrying the inhumanity of that action, Mr. Speaker, 
that seniors were going to have to choose between drugs and 
food at a deductible of $125, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so then what did the NDP government do in the 1990s? It 
was so shameful that people had to pay $125 a year on a drug 
deductible that the NDP government raised it up to $1,700, Mr. 
Speaker. Can you imagine the amount of shame that must be 
involved — if it was so shameful at $125 — how immense 
must that shame be on the NDP to have raised it to $1,700, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, under this budget, where has it gone to? 
It’s gone to the $1,700 plus, Mr. Speaker, a percentage of your 
income up to $50,000 — a huge increase, Mr. Speaker; a huge 
increase that all of those seniors out . . . throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are going to find difficult to deal 
with. 
 
If they had to choose, Mr. Speaker, between drugs and food 
with $125, they must have to choose now between drugs and 
food and accommodation and clothing and everything else in 
their life, Mr. Speaker. All thanks to the NDP members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker — all thanks to the NDP members 
opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member chirps opposite there, from 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. His members, Mr. Speaker, went 
down to a by-election in 1987 in the Wood River constituency 
saying, if you don’t elect us, the government will close every 
hospital in their constituency. 
 
Now the member opposite might think that’s fearmongering. It 
was his party that was doing it. The reality of the situation, Mr. 
Speaker, was that when his party became government they 
closed all but one hospital in that constituency. 
 
So the words of those members were indeed prophetic. The 
government closed the hospitals but it was the NDP government 
that closed those hospitals, Mr. Speaker. It was the NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we take a look at the long-term care of 
seniors, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite, when they were in 
government during the 1970s, put a freeze on the construction 
of nursing homes throughout this province. Nobody was going 
to get any older, I guess, under the NDP socialist utopia. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know and we all hope to continue, we all 
got older and we all hope to continue getting older, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So what happened, Mr. Speaker? Throughout the 1990s the 
NDP government opposite removed level 1 and 2 care from 
public, forced people to provide it privately, Mr. Speaker. And 
now what they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is raise the maximum that 
it costs an individual in long term care, the seniors of this 
province, the people who built this province, Mr. Speaker, have 
changed it from $1,500 a month to 3,800 plus dollars a month, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
A marginal tax rate, Mr. Speaker, a marginal tax rate for people 

over that $1,500 limit of 90 per cent — 90 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just going to be our youth leaving 
this province, it’s going to be our seniors now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, crop insurance is another area in which this 
government has been destroyed, virtually, by this government. 
They’ve taken away the spot loss hail which will drive a large 
number of people out of crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. And yet 
the governments both federally and provincial are saying: if 
you’re not part of our program of crop insurance you get 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All I can say, Mr. Speaker, about the actions of this government 
is that they have lost their moral compass. They have no 
concern, no care, and no compassion, Mr. Speaker, left for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The only point their compass now points to, Mr. Speaker, is 
how do the NDP stay in power? That is the only imperative that 
is now in place for this government; it’s power, power, power, 
and nothing but power. The old statement, Mr. Speaker, that 
power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely is 
approaching this point for this government, Mr. Speaker. They 
have lost their moral compass, they have no idea why they want 
to remain in government other than to be in government and in 
power, Mr. Speaker. That’s the only reason. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Will Shakespeare in his poem, Julius Caesar, 
expressed it properly, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the members 
opposite — the Premier and the Minister of Finance. Mr. 
Speaker, as Mark Antony said of Brutus, Mr. Speaker, “. . . 
Brutus is an honourable man.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has failed on all counts. Mr. 
Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget but will be 
supporting this amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — . . . I first would like to thank the members of 
the House on both sides for their kind welcomes over the last 
few days. I truly appreciate this as we do have an awesome task 
before us. And I know and I’m confident, at the end of the day, 
all of us in this House have the best interests of this province at 
heart. We do serve by the grace of the electorate and they will 
be the ones in the end who make their decision about the quality 
of our work. And so it should be in a strong democracy like 
ours. 
 
And I am indeed honoured to be here with all the members of 
the House. Until, of course, when the writ is dropped. So thank 
you very much for this opportunity to speak. 
 
My comments, Mr. Speaker, will be as a rookie with a pair of 
fresh eyes as this is my first budget and I try to make sense of 
all of this, reading and listening and that type of thing. And at 
the end, Mr. Speaker, I must tell you that I will be supporting 
this budget and the motion made by the Minister of Finance and 
seconded by our Premier. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
budget is good and responsible and I have confidence in both its 
contents and architects. And I think it’s open and transparent 
and well built. 
 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

 

Mr. Speaker, my comments will focus on three main points. 
The first is how this budget, Meeting the Challenge for 
Saskatchewan People, dovetails with the Throne Speech, 
Province of Opportunity. 
 
And the second is the context of this budget. And I think that’s 
really, really important. 
 
And finally the alternative. I was very interested in reading the 
opposition’s amendment, and I want to spend a moment at the 
end to talk about that because I think from that flows a strong 
indication of the quality of their work and their credibility. 
 
So first I would like to say that I was delighted to support the 
Throne Speech that sets the stage for this session. The speech 
speaks of creating a province of opportunity, and in fact 
building communities of opportunities. It speaks of hope in the 
face of these trying and challenging times. 
 
Now we’ve already talked a bit about the Throne Speech, and 
we’ve talked about the four pillars: investing in the economy 
and in the environment; investment in the infrastructure; the 
provision of quality education; and helping self-reliant families. 
And these are four critical pillars. 
 
The challenge, Mr. Speaker, is how do we build these pillars 
with integrity and strength. And the budget before us today does 
this absolutely. As the title says, it meets the challenges for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to highlight five areas that I believe are the 
right things to be doing today in Saskatchewan. They build 
these four pillars and I say this with some conviction. And I say 
this because just six months ago I was out knocking on doors of 
people . . . of homes in Saskatoon Idylwyld. And I say this too 
because I know that I was listening and hearing carefully what 
resonated with these citizens of Idylwyld. And I can tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, that the good people of Idylwyld represent a good 
cross-section of Saskatchewan, including a practical sense of 
rural and northern issues. 
 
And the five areas I would like to draw attention to, of course, 
are . . . the first one being the health action plan. And I’m really 
excited to see that this budget supports this with over $129 
million — new dollars — to support this. And for what the 
people are looking for in Saskatchewan are things like the 
24-hour, toll-free telephone health advice line. They’re also 
looking for primary health care teams, training spaces, and 
support for the waiting lists — that was a big one when I 
knocked on the doors — and Canada’s first Quality Council, 
and the list goes on and on. And really important to see that that 
was made a priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — And the second priority, Mr. Speaker, was 
learning. And this is a commitment to life-long learning right 
from childhood to the synchrotron. And I just think the 
spectrum in Saskatchewan is very exciting, starting with the 
early childhood development strategy. I think this is critical and 
it’s going to be launched in 18 communities across this 

province to ensure that people . . . that children have a strong 
start to education in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is really critical, particularly in my riding that has so 
many community schools and so many children, and also 
SIAST, the private schools downtown, and so many students 
from the university. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also really important that our government has 
set a course that is based on inclusion and diversity. And I heard 
just a minute ago about our moral compass and I think this 
speaks volumes about our moral compass when we talk about 
inclusion and diversity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now we see, we see that learning is a key 
investment. And I’m most happy to see the importance of 
learning in this budget — some $1.2 billion. And this is a 
critical thing. Over 10 years ago when we paying more on the 
debt and now it’s . . . we’re paying twice as much for education, 
and that’s excellent. And I am . . . really important to say that 
there’s no freeze here and I know that this is a priority for the 
Sask Party talking about a freeze in education. 
 
Now the third priority I’d like to talk about and this one is one 
that really speaks volumes to my, my constituency, but I know 
right across the province, is safe communities. Mr. Speaker, my 
constituents have raised this issue as one that’s very important 
to them. And I’m pleased to be supporting this budget as it 
supports two very important elements in building a safe 
community. 
 
And the first and the most obvious one is the increased number 
of police officers on the street and I think that’s a critical piece. 
But more important than that, it attacks and it fights the roots of 
the causes of crime, for example by attacking those who prey 
on children, and sexual exploitation, and by fighting poverty. 
 
The budget supports this by supporting community schools and 
keeping kids in school. The minister talked about our high rate 
of keeping kids in high school and I think that’s very, very 
critical. 
 
There also adds $1.3 billion in job supports for families by 
building independence. And where is the freeze? It’s not 
happening here, Mr. Speaker. This is a priority for our 
government. 
 
Number four, housing. This also is a very important piece for 
the people of Saskatchewan. This is exciting news. The 
Minister of Finance announced that there will be a major 
housing initiative of some 1,000 new housing units over the 
next five years. He spoke of the importance of good quality, 
affordable housing as an essential part of every family’s quality 
of life and the foundation of strong, vibrant communities. He is 
so right and we are very much looking forward to the details as 
this is announced in the next few weeks. 
 
Now the fifth priority, and it’s not — it’s right up there in terms 
of importance; it’s not the last, but I think it’s critical — is the 
economy. Mr. Speaker, the quality and strength of our economy 
is essential to building a province of opportunity, and I believe 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

this budget supports this as well. The budget speaks to all 
sectors of the economy — the investors with the corporation tax 
. . . capital tax, the small business support, the personal income 
tax cuts, and the supports for those building independence 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does set the stage here in our province 
to become truly a province of opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my second main point 
though I want to talk about — and it’s a phrase that’s often used 
— is context is everything. And so it is today, as we in 
government wrestle with the unfortunate circumstances that 
challenge everybody around the world and North America, not 
only in Saskatchewan. And I’m speaking of course of the 
drought, the downturn of the natural gas, the oil crisis, and the 
fallout of September 11 tragedy. But I believe we have a 
responsibility, as the minister says, to build a path of stability in 
time of strife, a path that protects people today. 
 
Unfortunately, I’m not convinced by the actions or the words of 
the opposition that they fully grasp the context of the world 
today as they speak of Grow Saskatchewan — an interesting 
metaphor as if the opposition believes that we live in a glass 
terrarium and all we need to add is water. Well we do need 
water, that’s for sure, but we are much more than that today. 
Our economy is diversified and we are building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the new guy, I was and still looking forward to 
much substance to come out of this House. 
 
But I must say how disappointed I was to read the amendment 
put forward by the opposition. Here I believe was a golden 
opportunity to see a plan, an indication of what they would do. 
But, Mr. Speaker, they ducked. In my neighbourhood, it’s very 
easy to complain. And I think many of us have run into people 
like that — complaining and the grass is always greener on the 
other side. It’s more challenging to come clean with what you 
would do differently. 
 
Say, for example, what about the Crowns? I was fortunate in 
January, February to sit in the Crown Corporations Committee 
meetings and hear and see and talk about, ask about how they 
were doing the financial records. And here, here was the 
information. And they act as if they’ve never had this 
information. And I wonder, what is their plan? And it’s, no 
comment. And I know the people in Idylwyld, when I knocked 
on the door, this worried them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right. Yes. So I am concerned, and I know the people in 
Saskatoon Idylwyld and right across the province are 
concerned. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I do have confidence in the main 
architect of this plan, the Minister of Finance, as they do 
support the plans for our government and we have committed 
ourselves to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when some six months ago I put my name 
forward, I argued for a principled, open, and transparent 
approach to government — one that put people first, that valued 
our resource and our planet, and one that values a co-operative 

approach to meeting the challenges that face our province. This 
government and this budget does exactly this. So I must say I 
will not be supporting the amendment, but in fact supporting — 
and I’m delighted to support — the main motion. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very pleased to enter into the debate on the budget. And it’s 
pretty obvious that I’ll be supporting the amendment because 
the budget didn’t do very much for anybody in this province. 
We hear the rhetoric about a game plan and a plan. Well look 
behind the real budget and there’s really nothing there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s worthwhile to know that in the budget, 
through smoke and mirrors, the Minister of Finance talked 
about a surplus of $45,000. Even though that’s very, very 
subjective, he said $45,000. 
 
Well at $12,000 a minute this government spends, that’s less 
than four minutes that this government could operate with their 
version of a surplus. My goodness — four minutes. How can 
we stand them for four minutes? We sure can’t stand them for 
any longer than that. 
 
Another little aspect of this $45,000 surplus, so-called surplus, 
Mr. Speaker, is that’s one bureaucrat away from a deficit. For 
goodness’ sake, what would have happened if Upshall hadn’t 
been unceremoniously fired? They’d be in a deficit right now if 
Upshall had of kept his job. That’s how foolish this budget is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s intuitively clear that this government 
is married to a socialist system and now it’s spending its whole 
time trying to justify the socialist system it’s wrapped around. 
 
The bottom line of this budget, Mr. Speaker, is the debt is going 
up the same as last year. And I don’t believe there’s anybody 
anyplace that can dispute the fact that the debt went up last 
year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear from the Minister of Finance 
about voodoo economics. Well let me suggest that if what we 
have is voodoo economics, his budget is the doo-doo of the 
voodoo economics. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about some 
of the comments that I’ve heard reference the budget from here 
in town and in my constituency — a smoke and mirror budget. 
Well there’s no doubt about it, it’s a smoke and mirrors budget. 
But the good part of it is, all the government had to buy was the 
mirrors because the smoke came from the fire that had the pot 
on the stove with some books in it. 
 
And another comment that I received, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it 
was a 3-D (three-dimensional) budget — 3-D: deception, 
deceit, and deficit. Now a 3-D budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
think you have to go back a few years ago to look at 3-D 
movies. And that’s what was needed in this budget, a set of 
those special glasses to read through all of the rhetoric and the 
tricks in this budget. 
 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

 

And if you remember 3-D movies, how you sat in a movie 
theatre, things would try and jump out at you, well I think that’s 
what this did in the budget. Things were jumping out all over. 
 
Another comment that I quite liked in the budget — it was 
called a Halloween budget. Maybe we should have had a fall 
sitting so this budget could have been introduced on Halloween 
day because this budget contains one whole pile of tricks and 
very, very few treats. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I, like some of my colleagues, I’d like to 
read into the record some of the comments from the media 
around the province with respect to this budget. Leader-Post: 
 

The government is blaming everything except itself for 
what have been steadily deteriorating times in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
The mood of this province has been getting darker and 
darker and it can be felt just about everywhere. Our 
population is sliding. Young people are leaving the farms 
their parents and grandparents worked. 

 
And that’s a very, very sad situation. People are leaving. Young 
people are leaving and now seniors are leaving. 
 

The province needs the kind of creative thinking that is 
going to produce revenue, jobs, and stature. It needs the 
new or expanded kind of industry that is lasting, and to find 
it and develop it will take incredible vision. 

 
That’s from The Leader-Post, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Incredible 
vision — something that is totally lacking on that side of the 
House. 
 
Bruce Johnstone, The Leader-Post: 
 

You have to hand it to Finance Minister Eric Cline. He 
certainly knows how to make salad — chicken salad out of, 
well, chicken feathers. 

 
Very, very profound. 
 
Murray Mandryk’s article following the budget calls Eric 
Cline’s budget “Fiddle-faddle” and “jiggery-pokery.” Good 
way to explain it. 
 
Talks about the budget as a fairy tale that he’s reading to his 
daughter, and he quotes: 
 

Even pixie dust won’t make this budget fly. 
 
Randy Burton in The StarPhoenix: 
 

The people taking the hit for this “tough” budget are the 
little old ladies in long-term care homes, the people who 
need prescription drugs and the smokers whom no one 
wants to defend. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to also talk about another article in 
The StarPhoenix editorial, and I would invite members opposite 
to read this, because this is really what people of this province 
think of the budget and I’m going to paraphrase some of it. 

. . . at times such as these — when resource revenues are 
down, many taxpayers are fleeing, farmers are barely 
scraping by on the parched prairie and the global economy 
is struggling to overcome the terrorism-inspired tailspin — 
that the farcical nature of Saskatchewan budget-making 
comes fully into focus. 

 
(15:45) 
 
It goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

No matter how hard Cline and the Lorne Calvert 
government try to make the province’s books and their 
management of them look good, however, it’s impossible 
to ignore the disquieting feeling that they are about to take 
Saskatchewan people on a scary ride we’ve been on before 
— one we’ve spent the better part of a decade trying to 
forget. 

 
You need not look any further than Cline’s capital funding 
scheme for the newly named Learning sector to understand 
the problem. No amount of explanations from the finance 
minister can alter the reality that his move to gas the full 
. . . capital comments from the government’s books by 
funnelling them through a new Crown entity and 
amortizing them through operating grants to universities in 
the K-12 system is no more than accounting 
jiggery-pokery. 

 
This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a very, very good quote. 
 

Cline and his boss deserve a whack to their noses with a 
copy of the 1992 report by the Don Gass commission to 
remind them of their obligation to provide taxpayers with 
complete transparency on public spending instead of 
concocting odious bookkeeping methods that make it 
impossible to understand the government’s finances. 

 
Of course, the entire spending plan Cline presented was 
riddled with typical political gobbledygook that renders the 
budget based on the general revenue fund nearly 
meaningless. 
 
Rather than make the tough choices, the government has 
opted to procrastinate. If it’s an election Premier Calvert is 
buying time for, he should go ahead and call one without 
delay. Saskatchewan can’t afford to carry on this charade 
for long. 

 
And I support that comment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
government has opted to procrastinate. In fact, I understand 
they’re going to join the Procrastinator’s Club but just haven’t 
got around to it yet. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to read into Hansard a letter I 
received from the Hotels Association of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we have this government that goes out on a bus tour, they 
obviously are not listening to the people of the province; I don’t 
know to whom they are listening but it sure isn’t the general 
public. They probably put some plants in each of the towns so 
that they can get off the bus and shake hands with one or two 
people and then claim it a success because one of their 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

forerunners greeted them as they got off the bus. If they listened 
to real people in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think they 
would have a totally different outlook on this province. 
 
But I’d like to read in a letter that I received from the Hotels 
Association of Saskatchewan. 
 

Yesterday’s budget announcement by finance Minister Eric 
Cline is, in the opinion of the Hotels Association of 
Saskatchewan, an assault on the financial viability and 
outright survival of the hospitality industry in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Recent increases to beer by the Saskatchewan Liquor & 
Gaming Authority and the breweries, now coupled with 
Mr. Cline’s announcement of a 42.9% increase in the 
Liquor Consumption Tax will have a dramatic effect on the 
sale of beer, wine and spirits in hotels, nightclubs and 
restaurants throughout the Province. (The) . . . increase in 
the LCT is not unprecedented, as a similar increase was 
imposed on beer and alcohol sales in the early 80’s. A 10% 
LCT then had a devastating effect to beverage sales that 
virtually forced properties to close their doors. The 
experiment of increasing the tax was later . . . (removed), 
but not until serious financial damage was inflicted on 
numerous properties. 
 
It is getting increasingly difficult to understand this 
government’s marketing strategy and political agenda as it 
strives to increase revenues through liquor and gaming 
initiatives to neutralize a deficit budget. The recently 
introduced Tobacco Control Bill 56 and now an increase to 
the Liquor Consumption Tax, are two more reasons why 
hoteliers will have a difficult time in attracting customers to 
their establishments, customers that the government is 
relying on to generate an additional $15 million dollars in 
revenue by increasing the number of VLTs in the Province. 
 
Obviously, the Ministers of Health, Finance, Rural 
Revitalization and SLGA were not in consultation when 
this budget was put together. But then again, maybe they 
were. 
 
It is clear to the Association that if this government is 
contemplating using this budget as the springboard to an 
election, they have obviously decided that rural 
Saskatchewan is not on the radar for (an) electoral victory. 
We would like to remind the government that tax increases 
and legislative changes that restrict consumers’ social 
lifestyles are borne by urban voters as well. 

 
That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what it’s like in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very, very clear, it’s very, very clear to 
me that this sanctimonious government is just happy with 
managing the downward spiral. Who are the creators of doom 
and gloom that we hear about all the time? The government is 
the creators of doom and gloom as we can see by this particular 
letter from the hoteliers association. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to talk about my 
constituency. I’d like to talk about some of the initiatives that 

others have talked about, but I’d like to bring them up to some 
actual facts of what’s going on in rural Saskatchewan, 
specifically in my constituency of Wood River. 
 
Ethanol, we hear an awful lot about ethanol. Right out of our 
platform, was introduced. But there’s one very, very key issue 
that was in our platform document that was not included in the 
legislation. That key issue was legislating a percentage blend of 
ethanol in gas. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government, the government has 
said, well we will put legislation in place to put ethanol blend in 
once it’s up on line. How does that attract an investor? They 
want to do it in reverse. Well the fear in the ethanol industry is 
if you don’t legislate the percentage of blend in gas, how are we 
going to get investors in? They don’t really trust the 
government. 
 
So in the mind of an awful lot of people is, this is another ploy 
by this government to expand a Crown corporation, or to build 
a new Crown corporation, typical of the socialist system. 
Because now they can sit back on their haunches and suggest 
that, well nobody wanted to invest in ethanol, therefore we will 
do it through CIC and make it . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
the Speaker’s gallery today we have a school group from Ray, 
North Dakota. Over 30 grade 7 and 8 students who are here 
touring the Legislative Building and having an opportunity to 
look at debate within the Assembly today. And just to talk to 
the kids a little bit about what’s going on, what they’re 
watching right now is the debate on the budget address. 
 
And the opposition members and the government members are 
talking about what they think about the budget that was brought 
down here less than a week ago. 
 
Now Ray, North Dakota is straight east of Williston and it’s, I 
think, straight south from the Estevan port, I think, in that 
location. Okay. Anyway I’d ask all members to welcome the 
students and their chaperones from Ray, North Dakota to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 
would like to welcome our guests from North Dakota. It’s near 
home for me. I live down on the very south part of the province. 
And so welcome. You’re in time to hear one of the best 
speeches in this House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was talking about the ethanol in gas. 
And the fear is still there within the ethanol industry that this 
government through, again, some jiggery-pokery is going to 
make it into a Crown corporation. 
 
Wouldn’t it have been simple, wouldn’t it have been simple had 
if you legislated ethanol as it come on line and say, we will 
have 5 per cent in seven years. Now it gives industry some 
incentive to invest in this province because they know it’s there. 
And it’s not going to import ethanol, as I heard one member 
from the government side say. That’s absolutely ludicrous. But 
if you legislate it, it gives some confidence to investors to 
invest. 
 
By this particular methodology, why would somebody invest 
knowing full well if you put $200 million into a plan . . . or into 
a plant and the government decides, oh well, we want to make it 
a Crown corporation, then you’re investment is basically lost. 
Or else you’re in competition again with the government. My 
goodness. 
 
Let’s talk about roads. We had the Minister of Highways get up 
— and I think he was talking about roads; it was very hard to 
tell what he was talking about half the time — and he talked 
about putting a bunch of money into all of these roads. But why 
would our member say such things as putting money into a 
good highway? 
 
Well isn’t that kind of ridiculous? You go throw a little bit of 
money here and a little bit of money there, and then next year 
you have to do the same thing. That’s very evident in the 
southwest part of this province. They throw a token amount into 
the highway, and guess what? The next year they have to do 
exactly the same thing. 
 
I would also like to talk a little bit about roads, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in relation to rubber asphalt roads. As members are 
probably aware, we have a rubber recycle plant in Assiniboia. 
Now here’s a perfect example to expand an industry in this 
province — a perfect example. What was suggested by the 
rubber company is rubber asphalt and to put roads in . . . test 
bed of a road of 20 kilometres. 
 
I spoke to the manager of the plant and his words to me were: 
we have a machine that’s ready to come up here; we have 
money that was being donated in the neighbourhood of 
$100,000 to put in a test bed in this province. All we need is a 
go ahead from this government or the Department of Highways. 
 
Guess what the answer is? We will study it. That’s the only 
answer. 
 
There’s been 30 years of study going on in rubber asphalt and 

yet this government wants to study it. My goodness! And what 
we have lost, we’ve lost the capability of putting a test section 
in. 
 
I’ve looked at some of the history of the rubber asphalt. I’ll hear 
a member say, well, it doesn’t work as good in cold weather. 
How about Nebraska? They have some pretty chilly weather in 
Nebraska. It’s been there for years. So in essence what this 
government has done is lost $100,000 that was going to be 
geared for a test section of highway in rubber asphalt. That’s 
the way this government is operating. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the concerns in my constituency 
are very much the same as my other, my other colleagues here 
have talked about — long-term care homes. I don’t believe I 
have to say any more than that. It is just devastating for our 
seniors in long-term care homes. 
 
Did this budget actually do anything to reduce medical waiting 
lists? I don’t think so. How about prescription drugs? How can 
anybody on that side of the House get up and defend it? How 
can anybody over there get up and defend the increases in 
long-term care homes? And it’s gone up 100 per cent in some 
cases. 
 
How about stop loss hail? Stop loss hail — 200 and some per 
cent. How can anybody on that side of the House defend that? 
 
How about rain roulette or Saskatchewan roulette on the forage 
insurance? I have not seen anything so ridiculous for ages and 
ages. I just, I just can’t understand how they could come up 
with some hare-brained idea such as you can insure your crop 
anyplace in the province, even in Alberta or even in Manitoba. 
 
Now how about water? I would, I would really like to hear 
more about this water. The minister — whichever one would 
answer it in question period, who knows — would get up and 
give a song and dance about how we’re studying the water 
situation, we’re studying it and we’re going to study it and we’ll 
make sure we study it to death. 
 
(16:00) 
 
But what’s happening to the people that have . . . the towns and 
the villages that have serious water problems? 
 
I would bring to the minister’s attention the village of Kincaid 
is going on three years. Did anything from this government help 
them? They come down and they did a little bit of a survey and 
said, you have a problem with your water; it will cost you X 
number of dollars. So then we have another bureaucrat that 
comes down and says, oh he was all wrong, it will cost you 
twice as much. And a third one come down and said, the other 
two were wrong, it’s going to cost you — I think it was — 
$250,000 to repair the water in a village of 100 people. 
 
So what’s going to happen to this town? That’s typical 
socialism. Blame it on somebody else. 
 
How about the town of Cadillac in my constituency? They’re in 
the very same boat with water. 
 
Now I just ask members across the way, does $80 million in 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

Australia help either of these water problems in Saskatchewan? 
I don’t think so. How about the money in Chile and in Mexico, 
is that going to help them? And I would also like to suggest that 
80 million in Australia, what’s it for? High-speed Internet. And 
yet we don’t have cell coverage in areas of rural Saskatchewan 
but we can spend $80 million in Australia. It just doesn’t make 
sense. 
 
The way this government operates, Mr. Speaker, is very, very 
typical of the premier of BC, Mr. Glen Clark, a while ago. And 
Mr. Clark was on national TV about three nights ago. And I 
would like to quote, I would like to quote, what Mr. Clark said 
on TV the other night, and it was over his little scandal, 
bingo-gate. It was about his bingo-gate in BC. And this is a 
quote from Glen Clark, he said — his question about his 
knowledge of the bingo-gate — and he said: 
 

I instructed my staff to ensure that I was insulated from the 
decision-making process. 

 
Is that not a socialist statement? Is that not what this 
government wants to do on a continuing basis? Insulate 
themselves from the decision-making process. Why do we have 
boards? Why do we have SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations)? Who closed the 52 hospitals? Oh, it 
wasn’t us; it was SAHO. That’s just the way this 
sanctimonious, socialist government operates. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t touch base a little 
bit about how ridiculous this government operates. And I 
mentioned it last year and I’m happy to mention it again 
because there’s been no improvement. We have . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I am straining to hear 
the member for Wood River, and I’m having difficulty. Order. 
Would members please come to order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I would just like to touch base one more 
time with our cattle industry in this province, and it really 
shows how this government has crippled this province over the 
last number of years of socialism. 
 
We produce 1.5 million head of feeder cattle in this province, 
and we ship 750,000 of them to Alberta to be fed. And along 
with those 750,000 head of cattle, we ship young men and 
women to feed them, and we ship our grains to feed the cattle. 
That’s exporting the commodity, the commodity to feed them, 
and our young people. That is the result of 10 years of 
socialism. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no way that I can stand and 
support this budget, but I sure will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased rise today to speak in favour of the government’s 2002 
budget. 
 
The reason why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is clear. This budget sets 
a foundation to provide for the generation of a progressive, 
environmental, economic development agenda; to continue the 

enhancement of our infrastructure that supports economic 
development; to solidify the strengths of quality education; and 
to take action on programs that target the creation of healthy 
and self-reliant families, a prerequisite to successful 
participation in an expanding economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the past year has been a difficult one. 
Sixty per cent of our farmland and pastures have been affected 
by drought; agriculture subsidies in Europe and the US (United 
States) continue to hurt our farmers; a reduction in the oil and 
gas prices has affected the revenue stream negatively; softwood 
lumber duties are set to severely damage the forestry sector; and 
the general slowdown in North American economy — all set 
the stage for a year of belt tightening and fiscal responsibility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite say that we’re 
blaming everyone on the face of the earth but ourselves, but I’d 
like to set the record straight. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you cannot formulate a budget without 
looking at the global impact on your economy and without 
looking at the world around you. I wonder if they would 
construct a budget with disregard to all of those environmental 
impacts and the economic impact on a province such as ours. 
 
Well it’s clear they would. As the member from Idylwyld stated 
earlier that they want to live in a contained, little area and only 
look at what affects them directly and not the circumstances 
that surround us globally. As their leader stated, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they would be able to meet their economic targets if 
there was good weather and there was more money from the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our budget is an all-weather budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I wanted to outline the context for our 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That was the bad news 
surrounding this year’s budget but there is much, much good 
news, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The good news is that the 
Saskatchewan New Democratic Party is continuing its tradition 
of being good fiscal managers delivering our ninth consecutive 
balanced budget. 
 
The Fiscal Stabilization Fund has been an invaluable tool as a 
fiscal shock absorber against market dips. Moreover this 
government has been able to avoid increases in the PST, avoid 
increases in personal income taxes, and the creation of health 
care premiums that are only going up in our neighbouring 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our budget and how we speak to budget 
issues and the economics does not change depending on the 
weather. It does not change depending on what room we’re in, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because there are those who would go to 
the Public Accounts Committee and tell you — members 
opposite would tell you — that yes, the statements that we 
provide to the Public Accounts Committee and this Assembly 
are a good overall reflection of the province and the state of the 
economy in this province, and then stand in the Assembly and 
say, no that’s not so. 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

 

There are others that would stand one year in this Assembly and 
say, for example, that they want to have a recall of the 
legislature as quickly as possible to be able to understand how 
they could spend the windfall that was set aside as the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. 
 
One coalition . . . one Saskatchewan Party Finance critic said in 
the paper, in The Leader-Post of November, 2000 that the 
coalition government should be giving everyone an opportunity 
to debate how that windfall would be spent. And his 
suggestion? Give everyone an energy rebate. 
 
Well we only need to look to Alberta who was deregulating and 
had the . . . putting forward their goal of deregulation and 
deregulation, and have to subsidize the hikes in their energy 
costs to some $16 billion. 
 
And we all know about the wonders of the member opposite 
who would put forward when we should be able to purchase 
energy and how we were going to be able to give a good deal to 
the people of this province. And we know the millions of 
dollars that that promise would have cost the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Then we have Saskatchewan Party leader . . . I’m sorry, this is a 
quote from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix: 
 

But Saskatchewan Party leader Elwin Hermanson has said 
the government can afford to introduce deeper tax cuts 
immediately, given that the net provincial revenue is 
projected to be $370 million higher than expected because 
of booming oil and gas royalties. 

 
Now that was December of 2000 — spend, spend, spend. It’s 
no wonder the members opposite took exception to the 
comparison to the Devine Tories in the ’80s, because like their 
predecessors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these members can only 
spend. 
 
Last year I remember members getting up — spend more on 
highways, spend more on education, spend more on health care, 
spend more on energy rebates. Spend more was the slogan of 
the day last year in this Assembly from the members opposite. 
 
But when they got outside of the Assembly they talked about 
their platform to cut taxes which would grow the economy, and 
what would they do in the meantime? Freeze spending. Freeze 
spending everywhere in government to pay for their 
unsustainable tax cuts. 
 
They do not put forward a plan to ensure the Saskatchewan 
economy does not have to endure the spikes and the collapses 
of a boom and bust economy. No, they’re like our neighbours in 
Alberta. 
 
And even today we heard from members opposite who said 
spend more on water, spend more on agriculture, spend more, 
spend more. And outside of this Assembly it’s not spend more; 
it’s freeze expenditures in government, frozen until they can 
pay for their unsustainable tax breaks. 
 
Well they don’t like to be called spend, spend, spend Tories, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I call ’em as I see ’em. 

I outlined the bad news that surrounds us as we deliberate this 
provincial budget, but the good news is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party will deliver on 
good fiscal managing. 
 
There are so many initiatives in this budget that it’s really hard 
for me to highlight just a few. But today I want to spend a few 
moments talking about what’s important to the people in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First I would like to highlight some very important initiatives 
undertaken on taxes and economic development. 
 
Since 1993 this government has consistently lowered taxes. 
This is the fifth consecutive year that Saskatchewan residents 
will see personal income taxes rates go down on their personal 
income tax form. 
 
We’ve heard much from people who talk about how can we 
retain skilled . . . a skilled workforce and also retain 
professional people in Saskatchewan. And the tax measures in 
this budget will do that. 
 
One of the most significant improvements in competitiveness is 
the reduction that’s occurring in the marginal tax rates, which is 
the rate at which the taxpayer pays income tax on the next 
dollar of income earned. Saskatchewan’s top marginal tax rate 
under the pre-reform tax system was equal to 19.9 per cent. And 
under the reform, the top marginal rate will decline by 4.9 
percentage points to 15 per cent — the third lowest rate in 
Canada. 
 
While this improvement is dramatic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
marginal tax rate of an individual earning $50,000 also declines 
significantly — from 18.1 per cent to 13 per cent. 
 
What does this mean for attraction and retention of a skilled 
workforce in the province of Saskatchewan? With this budget, 
the lowest sales tax . . . we see the lowest sales tax except for 
Alberta. And in Alberta, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have 
substantial health care premiums. 
 
What do we also see with this budget? The second-highest 
personal tax credits and the only universal child tax credits of 
any province in this country. 
 
What do we see with this budget? The third-lowest top 
provincial marginal rate at 15 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In 2002 an average Saskatchewan family will pay almost 
one-third less in income tax than in 1993 — an annual reduction 
of more than 13,000 . . . $1,300. 
 
On top of that the budget also sees a 40 per cent reduction in 
small-business income tax rates since 1991. The level of 
income to which this rate applies has increased by 50 per cent. 
Moreover, this government has increased the corporation 
capital tax exemption for Saskatchewan-based businesses to 
encourage capital development and job creation in this province 
— jobs for the people of this province and the future of this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(16:15) 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

These tax cuts, coupled with initiatives such as the provincial 
research and development incentive for the resource sector, an 
extension of the ability of Saskatchewan companies to access 
the provincial R&D (research and development) tax credit, the 
commitment to fully implementing personal income tax reform 
to encourage the attraction and retention of skilled workers, the 
elimination of the fuel tax on ethanol produced and sold in the 
province all show this government’s commitment and 
dedication to keeping Saskatchewan prosperous and 
competitive without leaving anyone behind. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of this government’s fiscal 
management, the outlook for Saskatchewan’s economy is good. 
This commitment has resulted in three Dominion Bond Rating 
Service adjustment surplus . . . I’m sorry, three Dominion Bond 
Rating Services adjusted surpluses out of the last four fiscal 
years and a virtual balance in other years. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not of a concern to me if the 
member opposite can’t somehow understand that the economy 
in this province is good, that they ponder and contemplate what 
does this mean, that it’s gloom and doom. 
 
It matters to me that there have been significant reduction in the 
DBRS (Dominion Bond Rating Service) defined debt to GDP 
(gross domestic product) ratio, GDP ratio. It matters to me what 
the bond raters are saying and the fiscal creditors that are 
talking about the province’s budget. And what do they say? 
That the province’s balanced approach to fiscal planning has 
not only strengthened its financial profile, but has contributed to 
the improvement in Saskatchewan’s economic fundamentals. 
 
Financial institutions have lauded this government’s approach. 
Standard and Poor’s says that we have: 
 

Consistently falling tax-supported debt burden, due to good 
budget performance. 

 
Moody’s Investors says that: 
 

. . . the presence of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund provides 
additional comfort that budgetary performance will remain 
on track, even in these difficult times. 

 
So it matters not to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker if the members 
opposite don’t even know that there is a Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, if Moody’s Investor Services can find it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Even in these difficult times we will remain on track and that is 
a result of: 
 

. . . the Province’s demonstrated ability to manage its fiscal 
accounts, even under adverse economic circumstances, 
(says Moody’s) Moody’s believe’s Saskatchewan’s fiscal 
position will not be in jeopardy. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Regina Wascana Plains has a high number 
of young families and university aged children. In my 
constituency, they will be happy to see that this government has 
placed learning as a top priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of education this government has 

allocated $1.2 billion, an overall increase of $78.6 million, or a 
7.2 per cent increase over 2001 to 2002. This also includes $90 
million in grants and loans for capital projects. 
 
In Wascana Plains, Mr. Speaker, they understand when we talk 
about good debt and bad debt. I had a conversation the other 
day when people were saying that they understand that when 
you have a investment in infrastructure and capital projects, that 
those kind of projects invest in the infrastructure of our 
province, and can be allocated over a period of time. 
 
It’s the bad debt which saw in the day . . . in the ’80s where it 
was borrowing to pay for programs today that left our children 
to pay for them in the future, that is catalogued as bad debt in 
the minds of the people in my constituency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the K to 12 school operating grant 
system there will be an increase of $10.8 million; a $6.7 million 
or 2.3 per cent increase in operating grants to universities, their 
affiliated colleges, Aboriginal institutions, SIAST, and regional 
colleges. A capital expenditure program of $40 million for K to 
12 schools, and 50 million for the two universities, SIAST, and 
regional colleges for building improvements. 
 
These investments, coupled with amalgamation of the 
departments of K to 12 and post-secondary education and skills 
training into one new department, the Department of Learning, 
will create better efficiency and better serve the public in terms 
of its educational needs. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it stresses a 
focus from this side of the House on lifelong learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to contrast this education plan with 
that of the Saskatchewan Party’s plan, but it’s cold enough 
outside, we don’t need more things to be frozen in here too. 
 
Representing a rural-urban constituency, I would now like to 
mention this government’s investment in a key area, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, highways. I would like to highlight the 
importance of this in our budget. 
 
A strong infrastructure is vital for economic development and 
the safe movement of goods and of people. Thus, with a budget 
of $300 million, this year’s highway’s budget keeps us on track 
to meet the 3-year $900 million funding commitment and our 
10-year $2.5 billion commitment to the highways in this 
province. 
 
This budget will allow for 700 kilometres of reconstruction and 
paving work on Saskatchewan’s highways this year. It includes 
completing 24 kilometres of twinning on Highway No. 1 west, 
with complete twinning west to the Alberta border by the fall of 
2004. 
 
It allows for the reconstruction of 150 kilometres of thin 
membrane surface, resurfacing of 370 kilometres of paved 
highways, and partnering with 35 municipalities on 18 different 
initiatives to manage traffic on 460 kilometres of thin 
membrane highways in this province. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, with no increase in the gas tax. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard members opposite say that there’s 
only a small portion of the tax gas . . . or the gas tax budget that 
goes to highways construction in this province. Not so. Last 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

 

year, Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent of the gas tax collected in this 
province went to the highways in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, this government says rural 
Saskatchewan is a priority and has delivered on that promise. 
With the amalgamation of the rural revitalization office into the 
new Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization, 
this government has created a higher degree of cost saving and 
efficiency that can now be passed on in the form of better 
service to our municipalities. 
 
Being a natural fit with agriculture, this new department will 
continue to look at ways to invigorate growth and to seize 
opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. As we have done so in the 
past, Mr. Speaker, we will do so in the future. 
 
Because agriculture and rural Saskatchewan is such a priority, 
this budget increases funding for crop insurance by $14 million. 
It’s investing $3.9 million for continuation of the Conservation 
Cover Program and $4.4 million for the family farm 
opportunities initiative which helps farmers assess their 
situation, improve their skills, and undertake diversification and 
development initiatives on their farms. 
 
We have faith in the farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker. I 
wish they would stop with the gloom and doom and show the 
faith that we have in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, for revenue sharing, this budget provides a $10 million 
or 18.2 per cent increase in revenue sharing grants to rural, 
urban, and northern municipalities to use as they see fit to make 
the needed improvements in their communities. 
 
This is revealing this government’s commitment to all the 
people of Saskatchewan no matter where they live. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, health is not usually on our minds until 
something happens. The members opposite have bought into the 
rhetoric of the Alberta people in American style of health care 
and says, when it does matter to you, when you need it, you’re 
on your own. Look for increased health care premiums or look 
to the American model where they leave more people out of the 
system and it is more expensive than it is per capita anywhere 
in this nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not on this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, not as 
long as I represent the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. 
This budget increases health care spending by $129 million to 
$2.3 billion. It reveals the government’s commitment to 
sustainable, universal, and quality medicare system in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
On top of that health research funding has increased by 80 per 
cent — $10 million will be allocated for new medical 
equipment; $24 million for capital improvements and 
construction; an increased base funding to begin the work on 
key initiatives such as encouraging primary health care teams of 
doctors, nurses, and other health care providers to promote 
accessible front line care to people across Saskatchewan; a 
24-hour toll-free telephone line for health advice, expanding 
support for seniors and people with disabilities who want to 

remain in their own homes; improving the management of 
waiting times; providing more training spaces for health care 
providers; and the return service bursaries for students studying 
in selected health care programs. 
 
And the list goes on and on, including Canada’s first Quality 
Council promoting excellence and more effective health 
spending, and the formation of 12 regional health authorities to 
replace the current 32. 
 
A clear commitment on this side of the House to quality, 
accessible, publicly funded medicare and a clear indication 
from the members opposite that it’s a pay-as-you-go and look 
after yourself kind of service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close I’d like to bring some attention to 
the family initiatives that were brought forward in this budget. 
The building independence strategy is important to me. It’s as a 
result of the first-hand experience I had on the board of inquiry 
into hunger and poverty when I was serving on Regina city 
council. 
 
Many issues were identified and recommendations were made. 
The building independence strategy puts into place many of 
those recommendations. With what results, Mr. Speaker? Well 
as my esteemed colleague, the Minister of Social Services, said 
yesterday, we have seen a decline in social assistance caseloads 
for 87 straight months. 
 
Since 1993 we have reduced child poverty by 30 per cent. We 
now have over 32,000 units of low-income housing with plans 
to build up to 1,000 more, and increase funding for things such 
as legal aid, employment supports, child care for those with 
special needs — just to name a few. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this government’s track record and the 
budget that we have put forward is comparable to the warm, 
sunny days that we’re looking forward to ahead as we see 
spring emerge and summer, rather than the opposition’s 
preference for continuing the cold winter freeze — freeze on all 
the budget expenditures that they would put forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they say they are about growing 
Saskatchewan. And I say, as does an article from The Wilkie 
Press in March of 2002, the jury is still out. Is it grow 
Saskatchewan or is it gut Saskatchewan? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The latter. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — The latter. The jury is still out, but I have a 
fear that what we’re talking about when they say grow 
Saskatchewan is to grow the debt; to grow the numbers of 
people who are unemployed; to grow the fear as the member 
opposite tried to do today with the long-term care scare; to grow 
the kinds of things that we saw happening in this province in 
the ’80s, because many of those members gave advice to the 
government of the ’80s. 
 
So really, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you there is one question 
that I am asked more often than any other question in the 
constituency I represent and they say, how could we vote for 
the members opposite when day after day all we hear from them 
is the complaints, the continual breaking down of what’s being 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

done, the gloom and doom, the negative comments on the 
economy or the province of Saskatchewan? How can they vote 
for someone when they don’t see them putting forward what 
they really are all about? 
 
Not one positive reaction or initiative. As my colleague from 
Idylwyld says, they have the opportunity in the Throne Speech 
debate — it wasn’t there. They have the opportunity in the 
budget speech debate — it’s not been there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re ducking. What they would do when they 
really say grow Saskatchewan means gut Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:30) 
 
They carry a cloud over them and it’s evident in the amendment 
that they have put forward. It’s the reason why I stand against 
the amendment from the opposition members and I stand 
proudly in my place to support the budget that has been 
prevented . . . presented to this Assembly for the year of 2002. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to enter 
the budget debate this afternoon. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to begin my remarks on the budget with a bit of a focus on 
its impact on my constituency of Swift Current and speak to the 
local impact of our community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the major economic players — the economic 
foundations of Swift Current — are agriculture as well as oil 
and gas. And certainly in Swift Current we’re fortunate in the 
city itself to have a bit of a diversified economy. And so we 
also have some significant large manufacturers that were able to 
locate there, for the most part in the late 1970s and in the 1980s. 
And so these are the three underpinnings, if you will, of the 
economy of Swift Current. 
 
And I think it’s important if we’re going to do a . . . have a look 
at the budget, we should do so in terms of its impact on those 
sectors and of course on the most important factor of Swift 
Current, the most important element of our community — the 
people, the residents of the city of Swift Current and of the 
surrounding area to the north and the south that make up the 
constituents of Swift Current. 
 
Well firstly, Mr. Speaker, how does this budget impact on the 
agriculture sector around Swift Current? And it’s a mixed sector 
around the city of Swift Current, featuring of course both 
farming and ranching to a very significant extent. And how 
does this budget and the early weeks of this session and of the 
Throne Speech, how do they impact on the agriculture sector of 
Swift Current and area? 
 
Well negatively, Mr. Speaker, not to put too fine a point on it. 
But in this budget there’s absolutely nothing in the way of hope 
for producers — for farmers or for those in the ranching 
industry. 
 
In fact, quite the contrary, Mr. Speaker, quite the contrary. We 
have seen the government gut the crop insurance program, one 

of the most fundamental programs that farmers rely on, and it 
certainly is important to the ranching industry as well. We have 
seen on every count, in terms of crop insurance, we’ve seen this 
government gut the crop insurance program. We know, and the 
critic for Agriculture raised concerns, some specific cases in 
this legislature, of premiums increasing up to 200 per cent for 
farmers. And certainly farmers in the Swift Current area are 
going to be among those that face significant increases. 
 
Certainly there are those in the Swift Current area who raise 
forage crops, that will be completely perplexed by the rainfall 
roulette crop insurance that the hon. members opposite have 
introduced, Mr. Speaker. And they knew going into the budget 
that the crop insurance program would be gutted by the NDP, 
so I’m sure they were looking for some hope. I’m sure they 
were looking for some indication from the government that it 
would either fix what it had ruined in crop insurance or that it 
would provide some other measure for agriculture producers in 
Swift Current and area and across the province. 
 
And so they would have looked through the pages of the 
budget, Mr. Speaker, for some sign that the government cared 
about agriculture or that the government understood about 
agriculture, about farming and about ranching. But they would 
have been sadly disappointed because there is no indication in 
the budget that the government has that understanding and that 
the government understands it needs to be there for 
Saskatchewan producers coming out of a drought year and 
potentially — hopefully not — but potentially heading into 
another one. 
 
Well what about the oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker? That’s 
also an important industry to our community, to the 
constituency of Swift Current, and the many young friends who 
actually work directly in the industry. 
 
It was a chance for the government to take some decisive action 
to reward capital investment in that particular sector of our 
economy, a sector so important to the city of Swift Current. It 
was their chance to do that. And to be fair, Mr. Speaker, they 
took a very small step in the right direction when they raised the 
cap with respect to the capital tax, with respect to the level of 
investment that corporations can invest in the province before 
being subjected to the capital tax. They raised it, I believe, from 
$10 million to $15 million in the budget. And certainly it is a 
small step in the right direction. 
 
Because a capital tax, Mr. Speaker, is among the most insidious 
kinds of taxes. It really does prevent economic development. 
It’s one of those barriers to venture capital that we’ve talked 
about, Mr. Speaker, because it tax a company based for the 
most part on how much they have invested in a jurisdiction. 
 
That’s why progressive jurisdictions have done away with 
things like the corporate capital tax completely. Those 
jurisdictions that are interested in fostering a private sector and 
a tax base to be able to support publicly funded health care and 
social services and excellent education systems — those 
jurisdictions have eliminated that capital tax or they have 
significantly reduced the rate. 
 
Now the NDP have taken . . . have listened to the Saskatchewan 
Party and they’ve taken a very small step in the right direction 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

 

by raising the cap. But the corporate capital tax rate that 
companies will pay in the province of Saskatchewan still 
remains among the highest — I think the second highest and 
maybe the highest now — but certainly it was the second 
highest only to Quebec in all of Canada. 
 
And so when corporations are looking to make large-scale 
investments in some jurisdiction in Canada, given the fact that 
we offer them either the second highest or the highest capital 
tax rate or tax on investment, it’s not hard to see where they’re 
going to choose. 
 
So they certainly could have sent a stronger signal, as the 
Saskatchewan Party has, to the oil and gas industry and to the 
service sector around Swift Current. They didn’t do that. 
 
And it’s much the same for large manufacturing, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly there was nothing substantive in the way of good 
news for the larger manufacturers in the city of Swift Current. 
 
There is one other very, very important issue in Swift Current 
that people were asking about in the wake of the budget. In fact, 
I think it was the Deputy Premier who came to . . . he came to 
the city of Swift Current the day after the budget and he had a 
bit of a luncheon, and he went through a presentation on the 
budget and then he opened the floor up to questions. And the 
predominant question being asked of the Deputy Premier was 
what about our hospital — what about the Swift Current 
Regional Hospital? 
 
The situation in Swift Current with our hospital is this: it was 
built in, I believe, the late 1940s, and it has . . . it saw its last 
capital improvement in 1971 when I was six years old. That is 
the last significant capital improvement that was made to the 
Swift Current Hospital — 1971. 
 
And so last session, Mr. Speaker, you’ll know well, and in the 
session before that, I’ve been trying to raise that concern, raise 
the concerns that we have in Swift Current over our hospital. 
I’ve tried to give the issue as much profile as I could from this 
side of the Assembly to let the government know that a new 
hospital for our city, and for the entire region, for Swift Current 
and area, it isn’t simply a want, Mr. Speaker — it’s a need. We 
need a new regional facility, a new regional hospital in Swift 
Current. The community will not stop working to that end, and 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, I intend to do my level best, and very 
best, to continue to press that issue with this government. 
 
And so we looked to this budget to find some good news — 
some indication that the hospital was a potential for the city of 
Swift Current, because there’s one issue standing in the way. 
You know, the city of Swift Current, the people there and the 
people in the area and the region, they have no problem, they 
have no qualms about raising their share to put towards a new 
hospital in Swift Current. 
 
They have a concern, however, that this government’s funding 
formula is unfair. They have a concern that this government’s 
funding formula which is 65 per cent/35 per cent — 65 per cent 
of the capital funding coming from the provincial government 
and 35 per cent coming from the locality — they have a belief 
that that is not fair. And the Saskatchewan Party agrees with 
them. 

In 1999, we campaigned on a funding formula of 85/15. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that is why the city of Swift Current, that is why 
different . . . I think the health care foundation there and the 
health district have made a focused and concerted presentation 
to the government that says look, if you just change the funding 
formula, we will be able to build that new hospital in Swift 
Current. We don’t mind paying our share, but the NDP have to 
pay theirs; we’ll put up our money, but the NDP have to put up 
theirs. That is the position of the city, of the community of 
Swift Current and area, and certainly that is the message that I 
have tried to deliver about our hospital in Swift Current. 
 
And there is rationale for the argument, you see, because the 
NDP themselves have reorganized health care in the province. 
They’ve set up these new regions and Swift Current is to be the 
regional centre for its particular region. Swift Current is to 
provide the regional hospital for its particular region. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? In order for Swift Current 
to provide that regional hospital it needs to have a regional 
hospital. It needs to have a new health care facility, one that 
warrants the title of regional hospital, one that would provide 
the sorts of services that not just Swift Current, but the entire 
region of southwest Saskatchewan need. And so we’ll continue 
to make the case. 
 
The community of Swift Current and area have said look, since 
it’s serving the entire region, since this new hospital, if we ever 
get it, is serving the entire region, it’s fair that the government’s 
funding formula recognizes the fact that it’s playing a role in 
the provincial system. 
 
The government recognizes that fact when it’s looking at its 
tertiary facility, tertiary capital funding in Regina and 
Saskatoon. This government pays for 100 per cent of those 
capital facilities in Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
And so, if you’re a regional centre and you’re providing a 
regional hospital for an entire part of the provincial network, I 
think it’s fair for them to say look, I think the government share 
on those particular projects has to be a little bigger than 65 per 
cent. The NDP have to be there to a greater extent than 65 per 
cent for the hospital in Swift Current. 
 
That’s the case we’re going to continue to make — the case that 
Swift Current deserves a new regional hospital and that we need 
one. 
 
And so the budget is silent on the funding formula, and we can 
only hope that in the days and in the weeks ahead that the 
minister will . . . the Minister of Health will come forward and 
indicate that indeed there is an interest on the part of this 
government to do the right thing with respect to that regional 
capital funding formula. There’s no indication that that’s the 
case as of yet. 
 
And so we are left then to look at another very important 
segment of Swift Current to try to evaluate this budget, and that 
very, very important segment is a group of people, Mr. Speaker, 
that built the community of Swift Current. That very, very 
important segment is a group of people that really are the 
foundation for everything that we treasure in our community of 
Swift Current, and those are our senior citizens, our pioneers, 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if we’re going to look at the situation of how our seniors in 
Swift Current feel about the provincial budget, you only need to 
know this, Mr. Speaker, that they’re already calling our office 
because seniors, of course, follow public affairs very closely, 
and they probably even endured most of the Minister of 
Finance’s budget speech. 
 
And they probably understood sooner than anyone else, sooner 
than anyone else what the NDP had set out to do to seniors; 
what they had set out to do in this budget to those people that 
built our communities, those people that founded places like 
Swift Current. Through two different measures — not one, Mr. 
Speaker, not one attack on seniors — but through two different 
measures, the NDP attacked seniors on the front of long-term 
care fees where they increased exponentially, and on some 
fundamental changes, some fundamental changes to the drug 
plan, Mr. Speaker. And . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cumberland on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Leave to introduce visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(16:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, over on your gallery we have 
three special visitors to the legislature. There we have Henry 
Desjarlais. Mr. Speaker, Henry has been working . . . is working 
right now on the Aboriginal Affairs, and dealing with the public 
in SERM for many years — of course, now the Department of 
Environment. But he’s also well known to have played goal in 
hockey in La Ronge and with the . . . So he’s been involved in 
many other things. 
 
And he’s with his daughter, who has worked in the forestry 
industry on the model forest sites. Her name is Sharon. 
 
And of course we have as well, the mother-in-law Hedvig 
Coxen, and she’s . . . and of course, Henry’s married to her 
daughter, Bette, who happens to work in our library. 
 
So I’d like all members to please give them a warm Ta wow, 
and welcome to the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was talking a little 
about the impact of this budget on seniors in Swift Current, and 
it’s coincidental because at about the same time, my colleague 
and friend, the member for Rosthern, was trying to assist 
perhaps a little bit with a speech. And that’s a little bit ironic 
because I was talking about seniors in the city of Swift Current, 
and as it turns out, Mr. Speaker, the member for Rosthern spent 
a good deal of time in our community — in Swift Current, 
where he taught. 
 
And so I can understand why he would want to intervene in my 
speech about seniors in the city of Swift Current. And should he 
ever come back to our community, I’m sure those that 
remember him will also want to discuss that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a very serious matter though, what the 
government has done to long-term care fees in our community 
and to the seniors that rely on the care that they receive in those 
long-term facilities . . . long-term care facilities. 
 
You know the change is really quite shocking. The old fee 
structure worked out such that the first . . . on the minimum fee 
side of things, Mr. Speaker, they looked at about an $828 per 
month fee plus 50 per cent of their income over $994. 
 
And under the new system — shockingly so — under the 
regime, the new regime introduced by the NDP, those seniors in 
Swift Current are now looking at $828, plus 90 per cent of their 
income over $994. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I know there will be many, many 
seniors in my community who feel let down by this 
government. They have already begun to phone our office 
concerned about this change, the change to long-term care fees, 
and concerned as well about the significant changes to the 
Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, the same seniors who are hurt by the 
increase in long-term care fees all too often rely on the drug 
plan; all too often have heavy bills in terms of the prescription 
medicines that they need to ensure their quality of life. And this 
government has attacked them on both fronts in this budget. 
 
And so the seniors in the city of Swift Current and area I think 
are going to be very disappointed with the budget of this NDP 
government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other concerns 
with respect to the impact of this budget on the city of Swift 
Current and the surrounding area, the constituency of Swift 
Current, as well as some general comments on how this 
government has changed its budgeting processes. 
 
But what I would want to do now, Mr. Speaker, is to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for 
leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding leave of 
absence to certain members. 
 
Leave granted. 



April 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence of Members 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for 
Estevan, Saskatoon Idylwyld, Shellbrook-Spiritwood for 
Monday, April 8, 2002 and Tuesday, April 9, 2002 to 
attend the Midwest Legislative Exchange in Lincoln, 
Nebraska. 

 
On behalf of the Assembly, I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:51. 
 


