















































Hansard: June 24, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2293 
 June 24, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move 
the committee rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Liquor Consumption Tax Amendment 
Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 36. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
first of all introduce a number of officials that are here with 
respect to Government Relations and Intergovernmental 
Affairs, which the committee will be dealing with this evening. 
 
I would like to introduce first of all, on my left, Brent Cotter, 
deputy minister, Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs; 
Larry Steeves, who’s the assistant deputy minister, municipal 
relations; John Edwards, who’s the executive director, policy 
development; Russ Krywulak, who’s the executive director, 
grants administration and provincial municipal relations; Doug 
Morcom, director of grants administration; Trent Good, who’s 
the acting executive director of community planning; Wanda 
Lamberti, who’s the executive director, finance, administration 
and information technology; and Marj Abel, director of finance 
and administration. 
 
As well we have with us this evening Mr. Paul Osborne, who’s 
the assistant deputy minister, trade and international relations; 
and Al Hilton, who’s the assistant deputy minister of 
federal-provincial relations. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, and 

to all your officials, welcome. It’s a pleasure to be able to ask 
you some questions tonight on behalf of my constituents and 
people across the province. I’m going to have a number of 
questions for your department, and then for Aboriginal Affairs, 
and then back and forth just so you remain very interested all 
night long. 
 
Mr. Minister, the first question I’d like to ask you is about the 
municipal library. Now I know that this has been taken from 
your department this year and moved over to Education. Can 
you tell me how this is affecting your department, how many 
staff you’re losing, and what really this is going to mean? Has 
there been some kind of a process set up for the removal of this 
area from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the member’s 
question. There was the total of 30.3 full-time positions that 
went to the Department of Learning with the library 
responsibility area, and basically those are the people that are 
employed in the library. So there were no people actually out of 
the department, out of the head office department. These are 
people that are already in the Provincial Library. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how is this going to affect the 
libraries in rural Saskatchewan? Are the people going to be 
phoning the Department of Learning now? How is the process 
going to work when it comes to the transfer of books and the 
needs that are going to be . . . that will be required out in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the reporting relationship 
has been changed through the Department of Learning, or to the 
Department of Learning. Nothing else has really changed as far 
as the physical responsibilities of the individuals involved with 
the libraries, merely the reporting and the responsibility from 
the Department of Learning to the library people and libraries 
through the Department of Learning. So it’s the communication 
aspect that’s changed. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How much funding actually went over to the 
Department of Learning from your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the total amount of money 
that was transferred — $8.372 million that went with the library 
end of it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I read that last year there was 
233 employees in your department, now there is 200.5. And I 
also understand that the responsibility for housing has also gone 
over to another department, so the number of employees that 
went for municipal . . . for the library system actually would 
have taken up this loss. So can you tell me what the difference 
is? You should have had . . . wasn’t there anybody employed in 
housing or what’s the difference in the numbers here? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m given to understand 
that the numbers in March as far as employees — which would 
include Intergovernmental Affairs, Aboriginal Affairs, 
Municipal Affairs, and the Provincial Secretary — made up the 
base number of 233. So that was what the figure is based on and 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

that number was reduced by 33. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, have you had any feedback from 
the local library boards regarding the transfer of responsibility 
from your department to Learning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, there has 
not been — none that I’m aware of — and the department 
hasn’t indicated any concerns as a result of the transfer. A lot of 
people felt that, given books and education and learning go 
hand in hand, that it was the appropriate move. 
 
And since that time the transition seems to have gone smoothly 
and we have not had any specific concerns from the people in 
the library system with respect to the transition. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m one of the people 
that thinks it was a good idea to move the municipal libraries 
over to Learning. I believe that this is going to actually remove 
. . . there was a duplication of services in lots of cases in the 
small towns and it’ll be an opportunity then for a librarian that 
may have been working in a separate building to actually be 
working within the school system. And I believe it may also get 
people to be in the school that maybe never had been part of the 
system. So this is something that I think is positive. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe that in some areas high-speed Internet 
was connected to the libraries. Is there . . . Maybe I should ask 
that question first of all. Was there any of your municipal 
libraries connected to high-speed Internet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, I want to 
first of all mention that that was an excellent assessment. And I 
appreciate that very much, your observations and assessment of 
the move from the libraries to the Learning department. 
 
With respect to the question about the Internet, high-speed 
Internet, there will be, as a result of the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program, 162 libraries that will be connected to 
the high-speed Internet throughout the province, which is an 
excellent and a very positive step — and I hope people out there 
will see it as such — and allow them the opportunity to access 
virtually the world probably a lot easier than some folks in the 
major centres in the US (United States) can access some of the 
Internet, the global Internet. 
 
So we’re very pleased about that and happy to be able to supply 
that very important tool to people in rural communities 
throughout this province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, does that mean these 162 
locations will actually have the funding for the high-speed 
Internet paid for through a program that involves the federal 
government? And will this now benefit the school system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the schools are now 
connected through the CommunityNet, so it will be the libraries 
that’ll be connected to high-speed Internet and will then be able 
to assist or be accessible to other libraries or school libraries as 
such. But the schools will be connected through the 
CommunityNet. 
 
I just want to mention, if I may, I’d just like to read this in that 

the Industry Canada, who’s been responsible for a great deal of 
the funding for existing library community access program 
sites, and it was under the every library connected program or 
CAP (community access program), sites were established in 
over 300 libraries in Saskatchewan. The federal government’s 
offering up to $5,000 per site which is very, very welcome for 
the 306 library CAP sites in Saskatchewan, plus Provincial 
Library’s administrative costs up to 10 per cent for a maximum 
contribution of $1.61 million. 
 
So that’s the agreement that kind of outlines the disbursement 
of funds throughout the province. For 2001-2002, in the area of 
$1.27 million; and in 2002-2003, $335,419 which is really 
welcome funding to allow us to supply that type of 
communication tool to rural areas. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I understand that’s money that’s 
coming from the federal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, to the member, it is 
federal funding. And that’s why I say it’s so much appreciated 
that that type of investment by the federal government is 
allowing us to give people in rural Saskatchewan the type of 
facilities that they’re entitled. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then this money that’s coming 
from the federal government, the Department of Learning is the 
one who makes the decision on where it’s . . . the money is 
going to? 
 
I guess I have two questions about this. Is there going to be two 
separate bills to school divisions, one for CommunityNet and 
one for this high-speed Internet set up through their libraries, or 
is all going to be integrated into one billing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the billing for the 
CommunityNet is through Sask Learning . . . through the 
Learning department, and perhaps the member may wish to 
pursue that aspect with the Minister of Learning next 
opportunity, or whenever. As far as the high-speed, that’s 
through the regional library system that the billing will be done. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then the systems aren’t truly 
integrated then. Even though municipal libraries has moved 
over to Learning, we’re still having basically two separate 
programs and structures within this department. It’s not under 
the purview of each school board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, the 
communication system is integrated. But specifically for the 
question the member asked I would appreciate it, and it’s not to 
pass the buck, but the Minister of Learning would be perhaps in 
a better situation . . . because we still have those separate boards 
that are involved. We have the library boards and we have the 
school boards that may very well . . . the regional library boards 
and the school boards that are involved in this whole process as 
well. 
 
So that may be best answered, your specific question about the 
billing procedures, may best be answered by the Minister of 
Learning because again, as I say, we still have the regional 
library boards and we have the school boards that are involved 
in this exercise. 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. So you’re 
going to still have the municipal library board and they’re going 
to be trying to work within the school system, and yet they’re 
going to be sharing a library facility, and they’re what, two 
separate billings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there are still the school 
boards that are in place and the municipal libraries, and the 
school libraries, and the municipal libraries. I understand that in 
some cases there has been some integration based on 
agreements on the local level, where they can exchange or 
participate in some way, shape, or form. 
 
But again, and I apologize for not having the specifics on this 
particular aspect which, with all due respect, would be better 
addressed by the Minister of Learning, in the event that there 
are perhaps some proposals or considerations for closer 
integrating the entire systems. 
 
At this point I understand that there are some areas that have 
taken it upon themselves, through their own initiative, to tie in 
between the local municipal library and the school library. So 
it’s . . . there’s some co-operative efforts that are involved or 
required. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then there will be an opportunity 
then for the local municipal library boards to work with the 
school boards when it comes to cutting back on duplication of 
books because they can go back and forth easier? Is that 
something that may be happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, yes that’s 
possible. Not only possible but very reasonable, in my humble 
opinion, that there is that kind of again co-operative effort to 
ensure that the services, that the requests by the public, and the 
requirements by other facility that they co-operate and . . . 
co-operate between one another to ensure that services are fully 
available to meet the needs of their citizens. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will ask the 
Minister of Learning questions on this area. 
 
So I have one other question on some . . . probably co-operation 
between different departments. I know that there’s a number of 
schools are actually building facilities where their gymnasium 
or their hall . . . gymnasium could be used as a community hall 
or a community facility as well. 
 
Do you have any examples or cases right now where the 
Department of Government Relations is working with Learning 
to build a facility that may be accommodating a community to 
provide a service or a structure that would be multi-purpose? 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, the . . . 
there are no specific building programs where Government 
Relations has indicated to municipalities that they must build 
integrated facilities to accommodate events for the community 
plus administrative services for their electorate as well. 
However, through the communities’ own initiatives under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program and under the 
Centenary Fund, there have been communities who have gotten 

together with RMs (rural municipality) in the area, and I know 
of one for example, just off the top of my head, at Montmartre 
where they used that funding to build municipal offices and a 
library — a modern, up-to-date library. 
 
So the initiative and the incentive would be at the direction or at 
the decision of the municipalities and individual communities. 
And I’m not sure if I heard the member say perhaps Archerwill 
did . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, okay, whatever. But 
once again . . . And I believe it’s commendable, particularly to 
those communities that have need for facilities, to accommodate 
perhaps a number of functions such as administrative, library, 
and in some instances perhaps even a community hall where 
people can participate in local occasions and events. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials tonight. I’m going to try and direct 
my questions to one part of a problem that I got up by Big River 
and that’s probably to do with both IGA (Intergovernmental 
Affairs) and your department. But I’m going to try and direct 
the questions to you in regards to the municipal side of it. 
 
In regards to the Carlton Trail which is north of Big River, 
where there’s a land claim on the . . . a portion of land — I 
know that department doesn’t deal with you — but the Carlton 
Trail itself is a municipal road that goes up through that area. 
Now can you fill me in on what’s happening since the meetings 
that went on some time ago regarding the Carlton Trail and the 
municipal part of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, if I may, I 
would like to defer to the minister responsible for Aboriginal 
Affairs that has been directly dealing with that file. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, we’ll have a number of questions then in that area that 
we’ll be asking later on to the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that you now have the responsibility 
for Sask Water. And I have an area that I’m quite concerned 
about, and I’m going to actually read you a part of a letter I 
received from a constituent who was concerned about the 
pipeline in their area. 
 
The people right now have water piped in in the Humboldt area 
and they feel that it is really beneficial for them because they 
have a very secure waterline. They have good water and people 
are saying that they’d also like to join onto this pipeline. But 
PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) doesn’t 
have funding for them right now and there is actually another 
40 farms and acreages that are requiring funding. 
 
We know that with the concern about safe water and this year 
with the scarcity of water in many areas, it’s a concern that 
there isn’t funding to actually supply the basics and the needs to 
many of the farmers in this area. 
 
There was a big amount of money put into this facility to get it 
started, and to join, to add onto it, will lower the cost for some 
of the people that are already receiving water through this 
system, and it will actually ensure a safe water supply for the 
many acreages and farms that are looking for help right now. 
 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

So the people that have written to me are asking that we look 
into it and see if your government is looking at a way to 
actually expand the system and ensure that there is more 
availability. 
 
Have you had an opportunity to look into this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member may . . . is 
probably aware that the water file was one that I had the 
opportunity to participate in. The specific circumstances you’re 
speaking of, I’m not aware of. I’d be very, very pleased to 
receive a copy of the concern that’s been expressed. 
 
And on that note, just to once again reiterate that the situation 
with . . . the water situation throughout the province is not a 
trivial issue and it’s not being taken lightly. And there are a 
number of efforts and attempts through Sask Water to — and I 
know people, environment people — to deal with some of those 
issues or at least acknowledge some of those issues and work 
with communities in trying to determine what the best efforts 
might be to overcome these immediate problems. 
 
In some areas, some of the problems have been lessened. And 
thanks to the opening up of the heavens here in recent days, 
there are some things that can be done through various projects 
and investments. A lot of it still, down the road, will depend 
upon mother nature and how we see the return to regular 
rainfalls and water supplies through the natural way. 
 
But having said that, again I just want to point out that there are 
consultations that are ongoing with even engineers in the 
private areas who are as concerned about wanting to participate 
and seeing that there are appropriate programs and 
opportunities in place to assist people who are in these kinds of 
situations. And we know full well that province-wide there are 
communities that have a desperate need to upgrade their 
deteriorating infrastructure and perhaps a search for other 
sources of good, clean, quality drinking water. 
 
And the options that are available are all being looked at very 
carefully in the variety of areas where in some areas one option 
may be more appropriate than another, and the regionalized 
system very definitely is one of the options. In some of the 
smaller communities that exist, water hauling may be another 
long-term, viable, and financially favourable situation . . . 
affordable situation. So there’s a number of those areas, but I’d 
be very pleased to look into that situation that you’ve 
mentioned here this evening. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay, Mr. Minister, I’m going to be sending a 
copy of the letter that I received over to you, and I will indicate 
to the people that you’ll be looking into it and contacting them 
as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that there has been areas of the province 
that have received considerable moisture in the last little while, 
but there are other areas of the province that have not. There are 
still a lot of people hauling water for cattle, there is still a lot of 
people who know they won’t get a hay crop this year, and 
there’s a lot of people who aren’t going to get any farm . . . their 
crop is actually going to be very poor, if anything, this year, so 
we can’t say that the problem is over. 
 

Mr. Minister, we know that there is $300 million worth of 
infrastructure needed to update the water systems and the 
infrastructure in this province, and I looked at this budget and 
saw that it’s not going to be there. There’s not many people are 
going to be receiving the help that they need this year. So I 
guess we’re going to have to be hopeful that it’s going to be 
coming in the next year or so because there are people . . . 
towns and communities right across this province that are in 
dire need for help when it comes to the infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Minister, going on to another area when it comes to the 
assessment and the property taxes, I’ve received another letter 
from a hotel owner in my constituency who was . . . were very 
concerned last year in the spring of 2001 when their property 
tax assessment came in and their bill had gone from $1,200 to 
$6,628. The town council had met with them and they were 
guaranteed an abatement of $725 and they were waiting for an 
opportunity to appeal this year. 
 
This year when their assessment . . . they waited for their 
assessment notice to come in. The mayor had been helpful on 
their behalf and informed us he was going to have a special 
meeting to discuss the hotel property taxes. And later on they 
found out that the village actually hadn’t sent out assessment 
notices this year and they were denied an appeal. 
 
Mr. Minister, going from $1,200 to $6,628 in one year is way 
too large a jump for a small town, for any kind of small 
business in a small town. And I’m wondering if this is the type 
of information you’ve received from right across this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, first of all if I can follow 
up just to your initial comments for people that are desperate for 
water. I agree, and I just . . . I know that the member is aware of 
the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program and the 
number of applications we get for the second year. And the 
applications always are well beyond the amount of money that’s 
available, so the priorities are given to those people that are in 
real dire straits. 
 
The drought situation is just another added difficulty, if you 
wish, in addressing those communities that have been without 
rain and their water sources are drying up. Those are other 
projects that hopefully will be addressed, again through the 
program or through whatever grant money might be available 
through those applications under the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program. Otherwise the alternatives are for the 
municipalities who have the responsibility for good, safe 
drinking water to look at alternate sources of revenues — either 
their reserves or the municipal financing corporation, working 
with other communities which has become a reality as well; 
communities that pool their resources and make application for 
some assistance in that respect. 
 
Now with respect to the assessments, the number of 
assessments that were carried out during this past assessment 
year did involve some appeal or a number of appeals and a 
number of concerns that were expressed by businesses from 
different parts of the province. Now I know that the SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) board is 
carefully looking at the process that was followed and are 
reviewing what processes will be in place for the next 
assessment year. 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

 

So I guess what I just want to say to the member, Mr. 
Chairman, is that whatever concerns have been brought to the 
board are being addressed. Those businesses or 
residents/owners who have concerns about their assessment, as 
the member is no doubt aware, do have an appeal process that 
they can launch. And other than that I’m not actually certain 
what I can suggest. Again, if there’s a specific situation that you 
want to share with me that I could ask the SAMA board to 
follow up on or look into, I’d be more than happy to do that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I will again send you 
a copy of the information that I’ve received from this very 
frustrated business owner. I know that they’re not blaming the 
town council either because there’s a real need for funding, 
again for the water system and the roads and all the rest of it. 
But you can’t expect a small business to go from $1,200 to 
$6,600 in one year when they’re making their money on coffee. 
So it’s something that we have to address. 
 
I’m going to send you a copy of this information and you can 
forward it on to SAMA. I understood from your answer that 
SAMA’s going to do some reassessment and I think that . . . 
I’m not sure if I heard you say that they’re going to have the 
new system up by next year, but looking at relieving some of 
the responsibility for taxes from places like hotels is going to be 
a must if we’re going to be able to keep them viable. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I will be sending this information over to you 
and hopefully you’ll be able to get to my constituent and let 
them know what your government is doing to address this very 
real concern. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Because I have a potpourri of questions to ask you tonight, 
another issue that a lot of my constituents are concerned about 
is the farm land property tax rebate program and the fact that 
the deadline was so inflexible. And the fact that last year they 
actually had a . . . or allowed . . . they extended the deadline for 
some time. This year there was no extension on it. Someone . . . 
the opportunity that people had to apply was not great. 
 
I’m going to read you the letter so that you understand what this 
constituent of mine is talking about: 
 

The property tax rebate program allowed the applications 
for the rebate of taxes for the year 2000 to extend 13.5 
months. The application for the rebate for the year 2001 
was allowed only six weeks. All of the bills are paid 
December 31 and because of year-end my taxes were paid 
on December 31 with a post-dated cheque. 
 
After January 2 the RM sent me a receipt for my payment 
in the mail which I would have received approximately the 
week of January 8. I work off the farm like many people in 
rural Saskatchewan. Since all bills coming in in January 
need to be paid in February I didn’t get my bookkeeping 
done until February. And in February I was shocked to read 
that the application for the tax rebate ended February 15 
and it was already February 21. I applied anyway and knew 
that I wasn’t going to be able to receive the money. 
 

Mr. Minister, there must have been money put aside for taxes 

when you had the $25 million there, knowing that there was 
going to be a number of people apply for it. I don’t know how 
much . . . I guess one of my questions can be: how much did 
you pay last year for the rebate and how much this year? 
Because with the extension on the deadline for last year and not 
this year there was a number of people cut short. I’m wondering 
how much money you actually spent out of that 25 million this 
year, and if there’s funding available for some of these people 
who were caught in this kind of crisis situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, I want to 
assure you — assure the member, Mr. Chairman — that I’m not 
trying to avoid answering your questions, and I notice that 
you’re piling a lot of work up on me and I appreciate that. But 
the Ag and Food department are the ones that had administered 
that particular program, and that would be the department better 
able and capable to respond to that particular question. I 
apologize for that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when you came in you 
introduced one of your officials as someone from the trade area. 
Can you tell me what your area does in the area . . . in the area 
of trade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Okay. Mr. Chairman, I’m happy to tell the 
member that our trade policy within Government Relations 
involves developing policies and represents the province’s 
position on trade and investment policy issues in various 
international and, very importantly I think, internal trade 
negotiations and under various forums and agreements. 
 
As you can appreciate, between provinces there are different 
agreements and trade issues that go on. The department would 
become involved in representing this province with respect to 
concerns over, for example, the softwood lumber trade issue to 
make representation on behalf of our province with respect to 
the effects of that particular situation. 
 
And it also manages Saskatchewan’s participation in the 
resolution of trade disputes. So as you can appreciate that if 
there’s something — anything — that’s affecting our province, 
that we would have representation there to put forward on the 
table our position with respect to any trade issues. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many people in 
your department work in this area of trade and how much 
money do you spend on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That particular unit has five people and the 
budget for that department is $450,000 — $450,000. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I think the member from 
Saltcoats has a number of questions. But I just want to ask you 
how this department works with Intergovernmental and 
Economic Development and all the rest of it that are also 
dealing with trade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — This aspect of the unit deals with the trade 
policy issues and representation on trade related disputes and 
negotiations. It’s also an important and integral part of the other 
departments’ responsibilities dealing with other provinces and 
beyond. 
 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
never cease to amaze me. A new department seems to have 
sprung out with trade now. We have Intergovernmental Affairs, 
now we have a trade department within what I would call 
municipal government. 
 
Mr. Minister, how long has this department been a part of 
municipal government? Is it something new or has it been there 
all the time and I just didn’t realize that we did have a part of 
municipal government for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
question. Just to explain that with the amalgamation of 
Government Relations and Intergovernmental Affairs, the trade 
unit within Intergovernmental Affairs has been there since 
1996. And it’s based on and arranged in the same, virtually the 
same way, as the Alberta model for their unit involved in 
representations on internal and external trade relations and 
policies. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well would 
that department not also be part of Intergovernmental Affairs 
then? Would there be a department of municipal . . . or 
Government Relations and then also Intergovernmental Affairs 
would have their own department? Do we have two, three, four, 
five departments that are dealing with trade? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . in the 
reorganization of the various departments, what the effort and 
what the intent was, was to bring all government relations and 
intergovernmental affairs issues under one umbrella, if you 
wish. So Government Relations is the umbrella, if you wish, for 
a number of components: Municipal Affairs, which was 
previously Municipal Affairs and Housing; we also have the 
federal/provincial department, federal/provincial trade relations; 
we also have the trade and international relations. 
 
These are all units, all components, within Government 
Relations. So anything and everything to do . . . And that 
includes Aboriginal Affairs. So anything and everything to do 
with other governments. For example, the municipalities, 
municipal governments, that is one level of government that 
deals with Government Relations. Provincial, interprovincial 
relationships, that is the other area. And international trade 
relations as well. That comes under this umbrella as well. 
 
So it was an effort to combine units that were directly related to 
having administrative communiqués, communications, and 
intercommunication relationships with other governments in 
other provinces, in other countries, would all come under this 
one umbrella through a specific unit that was dealing in any of 
those particular areas, such as trade, trade relations, for 
example. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand we 
don’t have that many minutes left, and you . . . something you 
said here a minute ago, I’ve had concerns the last few days. 
You touched on amalgamation — I know you’re going to wish 
you hadn’t done this — but you brought it up, Mr. Minister, and 
I’m glad you did because I forgot to write it down. 
 
I’ve had some calls in the last few days, and I don’t know 
where this is coming from, Mr. Minister, and maybe you can 

enlighten me. I hope it’s not what I’m worried about. Some 
concerns out there that the amalgamation or forced 
amalgamation issue may be coming back to the forefront. 
 
Now while you’re still the Minister of Government Relations 
before I jump in — I’m sure I have the right department, Mr. 
Minister, so I’m afraid you’re going to have to answer this — is 
there something new in the wind on amalgamation? Because as 
you know, I have grave concerns about when we talk forced 
amalgamation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the member 
that that’s not on the table. My discussions with any of the 
municipal leaders has revolved around the fact — and there are 
those municipalities and communities have been very 
appreciative — that the impediments have been removed from 
legislation to allow those municipalities, villages, hamlets, to 
annex or to carry out their restructuring of their own accord. 
 
And I’m very pleased to say that there has been a fair amount of 
discussion in that respect because of the very evident benefits of 
pooling resources and combining efforts for one common 
objective for the community, for the greater community. So that 
is evolving as a matter of course in some areas, as a result of the 
municipalities’ or villages’ or hamlets’ or towns’ own 
initiatives, where they see some very positive benefits — 
financially and sharing of resources, again as I mentioned — 
but for the benefit of the community at large, where 
independence is not quite as easy to continue dealing with as it 
once was and not unlike many major corporations. 
 
And we hear about it all the time — people join forces in order 
to meet the challenges that are facing us into the 21st century 
and beyond. 
 
So it’s not something that has been . . . has been given to 
municipalities as a mandate to carry out, but more of, how can 
we help you if you choose or if you care to go that route. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and that’s 
exactly what I hoped to hear tonight. And I don’t know what 
stirred this up again or where it came from, and as you know, 
sometimes rumours create rumours out there and things like that 
start. As you know, we were dead against forced amalgamation. 
I think you’re well aware of that and other members on that side 
were, and we’re still at that view. 
 
But when it comes to helping villages and towns and rural 
municipalities out there by removing the impediments and 
things like that that you’ve done already, we commend you for 
that. 
 
Any other way that you could assist communities, whether it’s 
financially . . . I know we’ve talked to communities out there 
such as small villages that have water and sewer problems and 
RMs really don’t want to take them on at this point because of 
the cost involved. And I think that’s areas where if we would 
put our time and effort into how we could assist those 
communities to become part of the RMs, whether it is 
financially or whatever it is, I think you would find that we 
would support you all the way on that. 
 
So I’m glad to hear that that concern is not on the table at this 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

 

point and as we are still very gun-shy of forced amalgamation. 
 
(22:00) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I understand we’re out of time for this. I want 
to thank your officials this evening. And I have a number of 
SAMA questions I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, but we’ll 
have to get them at a later date. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I just want to conclude by thanking the 
members opposite for the questions that have come forward and 
the meaningful dialogue that we’ve had on issues that are 
important to people of the province. And I thank you for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress on Government Relations and that 
we move to Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Subvote (GR05) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Well in addition to 
Brent Cotter, the deputy minister on my right; and Wanda 
Lamberti just behind him, the executive director of finance, 
administration and information technology — who have been 
here for Minister Osika — Donavon Young to the right of the 
deputy minister, the acting assistant deputy minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs; and Glen Benedict, who until tomorrow will 
be the executive director of Indian land and resources. I’d ask 
the members to welcome them. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I was 
asking a question earlier regarding the minister for Government 
Relations and I was asked to ask the minister for IGA. So I’ll 
put the question towards you. 
 
It’s regarding the land claim on a piece of land just north of Big 
River, put on by the Pelican Lake First Nations, and it is 
regarding the portion of municipal road going up through the 
land in question, and it’s called the Carlton Trail road. 
 
Now has there been any further discussion regarding that and 
where are we situated right now regarding the proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member’s question and the resolution of the Pelican Lake First 
Nation TLE (Treaty Land Entitlement) selection as it relates to 
the RM of Big River, the member will know there have been a 
number of meetings between many ministers and both the 
Pelican Lake First Nation and the RM of Big River reeve and 
council, that there have been many efforts to try to resolve this 
matter through mediation, and the province provided a mediator 
for that purpose. 
 
The efforts of the mediator were not successful. And in spite of 
every effort to find a mediated solution, including meetings as 
late as January of this year and February of this year also, the 
government has decided to and has informed both the RM and 
Pelican Lake First Nation to transfer the trail by three-party 
agreements. The trail will attain reserve status. The RM of Big 
River has been advised by letter of the government’s decision. 
And it’s our view that the band’s proposal to protect the 

heritage of the trail through a band bylaw and the offer of a 
co-management agreement with the RM of Big River would 
serve to protect the trail and protect the interests of the RM of 
Big River and those who wish to use that trail. 
 
The RM has chosen not to participate in seeking a 
co-management agreement. I would urge the RM to do so. I 
think it’s in everybody’s best interests that they do do so. There 
is some concern on the part of the RM that the band bylaw is 
not sufficient to protect its interests, but I’d remind the member 
and the RM that band bylaws are binding as any other 
contractual situation would be. So that the resolution of this 
matter, in short, is to transfer the trail to reserve status and, as I 
say, we’ve urged the RM to work with the First Nation to find 
ways in which everyone in the region can make use of and have 
some role over the management of the trail and the surrounding 
area. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regarding the letter that was sent to the RM regarding the RM 
working with the First Nations in regards to that, was it ever 
thought about by the government that maybe the First Nations 
may want to work with the RM because the road is the RM 
property in the first place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, I think in response to the 
member’s concern here, this really isn’t a road. I mean it’s a 
trail which is for recreational purposes. It is of significance and 
I think it’s important to try to find ways in which all interested 
parties can have a say over its use and also use it themselves. 
 
There have been, I think, many efforts made to ensure that both 
parties work together to find a solution, and towards the end of 
these discussions the RM appeared not to meet with Pelican 
Lake First Nation over the co-management agreement. And 
without some kind of meeting it’s going to be hard to find a 
resolution. 
 
My hope is that as we look back in four or five years time this 
will all have been resolved and the First Nation and the RM will 
be able to live in the harmony they’ve lived in for many years. 
It’s unfortunate that it hasn’t been possible to find a way for 
both sides to find an accommodation here. But I would urge 
everyone to do so, and I’m sure that that will happen in due 
course. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I know 
the best way to solve this is with harmony on both sides. But I 
think the RM of Big River is somewhat snubbed for the fact 
that this trail, as you have mentioned, is not actually a 
municipal road. The reason I know it is is for the simple reason 
that SARM’s (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) been involved with it and a portion of that trail 
is RM road. And therefore the RM of Big River feel that they 
have a jurisdiction right over that far more than any treaty will 
enhance that it’s different. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, once again, Mr. Chair, there 
isn’t really a road. There’s a trail. That trail actually belongs to 
the province, not to the RM, and so it’s a legitimate selection 
for Pelican Lake to make. And the view of the province after 
finding . . . after exerting considerable efforts to try to find a 
solution is that this is the best we can do. 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

If the RM wants to have a say over the management of the trail, 
if the RM wants to participate in that, then they’re fully 
welcome to do so. My understanding is that Chief Bill and the 
council of Pelican Lake is more than willing to work with the 
RM to find a solution to this issue, but to date the RM has not 
wanted to participate in that discussion. 
And I would urge them to kind of put some faith into the 
process and sit down and work it out. 
 
What we’re trying to do, as the member will know, with treaty 
land entitlements is to redress some old wrongs and to provide 
First Nations who fall within the category of needing extra land 
to finally turn to reserve status is to ensure that the province 
plays its role in . . . along with the federal government, to meet 
these obligations. What we’re asking in some instances, and this 
is one, is for neighbouring municipalities to participate in that 
process too. 
 
There are many, many transfers of property to First Nations 
which go quite smoothly and which add to the First Nations 
land base and subsequently to their reserve base. And in doing 
so, once their shortfall has been attained, those bands then are 
eligible for significant economic development resources from 
the federal government which only serve the province and those 
neighbouring communities well. 
 
This is money which is invested in our economy which is new 
to our economy and which, as you know if you . . . as the 
member will know in his neighbourhood and in others, has been 
put to significant use, and the economic development in many 
First Nations is quite striking. And the issue is to try to bring 
along as many First Nations as possible. Of course sometimes 
there are conflicts as is the case here. 
 
But it’s a little difficult to see how we can move forward in this 
province living in harmony together, First Nations and non-First 
Nations, unless we make some compromises and some 
concessions. We are not going to . . . we’re not going to find a 
way to build this province together unless we do, unless we do 
that. Those are concessions both on the part of First Nations and 
on the part of neighbouring non-Aboriginal communities. 
 
And in regards to Pelican Lake and Big River, we are asking 
both to come together to find a solution to this challenge. We 
think, and certainly Pelican Lake thinks — although Big River 
plainly doesn’t — that a co-management deal can serve the best 
interests of all. And I think in most instances you’d be hard 
pressed to say that that wouldn’t be the route to follow. 
 
So if Big River has faith that the Pelican Lake Band resolution 
is enforceable, which it is, and if they want . . . if Big River 
wants to have a say in how to run the trail and how to 
administer it and how to provide access to it and how to protect 
it, then that is available to them. The alternative for Big River is 
really to not be part of the solution and to leave everything to 
Pelican Lake First Nation, which objectively is not in the best 
interests of Big River. 
 
Now it’s for the RM of Big River to make their decisions over 
these matters, but I think we could all see ways to form a 
satisfactory resolution of this issue here. And we’d urge both 
sides to do so. 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to the Carlton Trail, I believe the Carlton Trail has quite 
a bit of that portion of road that is actually RM. I don’t think it’s 
just an ordinary trail. 
 
Also the constituents from Big River that were disapproving of 
the fact that you were turning it over to the Pelican Lake First 
Nations in regards to an Indian claim, was the fact that that road 
is part of their heritage. Many, many people from the Big River 
area have utilized that road for years and years and years. In 
fact a lot of the members there actually built that road in the 
first place. 
 
Now when I think . . . and that’s why the Big River people are 
so against this order by the government to turn it over without 
their heritage rights being representative and that’s what they 
call the third party rights, and they don’t feel that they were 
represented properly. And now for the Big River people to now 
take a stand of working in co-operation with Pelican Lake to 
solve those problems, they don’t feel that that’s not the right 
way of doing it, even though I know many of the people from 
Big River and Pelican Lake First Nations work hand in hand in 
many operations up there. This whole idea of this Carlton Trail 
and being part of their heritage has been taken away from them, 
and their third party interests were not adhered to by the order 
in government by your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, on the member’s second 
point, the province has no ability to transfer to a First Nation in 
a TLE selection any property which doesn’t belong to the 
province. So the only . . . so what property is being transferred 
or what property will be transferred to Pelican Lake First 
Nation is property which is presently held by the province — 
not by the municipality, not by anyone else, just by the 
province. 
 
And I should remind the member, and I’m sure the member 
knows this, that this is a trail which was used just before the 
turn of the century and probably a bit after, but now is 
essentially a road used for recreation . . . or a trail used for 
recreation, and parts of it by logging companies. So this is not a 
discernable and continuous road which the member I think is 
suggesting it is. But it is of historic value, as the member rightly 
states, to all people in that area, which makes it I think even 
more important that they all together find a solution to running 
it. 
 
The member mentioned that Big River feels . . . the RM of Big 
River feels that this . . . that their interests have not been 
protected and that they don’t feel this is the appropriate 
direction to follow. I think what the member is saying by that is 
that the RM of Big River doesn’t want to work with the Pelican 
Lake First Nation. Well if they want to work with the Pelican 
Lake First Nation, that is available to them right now with the 
offer of a co-management deal and an offer of an enforceable 
bylaw. 
 
So they can’t have it both ways. They can either want to work 
together to find a solution or not. If they, as the member 
suggests, they do want to work together, then I wonder why 
they have not taken up the offer to negotiate a co-management 
agreement. I think from our meetings with them, they’ve not 
indicated a great desire to follow that route and certainly 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

 

they’ve not followed that route. 
 
So if the member is right that they do want to work in 
co-operation, then I’d urge him to work with the RM of Big 
River to have them sit down with the Pelican Lake First Nation 
and in fact work out a co-management agreement whereby 
everybody’s interests can be protected. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to 
portions of land like this, is there any other situation in 
Saskatchewan where a TLE land has taken land in this similar 
fashion where an RM has felt they’ve had some interest and 
have not been adhered to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — There are selections which of course 
. . . most of the selections are in rural Saskatchewan but some 
are in towns like Qu’Appelle, for example, and others are in 
cities like Saskatoon. And in those instances where they have 
been resolved, they’ve been resolved through discussion and 
negotiation with the appropriate municipalities, both . . . well in 
particular with regards to tax loss compensation and so on. 
 
There are presently TLE discussions taking place where third 
parties don’t feel that they’ve been fairly treated. That situation, 
and there are a number of them across the province, but in those 
situations the province’s practice is to provide a mediator in an 
effort to find an amicable solution. So there have been, as the 
member will know, issues around outfitters who have an 
interest on a particular piece of land which is in the process of 
being transferred to a First Nation. And the First Nation and 
those outfitters negotiate a solution to the issue. 
 
There are others where these discussions are continuing and 
haven’t yet been resolved. But I think the fact that . . . The core 
issue here is that, where there are disagreements, the focus of 
the province is to try to find a solution. And I think the member 
can understand that you can only have those discussions carry 
on for so long and then a decision has to be made. 
 
If the decision is made to suggest to the First Nation that they 
seek a selection elsewhere, then that decision plainly then is 
made in the interest of the, in this case, the RM. If on the other 
hand the First Nation’s position is held to be a stronger one, 
then it’s made in their best interests if you want, or on their 
behalf. 
 
There is, once the mediation breaks down, no easy solution to 
this in terms of satisfying both sides. 
 
So our efforts — and they are often very . . . take a very long 
time — are to find mediated solutions. And we have a number 
of those presently underway. 
 
I should say with regards to the member’s specific issue about 
Pelican Lake and Big River, that the Government of Canada 
also supports this transfer. So I really would urge the RM to 
find a way to sit down with the First Nation and come up with a 
co-management agreement, which I don’t think would be very 
complicated. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You mentioned in 
one of your answers some time back about a letter that was sent 
to the RM and the town regarding the decision that was made. 

Is it possible for me to get a copy of that letter from your 
department, if you don’t mind, please? 
 
And that’s all I have for questions regarding the Big River/First 
Nations/Carlton Trail road, so I’ll turn it over here to my 
colleague. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Let me check with both Big River and 
Pelican Lake — the communication I had was with them — 
before I kind of quickly say I’d send the member a copy. I think 
he probably could get a copy of it from the RM of Big River. 
Perhaps he’d explore that route first, and if that doesn’t work 
then we’ll see what we can do. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, just a couple 
of questions dealing with some general information with 
regards to the treaty land entitlement process. Under the 
process, a band is awarded a sum of money and some of it has 
to be, as I understand it, spent on land and that sort of thing. 
 
If a band decides to select some provincial Crown land, what is 
the process of that land being transferred to the band? Is it the 
same as if they go out and buy privately owned land and it goes 
through all the various processes? And part of that question is, 
does the band pay the province? Is there a value put on that 
Crown land and do they then pay the province whatever that 
value is determined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well generally in response to the 
member’s question about provincial land being transferred if 
selected by a TLE band, that the whole process is based on a 
willing buyer, willing seller approach. So the province would 
then, with the band, negotiate a price for that piece of property. 
 
There’d be some property that the province is not, for various 
reasons, willing to transfer and the member might know of 
some on the Churchill River which have been selected and 
which are of strategic importance to the province as well. 
 
So sometimes the province will say that particular piece of 
property for whatever reason is not available. It might be, it 
might be for example close to a facility that the province 
operates and it may decide it needs expansion or something of 
that sort. 
 
Then the question arises, are there third party interests on that 
land? We’ve just discussed outfitters. There are pasture lands 
which have been the subject of selections and then those who 
have used that pasture land over a period of time have interests 
which the province wishes to ensure are protected. 
 
So again there would be a negotiation of the value of those third 
party interests too and we would provide mediators to help with 
that process if it doesn’t move smoothly. And when agreed 
upon prices are arrived at, for say an outfitter’s interest or a 
pasture co-op’s interest, then those payments are made by the 
band. And once all of that is resolved then the land itself is 
transferred. 
 
The vast majority of the land transferred is relatively 
straightforward. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I understood you to 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

say that once the process is negotiated and so on, the band does 
pay the province for . . . once a price is agreed to, the band . . . 
there is a transfer of funds from the band to the province for this 
provincial Crown land. 
 
And the part of the question . . . another question that I would 
have that pertains to this whole process is, is the process similar 
for specific land claims? Can a band select Crown land as part 
of that settlement and is that also, once the price is agreed to, is 
there a transfer of funds from the band to the Crown? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — With regards to specific land claims, 
these are claims which are made as a result of land which was 
improperly taken by the federal government sometime in the 
past. The member will be aware of a number of these situations 
across the province. 
 
So it is a response . . . specific land claims are a response to 
land that was wrongfully taken in the past, and it is a matter of 
purely federal government responsibility which doesn’t engage 
the province. Most of that land is land which becomes available 
on the market. It is purchased by the band and then that is paid 
for by the federal government. 
 
Just in passing, the member will know also of the municipal tax 
issue and the response of the federal government to that to 
provide — and this is in TLE — 22.5 times the annual tax to 
assist the municipalities who lose that tax base as a result of the 
land falling into the hands of . . . well I guess that’s not quite 
the right way . . . having been purchased by First Nations. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you raise the issue of property taxes 
and the arrangement that has been made through the TLE and 
the specific land claims agreements and so on. But there is an 
issue that’s an ongoing issue and it seems to . . . it hasn’t been 
resolved, I guess. Part of the process when a band buys land, 
it’s held in a holding company for a while until all the processes 
are complete before it’s transferred in and finally becomes part 
of the reserve or becomes reserve status. 
 
And in a number of occasions that are in my constituency and 
in other members’ constituencies, there are bands that for one 
reason or another fail to live up to their municipal property tax 
responsibilities. And in fact I know of an instance where land 
was actually transferred to reserve status and there was 
municipal taxes still owing on that land. 
 
And this is a major concern of a number of municipalities 
because some of these tax arrears can amount to a significant 
amount of dollars and most of . . . in fact all the RM councils 
that I have spoken to, they understand that there is a process and 
those sorts of things, but given the history that some land has 
been reverted or turned into reserve status with tax arrears, it 
does raise some concern on behalf of municipal councillors. 
 
(20:30) 
 
And the question that they have is that at the end of the day, 
failing all negotiations and if the process should break down 
and they are out a significant amount of money in the form of 
tax arrears, I guess what they are looking for is: will this . . . 
will your government assure these municipalities that they will 
not be left holding the bag if, as I had said, the process of 

negotiation breaks down and the land has been transferred to 
reserve status and there are taxes owing? 
 
And again, just to restate my question, Mr. Minister, will your 
government assure the municipalities that if, at the end of the 
day, if this situation becomes reality, will you stand with the 
municipalities and help and in fact provide them with those tax 
arrears? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises an important 
question to both First Nations and municipalities. I should point 
out that the federal government will not transfer to reserve 
status . . . that is, the federal government has the responsibility 
to transfer land to reserve status. They won’t do so if there are 
tax arrears owing to municipalities on that land. 
 
So if there are examples of . . . There is one example where that 
happened. But if the member has other examples of where that 
has happened, he should perhaps let us know and we can take it 
up with the federal government. But the federal government’s 
position is that it will not transfer land which has been selected 
to reserve status unless municipal tax arrears have been paid. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I understand . . . I have been told by 
members of RM council of the RM of Edenwold that in fact the 
situation has arisen where the Piapot Band had some land 
transferred to reserve status and there was some tax arrears on 
some of that land. Now I haven’t checked with them recently to 
see whether those taxes have been . . . that money has been 
recouped by the RM or not, but there was some real concerns. 
 
And because of that particular incident, there has been concerns 
in other municipalities that that may happen, even though there 
are safeguards in place. I don’t know how it happened but I’ve 
been told that it did happen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the federal government 
informs us that the particular issue, the particular selection the 
member refers to did kind of fall through the cracks, and that 
they’ve assured us that that won’t happen again. My 
understanding is that the First Nation in question is fully up to 
date with its taxes over that piece of land, although there was a 
period of time when that was not the case. So my understanding 
is the First Nation has paid those taxes and that the matter now 
is effectively resolved. 
 
But if the member or his colleagues do come across any 
suggestions that this could happen again they should let us 
know. But the federal government assures us that they’re 
keeping an eagle eye on these kinds of transfers. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
information. I’m sure that’ll help alleviate some of the fears that 
some of the other municipalities may have. 
 
I’d like to turn my comments and questions to another issue that 
arose this spring in my constituency again and in other 
members’ constituencies. With the abnormally dry spring that 
we had there was a number of situations where fires got started 
on a reserve and then the fire moved out of the reserve and it 
destroyed property, whether it be fences or . . . I had a 
constituent phone me and was very concerned early one 
Saturday morning that a fire had come off of one of the reserves 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

 

and burnt, I believe it was, a half section of his pasture, and he 
said he really didn’t know where to turn. And other constituents 
have talked to me about the situation of pasture fences being 
burnt. 
 
They’ve gone to the band and they of course realize that the 
bands have many responsibilities and sometimes limited fiscal 
ability to look after some of the damages and those sorts of 
things. And they just wanted to be sure that both the provincial 
and federal government were aware of these situations and 
perhaps there is something that they could do to help mediate 
these disputes, because it certainly doesn’t do anyone any good 
to have these disputes continue on over a long period of time. It 
doesn’t do anything for harmony amongst the neighbours and 
that sort of thing. And I’m just wondering if you’ve had some 
time to ponder this situation and perhaps have you some 
answers for these people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member raised this 
specific issue with me a little while ago and we have been 
looking into it. I don’t think we have a response for him at the 
moment but we’ll get one as soon as we can. Certainly this 
summer has brought to attention more of these issues. We’ve 
had a particularly dry summer. My guess is that there will also 
be some fires which have moved from RMs onto First Nations 
as well. Not always is there adequate equipment and personnel 
to deal with these fires on First Nations. 
 
And one of the things that I think we have to do in order to 
ensure that we do live together in greater harmony is to ensure 
that we do have better arrangements for how these kinds of 
issues might be addressed. Certainly we’re working in the area 
of wildlife conservation, First Nations with RMs, and in fact 
and the provincial government as well to try find a way which 
best suits that particular region and that particular direction. 
 
I think more of that kind of working together to find solutions is 
not only useful, but it’s certainly the kind of things we would 
advise First Nations to engage upon. I think if communities 
which are close together can find solutions that meets both their 
needs, then not only will we live more happily together but the 
economy and the recreation in the area will be better, will be 
better served as well. 
 
And from my dealings with First Nations leaders, they are 
anxious to find those kinds of solutions, and also in our dealings 
with RMs and village and town mayors, the same; the desire to 
try to find solutions that work together — whether it be in 
education, wildlife conservation, fire, water, all the challenges 
that really affect large parts of the province. 
 
So it’s our wish and our urging that First Nations and 
surrounding communities work together to find solutions. It’s I 
think understandable that many First Nations find it difficult to 
set aside the resources from, you know, incredibly compelling 
needs — human and other needs, hungry children as important 
as any — and transfer them to dealing with such things as fires. 
 
But the member might also know that White Cap near Dundurn, 
or right next to Dundurn, in fact has a grass fire truck which it 
has used to assist Dundurn when it had its big fire last year. So 
there are examples of working together. There are examples of 
not so much and not so good working together. And I think it’s 

in all of our interests to try and find solutions to that. 
 
On the member’s specific point, as I say we’re trying to find 
some kind of response which would move that matter along and 
we’ll be in touch with him as soon as we can. And I apologize 
to him for the delay there. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I certainly agree that, 
you know, it’s in everyone’s best interest to find solutions to 
these problems. However some of my constituents are again 
kind of left holding the bag and, you know, they realize and I 
certainly realize that the First Nations leaderships have a great 
deal of responsibilities, and as I’d said earlier, certainly don’t 
necessarily have the fiscal resources to address all these issues. 
And so if you’re looking at providing health services or 
building your neighbour’s fence that you happen to burn down, 
I guess you’re going to put your dollars into the health services 
and so on. 
 
I’d like to turn my attention to another area. If my memory 
serves me correctly, I think it was approximately February of 
2001 when the former minister of Aboriginal Affairs was . . . 
spoke to an Aboriginal ag symposium in Fort Qu’Appelle and 
announced that the province was in . . . her department, in 
co-operation with the then Economic and Co-operative 
Development department were going to develop an Aboriginal 
economic development strategy. So that’s been well over a 
year. Has that strategy been developed and if so, what are the 
details of that strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member, Mr. Chair, touches on 
really what is the most — one of the two anyway — most 
crucial questions for how we as a province move forward. We 
plainly have the challenge on the social side with the First 
Nations and Métis people and we plainly have a challenge on 
the economic side. I’d see both of them as opportunities and 
ones we can truly take advantage of if we work together 
effectively, and if the province provides the kinds of supports 
necessary for, in response to the member’s question, Aboriginal 
economic development. We talked briefly about TLEs and the 
impact that flows once shortfall acres have been met and the 
kinds of dollars that come in to that First Nation in the province 
in that regard. And there are enormous investment opportunities 
flowing from that and these are investment opportunities that 
the First Nation wants to invest in here in Saskatchewan. It’s 
not a question of investing outside of the province. So in that 
sense it’s a critically important aspect of our long-term 
economic development. 
 
The partnership for progress, the most recent proposals for 
economic development from the Department of Economic 
Development . . . Economic and Co-operative Development, 
now the Department of Industry and Resources, includes a 
component for Aboriginal economic development. And I think 
the member can see some significant examples of the kinds of 
development that has taken place, certainly forestry the member 
will be aware of it, and the whole northern mining development 
strategy. 
 
I might mention the Aboriginal economic employment 
development program, the Aboriginal Employment 
Development Program which recently received an award from 
the Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board which has 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

been . . . which has had significant success in developing 
partnerships with employers, in particular in the health care 
field but elsewhere as well which has ensured about, well a few 
. . . more than 1,200 Aboriginal people working in the health 
care field and in other fields. 
 
The process there, which makes it so important and makes it 
unique, is that the program works with employers to find . . . to 
identify with employers the kinds of job opportunities that 
might become available, for example people might be retiring 
or there might be a need for a specific new skill. And then as 
well as ensuring that the workplace is one which is welcoming 
to Aboriginal people — so there’s some cultural development 
and awareness work which is done — then works with 
Aboriginal people and Aboriginal training institutions to ensure 
that there are qualified people to fill those jobs. 
 
So it is not a question of anyone hiring somebody who is not 
qualified but is picked because of their particular ancestry. It is 
a situation which qualified people, who happen to be First 
Nations and Métis, apply for jobs and are chosen on the basis of 
their merit. And that as I say received an award from the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board. And that just 
as a recognition of its success. 
 
Also the Métis and off-reserve First Nations strategy, which is 
the province’s . . . one of the province’s responses to the Royal 
Commission on Aboriginal Peoples — and indeed we’re the 
only province that has responded in this way — is another 
significant part of Aboriginal employment development and 
economic development. And it is another program which has 
been recognized — this time nationally — and it is a finalist for 
a national Award for Innovative Management from the national 
Institute of Public Administration. 
 
(20:45) 
 
And this is . . . Both these awards, well we haven’t quite yet got 
. . . we haven’t quite won the Métis and off-reserve strategy 
award, but to be recognized as one of seven across the country 
in this field is a significant indication of the work done by 
Donavon Young, the assistant deputy minister, and people 
under him working with First Nations and Métis leaders in that 
off-reserve strategy. 
 
So there’s some exciting initiatives which have taken place. But 
all of this is part of a partnership of working together with First 
Nations and Métis people. As the member can imagine, and I’m 
sure would agree, it’s not possible for us to decide here in 
Regina how economic development and employment 
opportunities might take place on a First Nation or in 
communities where First Nations live. It’s our job and our 
ability to find ways to work with First Nations and Métis people 
for them to find the solutions themselves, and for us to work 
together in the long term for the economic development of the 
province. 
 
As I say, Aboriginal people — especially that large, young, 
potential workforce — offer the province a significant challenge 
but also offer the province a huge opportunity. We often talk 
about people leaving the province. Aboriginal people in large 
measure do not leave the province, have a much greater 
attachment to the land than some other residents, consequently 

want to stay here, and consequently are available for training 
and other opportunities. 
 
And as we see people my age, but rather older than the member 
opposite’s age, leaving the workforce, this cohort of potential 
new employees will enable us — if we do our work properly — 
to be the plumbers and the carpenters and the managers and the 
nurses and the physicians that will enable our society to 
continue to grow, and only coincidentally of course continue to 
provide the tax dollars to ensure that our health care system is 
sustainable and our pensions are paid. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, certainly all the things you spoke 
about as far as training and job creation and all those sorts of 
things for First Nations people are all great things and so on. 
You mentioned some of the things that are happening in mining 
and forestry, and I would suggest that all those things were in 
place prior to that announcement of February 2001. 
 
And we just, earlier in our discussions, talked about the 
inability of bands to provide compensation for damages that 
occurred outside the reserves. We talked about the whole TLE 
and land . . . bands acquiring land under both the TLE and 
specific land claims. And in many instances some of this land is 
idle, and I think the bands are looking for some leadership. And 
I certainly agree with you. We certainly can’t here in . . . 
government can’t go to the band and say, look this is what we 
think is good for you and this is what you should be doing. 
 
But I think there are a lot of ideas and a lot of initiatives that 
bands have and they really are looking for co-operation from 
the provincial government. And I don’t see anything in what 
you said that would relate to this economic development 
strategy. You know a lot of the things you mentioned were 
already happening and I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that there 
is nothing been done as far as this economic development 
strategy. 
 
And certainly we would . . . as I said, this announcement was 
made in February of 2001. You would think that’s more than 
ample time to at least have a preliminary framework of this 
strategy so that the First Nation bands could say, well look, 
there is something here for us, that we can develop some of our 
unused resources to provide employment and to provide income 
for our people and for the bands themselves. 
 
I can think of an opportunity that I’m sure a number of the 
bands in the Fort Qu’Appelle valley area would be very 
interested in looking at — ecotourism. The Fort Qu’Appelle 
valley is a . . . the Qu’Appelle Valley, I should say, is a great 
place to develop, you would think, ecotourism with all its 
natural attributes that it has. 
 
I know the Piapot Band has quite a number of acres of farm 
land that they purchased recently, and perhaps with some 
assistance as far as management training and those sorts of 
things, perhaps some of our exotic livestock operations would 
be a natural fit that would fit with ecotourism and those sorts of 
things. And from your comments I haven’t . . . don’t see any of 
that, Mr. Minister. And I guess what a number of the bands are 
asking is, when will we be seeing some of this from your 
department? 
 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I might begin, Mr. Chair, by just . . . 
not to pass the buck here, but remind the member that the 
Department of Aboriginal Affairs is more of a facilitative 
department rather than a program delivery department. So we 
work with many other departments, including the Department 
of Industry and Resources when the minister responsible has his 
hearing aid turned on. 
 
So we work . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . he must have it on. 
So we work with that department, with other departments too in 
other areas. I think, too, that if you take for example the 
Department of Agriculture, it would support the marketing of 
bison, and the member will know that many First Nations have 
bison farms. I was at Okanese just last week and they have a 
thriving small bison farm there and many new calves from their 
spring or winter/spring calving season. 
 
So the various departments would also be facilitating the work 
of First Nations, as they would non-First Nations activities. I 
think this is a continuing operation. The member is right to 
point out that we haven’t made as much progress as we would 
have liked to have made. That I think is patently clear. We still 
see the numbers of unemployment and lower attainment of . . . 
lower educational attainment levels and so on. Plainly we have 
a lot of work to do. 
 
But I think we should rejoice in our achievements too, and I 
think a lot of things have happened that we perhaps don’t 
remember or have put aside. But if the member would cast his 
mind to mining operations in the North, the numbers of 
northern and in particular Aboriginal employees in those 
operations, the number of contracts — catering, transportation 
and other contracts which have been won by First Nations and 
First Nations companies; the large . . . some of the very large 
First Nations corporations that exist, in particular transportation, 
West Wind Aviation now owned by . . . partly owned by PAGC 
(Prince Albert Grand Council) and Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council. But mining in the North I think a very good example 
of how, in fact again I mean there’s nothing like it in Canada 
and I don’t think much . . . The member from Cumberland 
reminds us that this is world-leading work in which we have 
found ways in partnership to ensure that many, many First 
Nations people work in the North. 
 
Forestry with its challenges with the softwood lumber and so 
on, but a key element of economic activity for First Nations 
employment and economic development, and a major concerted 
partnership effort once again with forestry companies and First 
Nations and Métis peoples. 
 
The member mentioned Qu’Appelle and he also mentioned 
Piapot and he mentioned ethanol and ecotourism. And there’s, 
you know, within the context of those few words, there is 
ecotourism being developed with . . . and Piapot, there’s ethanol 
with Treaty Four in that area too. There are many people 
working on pipelines. 
 
I think the list goes on, but I would agree with the member that 
we do plainly have to do more when you consider the numbers 
of new, of young new entrants to the workforce. I think the 
number’s something like 45,000 in the next five years or ten 
years. I mean not a very long period of time for a large, large 
cohort of new employees. 

There is no doubt that this is not a time to relax, that this is a 
time to move forward with some urgency, both on the part of 
First Nations and the Government of Saskatchewan, and indeed 
also of course the Government of Canada, and the business 
community as a whole. And so there are many ways in which 
business, government, and First Nations and Métis people come 
together to search out ways for more and more economic 
development. 
 
Finally I’d say — and I’m sure the member would agree with 
this, although one never knows — that dollars are not the sole 
answer to this problem. What’s important is finding ways to 
work together and put the investment dollars we have available 
to us to good effect. That is what we try to do. We know we’ve 
got more to do in that regard but I look forward to the member’s 
support in working in these areas. I think it is truly the key to 
the success of the province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I certainly agree with many of the 
things you stated. However that certainly didn’t address the 
question in that many of the things you referred to were already 
happening and it’s coincidental that . . . Or was it just a mere 
coincidence that this announcement was made at an Aboriginal 
ag symposium and that really there has been nothing done in 
that whole area? 
 
As a matter of fact, just prior to coming into the Assembly here 
I did check your Web site under Aboriginal Economic 
Development Strategy. I’ll read to you what it says on the Web 
site: 
 

Saskatchewan Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 
and Saskatchewan Economic and Co-operative 
Development are in the process of developing an 
Aboriginal Economic Development Strategy for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Now maybe I should have checked one of the other department 
Web sites to see if there’s anything more to this. But I would 
suggest, Mr. Minister, that I won’t find anything more than 
what I found on your department’s Web site. 
 
So I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that you work a little harder 
in this area; that there are bands that are out there waiting for 
this strategy. They’ve been asking for it. And I think you’d have 
to agree that we probably . . . there hasn’t been a whole lot done 
in this area, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member, I would say you’ve got to work with what you’ve got. 
But just like neighbours and family, you know, you don’t really 
choose your colleagues. But you got to work with what’s there. 
 
And I will take this matter up with my colleague, the member of 
Industry and Resources. This is a matter of serious importance 
to us and I think what I’ve indicated is a range of things we 
have done and the member should be aware that there are many 
more things in the pipeline, not just ethanol. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just have one 
further question to the minister. Are the global questions for 
Intergovernmental Affairs available? Are the global estimates 
available for Intergovernmental Affairs? 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

But on that, Mr. Minister, I want to thank you and your officials 
for coming out tonight and answering these questions. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — They’ll be available shortly. As soon 
as we have them available we’ll make them available. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, we would like to 
report progress on Aboriginal Affairs and move to the 
Provincial Secretary. 
 
Subvote (GR03) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask her to 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my left is the deputy minister of Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs, Brent Cotter. To my right, Michael Jackson, 
executive director of protocol and Government House. And 
behind Mr. Cotter, Florent Bilodeau, director, office of French 
language coordination. And directly behind myself, Wanda 
Lamberti, executive director, finance, administration, and 
information technology. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I’d like 
to take this opportunity to thank you for agreeing to sit tonight 
to answer some questions that we have. And also I’d like to 
welcome and thank your officials for being here this evening. 
 
I’m primarily going to focus on this Celebrating Saskatchewan 
book that was distributed earlier, and there are some things in it 
that I’d just like clarification on. And one of the first things is 
that I see where the government has set up a new Crown 
corporation and it’s called the Saskatchewan centennial 
corporation. And I know in the past, over the history of the 
province, that we’ve had celebrations pretty well go off without 
a hitch and it hasn’t been deemed necessary to set up a Crown 
corporation. 
 
So I would like to know the reasoning behind setting up a 
Crown corporation and who is appointed to the head of this 
corporation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This idea was put forward by the 
committee that worked on the early consultations, and it was a 
model that was used before. And what we have in place at the 
moment is the potential to have a centennial corporation but 
we’ve never actually set it up. And I think that we may in fact 
not do that. We may proceed with a different form of 
organization. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Could you expand on that, like what kind of an 
organization that you would be going with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well clearly the people that will be 
very involved in any of the efforts around the centennial will 
tend to be people who are already organized in the form of 
REDAs (regional economic development authority), arts 
councils, municipalities, etc. 
 

So what my view as Tourism Saskatchewan is that it would be 
more directly beneficial to have those people at the table who 
are already organized to deliver activities, programs, 
infrastructure, etc., in their communities and in their regions, 
and have them directly at the table, as opposed to setting up a 
separate body. So it’s really to connect the celebrations much 
more directly to people working at the ground level in 
communities and in these organizations. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Okay. Will these . . . Thank you, Madam 
Minister. Will these people be paid for their work or will this be 
on a volunteer basis, or will it just be included in their . . . added 
on to their job description now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The idea that we really have for the 
centennial — because, as you know, in the current economic 
circumstances there isn’t tonnes and tonnes of spare money — 
the idea is how we can create a focus, a momentum for people 
to decide to engage on some common ideas and to use some of 
their existing organizational capacity and budgets and resources 
to shape what they’re doing leading up to and during the 
centennial year to be complementary to an overarching theme. 
 
Now tomorrow a meeting will be held with representatives of 
these kinds of organizations. I’m talking about putting forward 
to them the question of what’s the best way to organize 
ourselves to get this done. We don’t have a preconceived notion 
of how this would happen other than we know that these are the 
people that must be involved. 
 
And so we’ll be meeting with them tomorrow to talk about how 
we can really use the opportunity of the centennial, not only to 
expand pride in our province but also to act as a springboard to 
the future by coalescing around a lot of the assets and resources 
that we already have and building on them sort of with a 
value-added concept of whether it’s tourism, making sure that 
people take advantage of the tourism opportunities, the heritage 
opportunities, the arts and cultural opportunities, the special 
events like the games that’ll be here in 2005, many of the 
communities that’ll be celebrating their 100th year celebrations. 
 
And I think we will be asking for some guidance from the 
communities where the money would best be spent — there 
obviously will be some money allocated to this — and where 
this money would best be spent, whether it’s in linking 
activities, whether it’s in promotional materials, whether it’s in 
small funds or support persons to help with organizing some of 
the work around the centennial. 
 
But I guess what I’m saying right now is we have received the 
report, the booklet you referred to from the advisory committee, 
and now we’re going to put that to the groups that would have 
to actually be involved in implementing and see what they think 
about how we should move forward. And then I want to move 
very quickly after that because every day that goes by we lose 
the opportunity to do things that involve a lot of coordination 
across the province. 
 
But it’s certainly my vision that every part of the province — 
north, east, west, south, central — would all be involved in 
shaping how we celebrate this centennial and working very 
much from a community organization perspective in doing it. 
 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to 
the minister. When you said about spare money and the fact that 
there just isn’t that much spare money kicking around, I was 
wondering how much money has been allocated to this 
celebration in 2005. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — At the moment in actual fact that very 
question is under discussion. So if you were to ask me maybe a 
few days from now I could give you the answer. But right now 
we’re in the process of discussing how we can set aside some 
funds over the next few years. But certainly what we’re 
targeting for, or looking at, is building towards sort of in the 
range of 1 million per year in the lead-up and towards it. 
 
Now there may need to be additional funds for infrastructure, 
some additional funds for special activities, but sort of the basic 
amount really required to keep moving forward on this would 
be in the ballpark of 1 million per year. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now with these 
funds, will communities that are planning celebrations within 
them, will they be able to apply for a grant or something like 
that to assist them with their celebrations, or how is that going 
to work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again through the lotteries fund and 
also through the Community Initiatives Fund, we have funding 
criteria that exists throughout the lottery system that exists 
again throughout the Community Initiatives Fund criteria. And 
what we’re hoping is that people will shape some of their 
criteria to match the objectives of the centennial, so that from 
year to year quite often in funding organization’s themes 
change, priorities change. 
 
And what we’d like to see is people embrace the centennial as a 
theme for that year or two years programming and funding. And 
so there will be some additional funds that there’s been no 
decision yet on how to allocate them. Right now like I say, 
we’re just having the first meeting tomorrow to bring the report 
that you’ve seen to the community groups that would be 
involved in actually implementing a centennial plan. 
 
And I think we would want to discuss with them how they think 
money should be allocated, and through whom it should be 
allocated, and what the best use of that money is. Because there 
won’t be a lot and people I think will have to make some 
decisions around whether they’d like to use some of that in 
promotional activities or whether they want to use it to hire 
organizers or to engage people to help them put on an event, 
whatever it is. 
 
And so I’m not going to predetermine what will happen. But we 
believe there’s a lot of resources out there already and what 
people need is a common focus to shape and direct the 
resources that will be spent during that lead-up year and the 
actual year of the centennial. 
 
Just to share a little personal philosophy with you — I don’t 
know if you care to share personal philosophy at 9:15 at night 
— but I don’t think it’s always necessary to add large amounts 
of money. I think it’s possible to transform what you’re doing 
to meet changing objectives. And so I really hope that people 
will use this as an opportunity to create a theme for their year’s 

organizational and spending priorities, rather than trying to 
layer it on top of something that’s already there. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I think in 
life we’ve learned that sometimes you can spend a pile of 
money and you don’t know where it’s gone. And on the other 
hand, you can spend very little and end up having a function 
that’s very, very successful. 
 
In this report it also says that it is recommended that the 
province initiate the development of a corporate theme and 
logo. Now I was wondering, like who is responsible to do this? 
Is there some sort of a facilitator or is . . . as the Provincial 
Secretary, do you appoint a panel or a committee or someone to 
administer this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — During the early phase of the 
discussions, people were asked to submit, both publicly and 
firms that are involved in this kind of work were asked to 
submit ideas. And so what we’ll do is we’ll bring all the work 
that was done there forward to the groups that we’re meeting 
with tomorrow, once they have their deliberations. 
 
And again, I’d like to move very quickly to choose that theme 
and logo. But a lot of the groundwork has already been done in 
terms of the ideas have been brought forward and they’re on 
hand for people to look at them and see which ones they think 
best reflect what kind of a mood we want to create around the 
centennial. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In 
recommendation no. 4 it says that to involve and assist 
Saskatchewan communities. How involved does the 
government want to be in this? Is it involvement money-wise or 
is it a criteria that communities are going to have to follow in 
order to qualify for grants? Is there certain rules and regulations 
that they have to abide by in order to qualify for some money? 
Could you just expand on that please? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess I’ll start on the assumption that 
there will be money available. I see the community 
organizations being very involved in constructing, helping 
construct the criteria. I don’t see myself being involved in those 
specific funding decisions. I see the organizations to whom we 
now have delegated some of that authority, whether it’s the 
lotteries, the Sask Sport, the Sask Parks, the culture . . . Sask 
Culture, etc., the multicultural councils. These folks already 
have a structure in place. 
 
So once we agree to some criteria that we’re comfortable with, 
that they think will work, that will make the best use of the 
resources, then I suspect that the actual delivery of monies 
won’t come directly from government; it’ll come through the 
bodies that make decisions about who gets money in the 
community. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you. I see in recommendation no. 5, it’s 
also recommended that the province encourage and assist, 
where possible, Saskatchewan-based culture, arts, sports and 
recreation organizations and groups to bring special events and 
conferences to Saskatchewan during the centennial year. Could 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

you tell us what major, major projects that your department 
hopes to develop for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s a few ways that we’ve gotten 
ourselves in the loop on that. Now one of the reasons why the 
centennial activity was transferred to Culture, Youth and 
Recreation was because of our close involvement in compatible 
activities. 
 
And in order to further that, both myself . . . I’ve become a 
member of the bid committee for Regina, whose whole purpose 
is to look at how we attract conferences and events to the city 
and the province. We’ve also hooked up with the bid committee 
from Saskatoon that does similar things. Of course, as you 
know, they’re bidding for the University Games right now. 
 
As well, the deputy of our department is working closely with 
Tourism Saskatchewan, with Tourism Regina. So really it’s 
those working relationships that are going to provide the 
foundation for attracting the conferences, attracting the 
activities. And we already have a fair lineup for that summer of 
activities that are happening in the province that are of a 
national flavour. And as this gets mobilized and people know 
that’s one of the objectives then all of the organizations can be 
involved. 
 
For example, there is an Aboriginal art co-op in Regina and 
they’re having a large Aboriginal artists gathering of people 
from across Canada. So that’s the kind of event that would fit in 
very well. 
 
And people have suggested perhaps a youth festival would be a 
good idea if we could . . . the federal government is interested 
in working together with us on this, and if we can find things 
that bring together federal and provincial objectives. Alberta is 
celebrating at the same time; if we could find ways to find some 
collaborative efforts between Alberta and Saskatchewan. These 
are all ideas that are in the mix right now. 
 
But I’m feeling the pressure myself to get to a decision point on 
some of these things fairly quickly because there’s been about 
three years of consultation and chat and what not. And I think 
it’s really time to decide on the theme, decide on the logo, and 
move forward. But I think I would be a very foolhardy minister 
if I did this without the involvement of the groups whose 
energies, volunteers, and activities will be needed to make it 
happen. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think it’s very 
important if we can get like a few drawing cards to bring people 
from other provinces here. And I mean it would certainly help 
our economy too to get some out-of-province people here 
spending money. 
 
You had mentioned that working together with the feds. And 
I’m just wondering are they willing to put any money in to help 
us financially or is it just basically as far as program 
coordination or something like that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The dance of funding that goes on 
between provincial and federal governments is always an 
ongoing negotiation. But I think if we’re able, along with 
Alberta, to come up with the right ideas the federal government 

will I think be looking at something that reflects the province’s 
relationship to Canada, and will be mutually reinforcing of our 
respective responsibilities. So active discussions are taking 
place. No decisions are made yet. But certainly they’ve 
indicated an interest, and a few meetings have been held at the 
officials’ level. Nobody has signed a cheque yet, but we believe 
that if we work together and come up with the right ideas . . . I 
mean, I think there’s some of the ideas in that booklet there. 
And I don’t know if they’re the right ideas, but someone has 
suggested maybe a border park between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan that you put a little extra effort into having it be a 
gateway between the two provinces. 
 
You know, who knows what the ideas will be ultimately but 
people are certainly starting to think about them and work on 
ideas that would be acceptable and that would leave a lasting 
legacy. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I see in here also 
that it is recommended that the province encourage and support 
the development of a significant centennial legacy project. And 
I was just wondering what you had in mind for this — 
something that is to be of national and international 
significance. I was wondering what you were leaning towards 
in that direction and what the approximate cost would be of 
something like that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well you know it’s interesting. The 
legacies quite often of events or centennial celebrations are 
quite often tangibles, like infrastructure. But you know, I think 
it’s worth thinking about intangibles too. And they mention one 
or two in the booklet that are the building of economic 
relationships, the . . . increasing people’s involvement in 
community, people’s physical well-being. There’s many kinds 
of legacies we can think about as we use the opportunity of the 
centennial to set a goal for ourselves. 
 
And there’s no question that infrastructure is always a popular 
one. But I think we can have some tourism legacies out of this. I 
think we can have some training legacies out of this. I think we 
can use it as an opportunity to organize some of the assets we 
have out there and add more value to what we’re getting from 
those investments. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — So there’s . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 
members . . . Order. Order. I’d ask the members that are not 
involved in the question and answer period to please keep their 
conversations to a reasonable level. It’s getting a little difficult 
to hear — to hear the members who are supposed to be 
answering and asking questions. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam 
Minister. I guess I was thinking of something more visible, not 
. . . I was just wondering if there was some sort of . . . 
something tangible that we’re going to see as far as something 
that we can see to commemorate our 100th birthday? Was there 
. . . I don’t even know what I could suggest, but if you had 
anything in mind for how we were going to . . . some 
monument or something that would show that we were . . . 
something that, you know, our children and our grandchildren 
could see as far as . . . that we’re 100 years old. 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think there may be a variety of things. 
Some of it would be works of art, whether they’re murals or 
statues or monuments. Some of it may be signage on historic 
properties that will increase the heritage information that people 
have through that kind of vehicle. We’ve got a bunch of sort of 
outdated and incomplete historic monuments around the 
province that could use some work. 
 
Certainly we have had the Centenary Fund over the last few 
years that’s been directed to capital in five areas: health, 
education, municipal infrastructure, arts and culture. And so we 
have already had some of that kind of work going on with that 
nice little surplus we had the budget before which enabled us to 
put the Centenary Fund together so people could do some of the 
infrastructure work that they wanted to do. 
 
And I do think there will be some infrastructure resources 
allocated in addition to the Centenary Fund that’s already been 
allocated. But at this point, I don’t want to pre-empt what the 
communities will say about that because I think we have two 
issues in the province. One is preserving what we already have 
and the other one is adding new stuff. And you don’t want to let 
your stuff that you’ve already established crumble because 
you’re busy adding new stuff all the time. You also want to 
make sure that the stuff that’s already there is well looked after, 
and some of that would be heritage sites that need . . . there 
would be the possibility of adding some new heritage sites, of 
refurbishing some of the things that are a little bit down at the 
heels. 
 
So I think this is a discussion again we’d want to undertake 
with the people who do that work because there is a very 
extensive heritage community in the province that looks after 
all the various little museums and everything we see all over the 
place, the very excellent work that’s been done to preserve 
villages that have been assembled of historic buildings, etc. And 
we want to make sure that those things remain viable and that 
we don’t sacrifice them necessarily to something new. So we’ll 
work our way through that with the organizations that deal with 
heritage, that deal with municipal infrastructure. 
 
But again, you know I’m a little more optimistic — as probably 
you are — since the rain’s been falling that we’ll see a little bit 
of improvement in available cash. But certainly infrastructure 
will always be a priority for these kinds of legacy projects. And 
we’d certainly welcome your ideas on what you think those 
priorities should be. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Yes, the rain usually does cheer everyone up, 
but we’ve had about 10 inches in the last week so . . . But again 
you hate to turn the tap off because it may not get started again. 
 
I was glad you brought up about refurbishing existing facilities 
and things like that because I do see and hear that it is a 
recommendation that the province provide communities with 
significant opportunities to construct new facilities or refurbish 
existing facilities. And it seems a little like right now a lot of 
the communities are struggling to keep their existing buildings 
open with the utility costs and things like that. And I’m just 
wondering what your thoughts are on that and how much input 
the government will have on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again I’m going to rely very much on 

the advice of the folks that do this kind of work all the time, and 
that is going to require that discussions with the community that 
I’m referring to will . . . (inaudible) . . . be taking place 
tomorrow and subsequently. Because I wouldn’t want to 
presume to know how people feel we should priorize capital out 
in the communities around the province. I would prefer to get 
direction from them in how that should be done. 
 
And once we have an idea of priorities we may be able to get 
innovative about how we cost share with the federal 
government on some of these things, how our Crowns might 
participate in some of that activity, and how small and 
medium-size businesses in the province may be able to 
participate. 
 
But first of all we need to have a clear idea of what priorities 
people have in the communities. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and to 
your officials, welcome. I have a couple of questions on the 
protocol office and I understand or I realize there’s $454,000 a 
year is spent on that office and I know every year there’s 
probably a different number of dignitaries come and a different 
number of functions, so I guess it’s more of an estimate. But 
does there appear to be the same number of opportunities to 
have visiting dignitaries come? 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Maybe I’ll just start with a quick 
description of the overview of the work the protocol office 
does. The protocol office plans, organizes, and supervises visits 
of foreign diplomats, heads of state, and foreign delegations. 
They oversee state ceremonial and symbols, organize special 
events and anniversaries, and provide protocol consulting 
services and policy and organization of provincial honours and 
awards programs, and as well responsible for the Legislative 
building art collection and government gift policy. 
 
And I’ll just now talk about the protocol activities. It looks like 
ambassadorial visits have stayed roughly the same over the 
years at about eight to eleven per year. Consular, corps, and 
other diplomats, that seems to have been relatively constant at 
around eight. Canadian diplomats, that’s a skinnier group there 
at about one in most of the years. Delegations and groups runs 
between six and ten per year. Heads of state, royal visits, that’s 
run around one or two per year. Individuals, around three per 
year. 
 
Official functions, state occasions, and events is around the . . . 
I’ll just average it out at ten here, it ranges from eight to eleven. 
Seminars and consulting, about one per year. And then there’s 
request for flags, there’s loans, there’s the gift work that’s done 
for protocol. 
 
There’s about forty significant visits and function events that 
require significant activity by the office to be involved in 
organizing and implementing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The visit from 
Prince Charles went off very smoothly as far as most of us 
understand and could see, and I’m sure it was something that 
most people will consider memorable. Can you give us an idea 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

of what the cost was? And was all the cost borne by the 
province or was there some costs that were actually covered by 
security federally or by his own staff with him? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The royal visit was cost-shared with the 
federal government and for the Prince of Wales the event came 
in, Mr. Jackson points out, under budget. Our portion was 
$225,000 which included the booklet that was produced. And 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), it’s part of their 
regular duties to attend to security on these types of visits so 
those services were provided by the RCMP and were not billed 
to us. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I would expect that $225,000 
being just about half of your total budget is probably higher 
than most of the other visits, so does this mean that there is 
going to be . . . you’ll go over budget this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m going to have to apologize because 
I was listening to a correction on the previous answer. 
 
In a bit of discussion here, it was recollected to be 130,000. And 
if you would be so kind as to repeat your question then I’ll 
attempt another answer there. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Before when you 
had indicated it was going to be $225,000, that was nearly half 
the budget of the Protocol department so now it’s about a 
quarter of it. And I would still think it would probably be more 
money than one visit from another group of people. So is this 
meaning that this area of your office will be over budget this 
year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You show an instinct for budgets here 
because you’re right. We were over budget last year with that 
visit but we don’t anticipate expenditure at that level this year. 
Obviously a royal visit is an exceptional kind of circumstance 
and costs more, so that would be accurate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress on the Provincial Secretary and that 
we move to Saskatchewan . . . SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation). 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 
 
Subvote (SP01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Tonight I am joined by the president of SPMC, Ray 
Clayton, who is seated to my right. Next to him is Paul 
Radigan, the director of financial services. To my left is Garth 
Rusconi, who is the vice-president of accommodation services. 
Behind me is Phil Lambert, the vice-president and chief 
information officer. And behind Ray is Debbie Koshman, the 
vice-president of corporate services. Behind the bar tonight we 
have Rob Madden, who is the director of air services. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Welcome to the officials this evening and to the minister. I 
guess my first question quite simple is the globals, Mr. 
Minister. Would the globals be available and ready for SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m told that the 
globals are in their near final phase and it will be ready in due 
course. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
my first set of questions is going to be dealing with the aircraft 
and airplanes. And I guess the very first question that I’d like to 
ask is how many aircraft that we have that are government . . . 
registered to the government, the numbers? And I would 
actually like a breakdown between the exec air and the water 
bomber fleet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I would like to thank the member for 
the question. I should start by saying that the water bombers are 
actually in the Department of Environment, so they are not 
under SPMC. There are one, two, three, four aircraft which are 
registered for use by the executive air service and four that are 
registered for use by air ambulance. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Last year, 
I believe it was last year, maybe it was bought the previous 
year, was a new aircraft to replace I think it was a Cheyenne — 
you can correct me if I’m wrong on this — but it was to replace 
an aircraft. 
 
And I’d like to know the status of the aircraft that the new 
Beech, I believe it was, was going to replace, and where that 
aircraft is or if it’s been disposed of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the Cheyenne, the one 
Cheyenne, has been taken out of service and a new King Air 
200 was brought in to service this year. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you give 
me the status of the Cheyenne? You say it’s taken out of 
service, but to my knowledge it is still . . . has been operating. Is 
it currently not operating now, and has it been sold, or what is 
the disposal, projected disposal of the aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The Cheyenne is not in service. We are 
going to retain it though to use it for parts to deal with the other 
Cheyenne’s that we do still have in service. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, out of the four for exec 
and four air ambulance, that does not include that particular 
Cheyenne; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — It does include that Cheyenne as it is 
still registered with us, but it is not in service. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We now know 
that the government has leased a new aircraft. I might have a 
couple of questions about the lease. But the understanding was, 
was the new King Air — or it wasn’t a brand new one — was to 
replace another, I believe, Cheyenne. If that is correct, what is 
the status of the Cheyenne it was to replace? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this is the Cheyenne I 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

 

was speaking of earlier, that we’ve taken out of service. This 
leased aircraft, this King Air 200, it will be taking the place of 
that. So we will have effectively the King Air 350 in service, 
the King Air 200 in service, and we will have a different 
Cheyenne which will be used for back-up. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — If I understand correctly, Mr. Minister, 
last year we got a King Air to replace a Cheyenne, this year we 
got a King Air to replace a Cheyenne, but only one has left 
service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think I have a better understanding as 
to what the member has asked me. The King Air 200 that was 
brought into service last year was for air ambulance’s fleet. And 
so these two fleets are kept separate. The air ambulance one, 
with the four aircraft in it. We have in the exec air service four 
registered aircraft, although only three are in use. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, with the leased aircraft, the 
King Air 200, I understand it’s leased from CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan); is that correct? It 
was purchased through a growth fund and leased to CIC and the 
government is leasing it from CIC; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That is not correct. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: —Can the minister tell us what is correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The aircraft is leased from Cajon 
Leasing. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, can the minister 
explain the status of the lease with respect to spares? And I 
specifically am interested in the leasing arrangement whereby if 
an engine is damaged or has to be replaced, does that come 
under the general cost of the lease or is that absorbed by the 
government through the leasing arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We are responsible for the 
maintenance costs. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now if the 
government is responsible for maintenance costs, can the 
minister explain if we have life cycle spares somehow arranged 
for this aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, although this is a 
used aircraft there is still warranty on the engines. I’m told that 
they have a 2,500-hour warranty on them and there are 
approximately 1,200 hours of usage. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, thank you. I just used the engines 
as an example. There’s an awful lot of other components to the 
aircraft other than engines. My question was the life cycle 
spares. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That’s the extent of it. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I didn’t hear the 
answer. I don’t know what the minister said. 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There’s no provision outside of the 
engines. We are responsible for the maintenance otherwise. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s 
just another example on the leasing program, because I’m very 
familiar with the cost of life cycle spares and if it’s not arranged 
in a leasing program or a buy-out program it gets extremely 
expensive when parts have to be retooled for an aircraft. It’s 
definitely a consideration that should be looked at in the buying, 
purchase or leasing of an aircraft, and it’s quite possibly going 
to stick the taxpayers with a whole pile of money in the future if 
there’s a problem with such things as the propellers or other 
than the engines of the aircraft. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to ask . . . and it’s going to be a fairly 
difficult question. I don’t know if you’d have the answer 
available with your officials tonight, but I would like to, I’d like 
to find out what the exec air cost per mile is with an exact 
breakdown as to what the costs includes. For an example, does 
it include hangarage? Is hangarage based in the cost? And I 
think I’ll just leave it with that for a moment because I have 
some follow ones to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the cost per 
mile is $4.45. That includes the following costs in terms of 
direct costs: pilot salary and benefits; engineer salary and 
benefits; training, licences and insurance; various miscellaneous 
items as well as variable expenses like fuel and oil, materials 
and parts, landing fees, travel and sustenance, in-flight 
expenses, pilots’ overtime, and engineers’ overtime. There is an 
additional allocated administrative maintenance cost which is 
factored in. 
 
That does not include the hangarage because the buildings are 
already depreciated and as such there is no cost. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and may I 
have a copy of that, if you would please. And also I understand 
that if hangarage costs are not included it basically gives an 
unfair cost per mile, because if somebody was to start up a 
company they definitely have to pay hangarage costs. Whether 
the cost is paid for the hangar already or not it still needs to be 
included in a cost per mile because it is. 
 
And could you also, if hangarage is not a cost, how about 
utilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, utilities are 
included in this cost. I want to say in terms of the hangarage 
though, if the hangar’s already been depreciated, that there 
would be no cost, be that for, in this particular case SPMC’s 
operations, or that of a private company. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Minister, if the hangar is not 
costing anything, what about the opportunity cost? If it wasn’t 
being used by the airplanes, could it be rented out? How much 
would it be rented out for? So there is a cost. Because if it’s for 
nothing, why can’t I go use it for nothing, for an example, and 
it’s not. So there has to be a cost factored into it because at 
some point it could be . . . I mean it could be rented if it was not 
used by SPMC for the aircraft that we have. So just saying it’s 
paid for, doesn’t cost anything, is not a fair assessment of what 
it costs per mile to run the whole fleet. 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

So I think the aircraft . . . if you did not have the aircraft there, 
you’d be renting out the space or selling the hangar. And I don’t 
believe you could stand there or sit there and say that the hangar 
is worth nothing. So therefore there has to be a cost factor 
figured in when you’re looking at a cost per mile. 
 
But I’ll give you another additional one that I would like an 
answer on. Can you confirm that the government does not pay 
the tax on aircraft fuel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we would be 
exempt on the GST (goods and services tax) but we would pay 
the PST (provincial sales tax) on fuel. 
 
And just for the record, I think that this argument about the 
hangarage and what the depreciation cost is, once a building is 
depreciated, it’s depreciated. You wouldn’t take into account 
opportunity cost. You wouldn’t double the count for this. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I would beg to differ with that. But 
back to the fuel costs, if you’re paying . . . you’re not paying the 
PST, but you’re paying the GST, is that what you had said? The 
other way around? And what is the cost per litre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The cost per litre is 62 cents. We have 
undertaken a tender to acquire it and it does vary in terms of 
cost. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And just back 
to the hangarage one: if you’re suggesting that it doesn’t have 
any influence at all, it’s paid off, does that mean that SPMC 
does not charge rent for any other building that’s paid off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think I went through this last time we 
appeared in estimates. We do charge the operating costs as rent. 
And so this is the way that the cost is fixed, in terms of 
SPMC-owned property. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, is the total cost of the air 
fleet subsidized by other departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I don’t completely understand the 
question, but as I understand it, the answer would be no, there is 
no subsidy from other departments. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I will pursue 
that one at a later time. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give the budget and number of flying 
hours flown for last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I do not have the breakdown by hour, 
but I can tell the member last year in 2001-2002 the service 
flew 361,408 miles. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — The cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — And cost was $1.654 million. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, I have a couple of 
questions on the air ambulance operation now. And from the 
information you’ve given me, we have two different types of air 
ambulance; I believe the King Air series and I’m not sure about 

the other. You’ve listed four as air ambulance and I was under 
the impression that there was two. 
 
So I guess the first question would be the aircraft that are under 
the air ambulance configuration, what four would be . . . I think 
you said the 350 and the 200, but I’m not sure if those are the 
ones you gave me. Can you give me the aircraft that are actually 
the air ambulance aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there are two 
Cheyenne and two King Air 200 models. We have been 
attempting to move into a standardized fleet with these King 
Air 200s as they seem to be well suited for our needs, and 
moving out of the Cheyennes. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, can you give me the 
runway requirements for the King Airs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Roughly 2,500 feet. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — And, Mr. Minister, there is a lot of 
variables in this obviously. One of the reasons for this question, 
I’m led to understand that with the King Airs that there’s an 
awful lot of smaller fields that have been taken out of the 
opportunity for King Airs to land when they’re in a fully-loaded 
condition, i.e., picking up a passenger or a patient with a full 
load. 
 
Can you confirm that 2,500 feet is the operable runway length 
for fully loaded aircraft in Saskatchewan? 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes I can, obviously depending on 
temperature, altitude, and the other variables. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another 
question that I have that was brought to my attention was the 
scheduling for air ambulances. And we know people don’t get 
sick at between 8 to 5, but I understand that the schedule for 
personnel is based on Monday to Friday at 8 to 5. Could you 
confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That’s not accurate. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And just while 
I’m on . . . discussing about personnel, can you confirm that one 
pilot is all that is required for any of the exec air flights, and 
including air ambulance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Legally that is the requirement. 
Obviously it’s a minimum requirement. On the 350 we do often 
use two pilots. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Is it correct, Mr. Minister, that when the 
government is going to charter, the rare occasions that it may 
charter outside, that the government has put a restriction that 
any charter company must have two pilots on the aircraft if 
they’re going to charter outside of exec air? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That is inaccurate. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll confirm 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

 

my source on that because that’s the information that I have 
been given. And so we’ll follow that one up for sure. 
 
And can you tell me how many AMEs (aircraft maintenance 
engineer) that we have in exec air per aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There are three in Saskatoon and three 
in Regina. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — And confirm that’s three per aircraft in 
Saskatoon and three per . . . two per aircraft in Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — . . . six in total. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Again my question, Mr. Minister, was: 
how many AMEs per aircraft? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The answer is one. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, my next question is: you 
may not have this figure right at your fingertips, but I’m 
interested in how many maintenance hours are required per 
flight hour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — For the Cheyennes we are averaging 
about two hours of maintenance per flight hour, but for the new 
King Air 200s we’re at about three-quarters of an hour. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
would like, if I could get from you, an organizational chart of 
your exec flight, if you could get a copy of that to me. I 
wouldn’t expect that you would have it here this evening, but if 
you could get a copy of your organizational chart for the exec 
flight I would appreciate it. 
 
And that brings to my next question, and I understand it’s in the 
organization of . . . operations manager. And my question . . . 
my question that was put to me by an individual is: does the 
operations manager retain his or her ATR (Airline Transport 
Rating)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — And my final questions on this part for 
now is the . . . we discussed hangarage in Regina, but hangarage 
in Saskatoon and office spaces in Saskatoon. And it is my 
understanding, and correct me if I’m wrong, that it’s not an 
SPMC facility in Saskatoon. So if it’s not an SPMC facility and 
if it’s not already paid for, and all of the stuff that you talked 
about earlier on, how much does it cost for hangarage space and 
offices in Saskatoon? And in fact is there a separate dispatcher 
for Saskatoon operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The cost of the lease in Saskatoon is 
135,000 a year, and the dispatch is undertaken by a Saskatoon 
ambulance company called MD Ambulance. 
 
I should also, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Chairman, send over to 
the member the globals that he had asked for earlier. I guess 
they’d been provided to your House Leader last week, but I 
could provide you with a copy now. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If my 

colleague had them, he didn’t let us know; so we have a copy 
for sure now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to switch . . . it’s going to be just one 
question away from the aircraft side of it and it’s going to the 
sound stage, and the way I’m looking at what’s happening. And 
I’ve got a number of questions that I have with respect to the 
sound stage. 
 
But the way I understand the set-up is part of the sound stage 
operation comes under SPMC, part of the sound stage operation 
comes under Youth, Culture, Recreation, part of it comes under 
CIC. 
 
And my question for you is . . . for the minister is, is what part 
of the sound stage operation comes under SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The facility management is under 
SPMC. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I’ll have a 
number of questions, but I know my colleague would like in 
now as the evening is going on. But I take it, from facility 
management would include all of the leasing, all of the 
contractual work, if we have contracts signed and that all comes 
under SPMC. I’d just like that confirmed because I know in 
previous estimates it’s always well that’s not my department it’s 
somebody else’s. And so I want to get it straight what comes 
under your department before I start asking the questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Contracts related to the base operation 
of the building are SPMC; contracts around production would 
be Sask Film which would be best addressed to the Minister of 
Culture and Youth. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, to Mr. Minister 
and your officials. 
 
I have a number of questions, Mr. Minister, and I’m going to 
start with probably the question that most people are wondering 
is what is the total value of the assets that are owned by SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — According to the annual report the real 
estate is valued at $347 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, what is owing against it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This year’s debt is about five and a 
half million dollars. 
 
Ms. Draude: — This year’s debt, meaning total debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes, total long-term debt. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I would . . . The values that 
we’re talking about and just listening to my colleague from 
Wood River, you had indicated that the hanger really doesn’t 
have any value because it’s been depreciated. How many other 
buildings or assets do we have that are totally depreciated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — We don’t have that tonight but we can 
endeavour to provide you with that. 
 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 2002 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, from the information that you 
had given us from globals, you indicated there’s 1,071 
employees or personnel under SPMC. And when I go through 
the information I see that’s there over 300 employees actually 
. . . a turnover of 300 employees last year. That’s practically 
one-third of your staff. 
 
If this was a business and you’d lost one-third of your staff 
every year you’d be in big trouble. Can you tell me why you 
feel that this is . . . (inaudible) . . . rate of turnover of people 
working your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — A large number of those are casual 
employees, so as they find permanent full-time work they will 
often leave SPMC and take that. Certainly in terms of the type 
of personnel we’re dealing with it would be largely cleaning 
staff. We may not see that here in the legislative building, it’s a 
very stable group of employees here in terms of . . . there’s very 
little turnover. But that’s not the case in other buildings. So that 
would be why the number would be quite large. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when I was looking through the 
list of people that had actually left your department I see that 
there was three of them were actually given a severance 
package and a fairly substantial severance package. One was 
152,000, was 103,000, and one was 51,000. Can you tell me 
why these three people were given that type of severance? 
 
(22:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — These three employees that the 
member opposite mentions were laid off and the packages, the 
severance packages, were negotiated within a common industry 
practice. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, up to the budget day, March 26, 
the staff was employed by SPMC and now I understand they’re 
employed by the Department of Corrections and Public Safety. 
Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In terms of my staff, as the Minister of 
Corrections and Public Safety, it is the lead agency and takes 
responsibility for the minister’s office. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, then before, when there was 
a minister just in charge of SPMC, that’s why he was . . . they 
were employed directly by that department; is that correct? So 
they were employed directly by that department when there was 
a minister just in charge of SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That’s correct. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, was there any travel out of 
province by any of your staff last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Yes, there was out-of-province travel 
undertaken by departmental staff last year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pardon me, I can’t hear you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There was out-of-province travel 
undertaken by departmental staff last year. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me how many dollars were 
involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — $124,200. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, a few minutes ago I asked you 
what the total debt was for SPMC and you’d indicated it was 
$5.5 million. Coincidentally, the member from Wood River 
tells me that’s the exact amount of money that was going to be 
borrowed for the sound stage. Is this the only money that is 
owed by SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — That’s correct. And I want to say, 
while I have the opportunity, that I appreciate the support that 
that particular member has shown for the sound stage in terms 
of her call last year for us to construct it. And I think it has 
proven to be a very sound decision. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I know from written questions 
that grants in lieu of taxes is something that SPMC is involved 
in. Can you tell me how much money is paid for grants in lieu 
of taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — SPMC does not make the payments to 
the municipalities. Those payments are moved through the 
Department of Government Relations. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, does SPMC pay taxes to any 
group in the province anywhere, to cities, or any of the villages, 
towns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question 
for the minister relates to the Legislative Building. There has 
been a fair amount of construction and operating going on in 
this building over the last three or four years, five years. There 
was a five-year program put in place. 
 
One of the areas of the Legislative Building that has missed out 
on the improvements has been the fourth floor. I know that 
there has been some proposals put forward for that space to be 
utilized for different opportunities. I’m wondering what SPMC 
is doing with the fourth floor right now, what kind of dollars are 
being spent on that area, and what is the long-term proposals 
that SPMC has for that fourth floor space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think, as the member knows, there 
have been various proposals made as to what we might want to 
use the fourth floor for. At this point there are no plans to 
develop it because the costs are deemed to be too expensive. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Is there any work happening up there on 
the fourth floor? I know that there was talk of taking the 
elevators up to the fourth floor because there was work being 
done on the elevators in the building; also of putting in a proper 
staircase going up to that area. As well as has any work been 
done up in that area dealing with the fire prevention, the 
sprinkler systems, and with surveillance of any possible fires, 
any fire detector equipment going into that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m not aware of any work being done 
on the fire suppression unit there, and there is no work planned 



June 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

 

at this point to take the elevators up or fix the stairwell. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Minister, did you say that the fire 
suppression and surveillance is up in that area or not? The 
minister shakes his head — I could hear it from here. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would we put fire suppression and detection 
throughout this building and yet leave a portion of the building 
unprotected? Surely if we’re going to protect the entire building 
with fire suppression and detection, you would want to protect 
the entire building, because if a fire starts in one area it can 
spread to the rest. 
 
And if it’s in an area where it has an opportunity to grow 
beyond the point where our fire suppression sprinklers would 
handle that situation, I think it would be important to have that 
suppression in that area, also to have detection in that area so 
that fire couldn’t spread beyond that point and could be dealt 
with in that very limited space. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’m advised by the officials that they 
believe there’s a low fire risk there as most of the hot air seems 
to come from this room, so I think we’re relatively safe on that. 
This room is certainly well looked after. So I appreciate the 
question. We can look into the question of the fire suppression. 
 
And at this point I would move that we rise, report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:27. 
 
 
 


