















































Hansard: May 08, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1253 
 May 8, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I consider it a 
privilege to present a petition on behalf of a number of 
individuals that are responsible for building this province. And I 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this is signed by the good people from Warman and from 
Hepburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Wiseton, Elrose, and Rosetown in the Rosetown-Biggar 
constituency. 
 
And I’m very pleased to present it on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to stand and present a petition from people who are 
concerned about long-term care fee increases: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions are from Saskatoon, 
Annaheim, and Muenster. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise this afternoon on 
behalf of citizens who continue to be concerned about 
long-term care rates. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 

Signatures on the petition this afternoon are from Saskatoon and 
from Melfort. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to do with the overfishing with nets at the Lake of the Prairies. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Stockholm, Yorkton, Churchbridge, and Whitewood. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition by concerned 
citizens who are concerned on the long-term care fees. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for the 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from North Battleford, 
Battleford, and Denzil. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with fee increases for 
long-term care services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Yorkton, Foam Lake, and Jedburgh. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 
present a petition that is really quite timely. It has to do with the 
crop insurance rate increases that were introduced by the 
government this year. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers from the 
communities of Gull Lake and Webb. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens who are 
deeply concerned about the long-term home care fee increases. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by people from my constituency, namely 
Estevan and Midale. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents who are concerned about the long-term 
care fees. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Big 
Beaver. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens concerned about fee increases. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Loreburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I have 
a petition from people in Saskatchewan who are concerned that 
the provincial government is using crop insurance to repay a 
loan that they took out from the federal government last year. 
And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 

the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from the good people 
of Paddockwood. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would also like 
to present a petition from citizens concerned about the changes 
to the crop insurance program. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Mayfair, Hafford, Spiritwood, 
and Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today with citizens concerned about the 
deplorable state of Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by citizens from 
Watrous, Viscount, Regina, and Simpson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned citizens. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate reasonable annual deductible 
amounts for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
community of Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition from citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned with Besnard Lake. And the petition 
reads as follows: 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
to bring about a resolution to the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that the natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people of the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Rosetown, Leask, Prince Albert, Hafford, and Shell 
Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province concerned about the 
long-term fee increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the 
community of Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
with a petition from citizens concerned about the long-term 
care fees. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Admiral and Shaunavon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper number nos. 8, 17, 18, 24, 31, and 32. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what criteria is used to calculate 
the actual cost to providing housing and care for a nursing 
home resident; and how is this criteria used to calculate the 
actual cost per resident? 
 

I also have two others questions directed: 
 

To the Minister of Health: how does the government collect 
monthly nursing home fees from residents; and also what 
factors are considered when determining the percentage of 
income nursing residents are charged? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: has there been or will there be 
any increase in pension benefits in the current year for 
those retired civil servants under the defined benefits old 
plan? 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a written 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what recommendations were 
made by the Saskatchewan occupational health and safety 
following the May 25, 2001 accident at Allan potash mine; 
and on what date were these recommendations 
implemented? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many agriculture 
producers lease Crown land; and further to that, how many 
of those producers are cattle producers? 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for SPMC: can the minister 
please provide the complete details of expenses incurred to 
date in the construction of the new Department of 
Highways facility located at Morse; as well, what further 
expenses does the department expect to incur related to the 
completion of this facility; and how this facility is being 
financed by Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation? Further to that, can the minister please 
provide the cost per year that will be charged to the 
Department of Highways? 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: what are the qualifications required 
for employment with the Government of Saskatchewan as a 
natural gas or plumber inspector in Saskatchewan? Number 
two, how many plumbing and natural gas inspectors are 
employed in Saskatchewan? And the third question, how 
many positions are currently vacant? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today I would like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Legislative Assembly a very fine group of 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

students from Thomson School in Regina. I’ve been to this 
school many times over the years and they have great Christmas 
concerts, amongst other things. 
 
But as you can see, it’s a very diverse school and these students 
have really — and their teachers and their parents have really 
learned how to make the most out of diversity and to celebrate 
it and to help it work for them in their school. And I just want to 
say that this is a terrific school, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The teachers today are Heather Walton and Michael Lamb 
accompanying the students. And I just want everyone in the 
legislature to help me congratulate these young people and their 
teachers for having such a great school. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
you, it’s a pleasure to introduce to members of the Assembly, 
sitting in your gallery, a young man named Justin Wall. I am 
proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that he is my nephew. 
 
He graduated a year ago and has spent a year working in Swift 
Current but plans to in the fall attend Briercrest Bible College in 
Caronport. And he’s interested in politics and come to view the 
proceedings of the Assembly. So I’d just ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming Justin to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the House, a group of 15 adult students from the Dumont 
Technical Institute in Regina here. And they’re seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. And they’re accompanied here today by 
their teacher, Nicole Amiotte. And the group has already had a 
tour of the legislature and now they’re going to take in the 
proceedings of the House. 
 
And I just hope the group enjoyed their time spent in their 
legislature; and I ask all members to offer them a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the 
legislature, Dr. Steve West, in your gallery. Dr. West, some 
might remember, is the . . . most recently was the member for 
the Alberta Lloydminster constituency, and most recently, 
among other ministries in Alberta, the ministry of the treasury. 
 
Dr. West is here today to see how question period should be 
carried on in a very civil way. He’s been through many of these 
in the Alberta legislature. Please welcome Dr. West to our 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Lloydminster in welcoming Dr. West. 
 
Dr. West and I had the pleasure — at least it was a pleasure for 

me, and I hope it was for him — of working together on many 
issues at the provincial-federal-territorial level, and I always 
found him to be most pleasant and co-operative to work with. 
And I had the pleasure this morning of meeting . . . renewing 
acquaintances with Dr. West. And he’s working in the private 
sector now and I know we all wish him well in his new role. 
 
And I also join in welcoming Dr. West to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the Assembly a guest in the east gallery, Mr. Clay 
Reich. 
 
Clay Reich is the current president of the Saskatchewan Party. 
He works on a voluntary basis but he is invaluable to the party. 
He’s been travelling throughout Saskatchewan, and one of the 
reasons that the Saskatchewan Party is faring so well is because 
of the fine work of Clay Reich. 
 
Would you please welcome to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join the 
member from Regina Northeast, of course, to welcome Nicole 
Amiotte and Dumont Technical Institute members at your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. Of course, in Cree I would like to say, Ta 
wow, which means welcome. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, I used to be the former head of 
Gabriel Dumont Institute, and Dumont Technical Institute was a 
very important development in this province. And it is 
important to recognize that it’s not only for the 
self-determination of individuals to create a strong education in 
this province but I think I’m very, very proud of each and every 
one of these students here. 
 
I would like to as well address them in Cree as well. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Welcome them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join with 
members opposite in welcoming the students from the Dumont 
Institute here today. I hope that they have an informative visit to 
the Legislative Assembly and I would like . . . ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming them again. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I want to introduce a friend of mine. 
 
And I’ve got up in this Assembly and I’ve done introductions in 
French and in Spanish and in Cree and sometimes English, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

 

But I want to introduce a friend of mine who ran against me in 
1995 and he promised he’d vote for me this time if I done the 
introduction in Dene. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got notes which I’m 
following. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Ms. Draude — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
Mental Health Week across Canada and this year’s theme is 
Emerging Into Light, Sharing Our Stories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, statistics show that one in every five Canadians 
will be affected by mental illness at some time in their lives. 
More than 10 per cent of the adult population will have a 
depressive disorder. Even more troubling are the statistics 
concerning our children. Nearly 20 per cent of children and 
youth in Canada have a diagnosable psychiatric disorder, yet 
only one out of five of these children will receive help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 16 per cent of health care expenditures can be 
linked to psychiatric disorders. Among those aged 20 to 44, 
mental illness is the second leading cause of hospital use. 
 
We know that there is a short . . . a growing shortage of mental 
health professionals and the government must work hard to 
address this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s crucial that we recognize the devastating 
impact that mental illness has not only on those individuals 
affected, but also on their families, their friends, and the rest of 
society. 
 
Only 43 per cent of adults suffering from depression seek care 
from a health professional, and 10 to 15 per cent of people with 
major mental illnesses will die by suicide. 
 
Mental health is just as important as physical health, Mr. 
Speaker. More must be done to improve the social stigma 
surrounding mental illness so that those who are suffering from 
it will feel free to get help and medical assistance. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Geoff Pawson to Attend United Nations 
Children’s Summit 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that 
Dr. Geoff Pawson, founder, president, and CEO (chief 
executive officer) of Ranch Ehrlo Society and Ehrlo 
Community Services, will be part of the Canadian delegation 
attending the special United Nations Children’s Summit in New 
York this week. 
 
Mr. Pawson is one of my constituents and has played an 
important and active role in our community for many years. He 

was selected to be part of this delegation because of his years of 
experience in and dedication to child welfare. 
 
Mr. Pawson started the Ranch Ehrlo Society 36 years ago, 
taking it from a single residential unit for troubled boys to a 
multi-service agency providing highly specialized programs for 
young boys and girls. The Ehrlo Society helps over 160 youth 
in both residential treatment and educational programs. 
 
Mr. Pawson is also a founding member and incoming president 
of the Child Welfare League of Canada. In April 2000 he was 
named to the Order of Canada for his commitment to helping 
youth and their families. Last fall he received the Saskatchewan 
Order of Merit. 
 
The extent of Mr. Pawson’s contributions to child welfare and 
to this province cannot be summarized in the short time I have 
for this statement. Therefore I would like to take this 
opportunity to congratulate him for his commitment and to offer 
our support to him and the Canadian delegation who is joining 
170 countries and 70 heads of state to review the successes and 
failures since the first World Summit for Children held in 1990. 
 
We’d like to thank people like Geoff Pawson for their 
contribution to Saskatchewan and to the world. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

A Taste of the Vanscoy Rural Municipality Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Weekes: — On Saturday, April 27 the Vanscoy and 
District Agricultural Society held its third annual A Taste of the 
RM (rural municipality) fundraiser gala. The RM of Vanscoy 
was bursting with excitement and exotic tastes. Tastes of the 
RM featured local treats such as bison, elk, ostrich, wild boar, 
lamb, fresh vegetables and salads, perogies, and saskatoon 
berries. 
 
There were many great door prizes and throughout the evening 
people were able to tour past the silent auction table and place 
bids on many exciting items on display. We had the opportunity 
to browse through the country store where sumptuous items that 
had just been tasted were on sale to take home and enjoy. 
 
Proceeds from this event will help to fund the many activities of 
the Vanscoy and District Agricultural Society. These include 
school bursaries, the district summer fair, farmers’ night out in 
the form of a dinner meeting, and a district rodeo. 
 
Congratulations to the Vanscoy and district agriculture society 
on another successful fundraiser gala. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan’s Master Teacher Award 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those of us 
who were around this place in the early ’90s will remember the 
excellent work of the then Chief Commissioner of the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, Donna Greschner. 
She has also been a professor of law at the University of 
Saskatchewan since 1982. 
 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

I am happy to report to the Assembly that at convocation later 
this month, Professor Greschner will be awarded the University 
of Saskatchewan’s Master Teacher Award, an award which 
recognizes teaching excellence. This is just one more item in 
her long list of accomplishments. A cross-section of students 
and faculty nominated her, praising her ability to stimulate her 
students and to motivate them to achieve high standards. 
 
In addition to her work in Saskatchewan, she has served as a 
member of Canada’s Human Rights Commission as well as 
serving as a consultant on constitutional issues to women’s 
groups, Aboriginal organizations, and foreign governments 
including South Africa, Mr. Speaker. She has lectured on 
constitutional law and human rights at universities in Canada 
and abroad. 
 
Why am I making this member statement, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
because Donna was a classmate of mine right through grade 
school, and her family is and are neighbours of ours on the farm 
in Goodsoil. 
 
Donna, we are very proud of you, and I know members will 
want to add their congratulations to the university’s recognition 
of this outstanding public servant and scholar. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening business 
excellence was celebrated in the Battlefords with the ninth 
annual BBEX (Battlefords Business Excellence) awards 
sponsored by the Battlefords Chamber of Commerce and 
SaskTel. The gala evening was another great success. 
 
Winners were: Business of the Year, the Battlefords Trade and 
Education Centre; property appearance, Mark’s Work 
Wearhouse; new business, Dollar Store with More; young 
entrepreneur, Joelle’s on Main Hair Salon; community 
involvement, Anderson’s Construction; customer service, North 
Battleford Co-op Service Station; and Heritage Award, 
Charabin Seed Farm, a fourth generation operation that began 
nearly 50 years ago now run by sons, daughters-in-law and 
grandchildren of the original owner Ken Charabin— a very 
deserving tribute to a family farm and a successful business 
operation. 
 
In accepting the Business of the Year award, the BTEC 
(Battlefords Trade and Education Centre) manager made the 
following statement: 
 

Excellence is the result of caring more than others think is 
wise, 
Risking more than others think is safe, 
Dreaming more than others think is practical and 
Expecting more that others think is possible. 

 
Congratulations to the winners, the nominees, and the business 
community of the Battlefords for striving for excellence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Students Against Drinking and Driving Banquet 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday night 
I had the privilege of attending the annual Students Against 
Drinking and Driving banquet, which was held at Greenall 
School in Balgonie. I was pleased to bring greetings on behalf 
of government and to take part in the awards ceremonies. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the first SADD (Students Against 
Drinking and Driving) chapter was established in 1986 and it 
was established for one simple reason — too many people, too 
many students were being killed on our roads by drinking 
drivers. Now there are more than 100 chapters in Saskatchewan. 
 
SADD has made a tremendous difference over the years in 
making driving after drinking unacceptable in this province. We 
all have more to do because people are still being killed or 
injured by drinking drivers, but thanks to organizations like 
SADD the public consciousness is being raised. 
 
For just one instance, SADD this year passed out its 
one-millionth red ribbon, a ribbon to raise awareness to remind 
people to think twice about their drinking and driving habits. 
 
I was honoured to hand out the Nicole Nakonechny Memorial 
Award, named after a young woman killed by a drinking driver. 
The award goes to the most active SADD chapter in the 
province. Eight deserving schools were nominated, and Swift 
Current Comprehensive High School received the award. 
 
Let’s hope, Mr. Speaker, that one day SADD chapters will no 
longer be necessary. But until then, our congratulations to each 
and every one of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Knights of Columbus Family of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In April, the Knights of 
Columbus held their provincial convention in Regina and, Mr. 
Speaker, it was a special occasion for one particular family 
from Swift Current. 
 
Stan and Marilyn Lautsch, along with their five children — 
Christine, Eric, Emily, Theresa, and Theodore — were 
recognized as the Knights of Columbus Family of the Year. 
Each year the honour is bestowed upon a family that shows 
exceptional commitment to their church, to their community, 
and to the Knights of Columbus. And, Mr. Speaker, there are 
many people in Swift Current who have been on the receiving 
end of the generosity of the Lautsch family. 
 
Stan Lautsch is an instructor at the local college. He’s a Boy 
Scout leader and involved with the Abilities Centre. Stan is also 
active with the Canadian Blood Services which time and time 
again in Swift Current surpasses its goal for blood donations. 
 
Marilyn Lautsch is a registered psychiatric nurse. She’s also 
involved with Girl Guides, and the Catholic Women’s League, 
and the Swift Current branch of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association. 
 
Their five children — Christine, Eric, Emily, Theresa, and 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

 

Theodore — are all actively involved with various church and 
community activities as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current is very fortunate to be home to such 
a volunteer oriented family as that of Stan and Marilyn Lautsch. 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating them as the Knights of Columbus Family of the 
Year. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Federal Response to United States Farm Subsidies 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Agriculture is back with us in the Assembly today after meeting 
with his federal and provincial counterparts in Ottawa and the 
news is not good. We understand from the media that there is 
no new money coming from the federal Liberal government. 
Nevertheless the US (United States) farm subsidy program is 
storming right ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also heard from the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, Mr. Vanclief, that if there was any type of a 
program that he would expect the provinces to chip in a 40 per 
cent of the cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ottawa’s response to this growing crisis is 
unacceptable. And I think it’s incumbent upon the Minister of 
Agriculture to explain to this House and to explain to the people 
of Saskatchewan why yesterday’s and the day before’s 
meetings produced no good news for our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first I want to say to 
the House that yesterday’s deliberations were, and the day 
before’s, deliberations were on two pieces, Mr. Speaker. The 
first piece was to talk about the agricultural policy framework 
of which we’re now going to have a national agricultural plan 
for Canada put together by the federal Minister of Agriculture 
and all provincial ministers across the nation. 
 
And I want to report, Mr. Speaker, to the House this afternoon 
that on that particular issue and file we were able to accomplish 
some very important strategies, Mr. Speaker. We were able to 
agree that the five principles that we were talking about and the 
five pillars are ones that we’re going to move forward. We have 
a commitment from the federal government, Mr. Speaker, that 
they are going to in fact grow their $1.1 billion, Mr. Speaker, to 
the chapters within the new framework. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have a commitment now from the federal 
minister that they are going to, in fact, use crop insurance as the 
lead risk management program, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of 
progress that we got on the agricultural policy framework. 
 
What we don’t have, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that 
Saskatchewan farmers will be concerned if crop insurance is 
going to be the lead in the fight against the US farm Bill, 
particularly in light of his government’s move to withdraw 
funding from crop insurance and reduce coverage from crop 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister pretty much confirmed what I said in 
my first question. The papers are right — the minister has 
agreed to fight the new US farm Bill, but the details of the 
battle are very sketchy. In fact we have no details whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Agriculture Minister Vanclief has not indicated 
how Canada plans to fight these new US subsidies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, could the minister enlighten us today? Could he 
tell us what options the federal government is considering? 
What sort of trade actions might the federal government be 
considering? Are they looking at the possibility of any sort of 
reaction — whether it be retaliatory trade actions, tariffs, more 
money for Canadian producers including farmers in 
Saskatchewan? What’s going on? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Direct to the House, I want to make sure 
that the members opposite understand that in this year’s crop 
insurance program this government, and this ministry, and this 
department added an additional $14 million to the crop 
insurance program. Mr. Speaker, we added an additional 14 
million. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to say to you, that all of the provinces except one said, Mr. 
Speaker, that we should be asking Ottawa to make up the 
difference on the trade injury — the 1.3 billion. All the 
provinces except one. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, this 
government, farm organizations, farm leaders in this country 
say that this $1.3 billion should be paid by the federal 
government in mitigation for Canadian farmers. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, and ask the member opposite, the Leader of the 
Opposition, are you on board, sir? Are you on board? Are you 
on board, sir? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just ask 
the minister to place all of his questions through the Chair. I’ll 
give you another 10 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Through the Chair I ask the Leader of the 
Opposition, are you going to support . . . I ask the minister . . . I 
ask the Leader of the Opposition through the Speaker, will he, 
Mr. Speaker, will he and his party agree to supporting Canadian 
agriculture? Will he agree that in fact we should be receiving 
from the national government a $1.3 billion injury payment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 
opposition has been unequivocal in its insistence that the federal 
government should entirely respond to the unfair trade action by 
the United States. We have not changed our mind on that. 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

Perhaps the minister is changing his mind — I’m not sure. 
We’ve not really heard any news from his . . . after his return 
from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the usual response isn’t good enough. In response 
to the latest attack on Canadian agriculture, we can’t get a clear 
answer out of Ottawa. The minister is going on about some 
changes to safety nets that may occur years down the road; and 
in fact is not a safety net that deals with price, it deals with 
production and with weather, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that a special conference is required. I wonder now 
after his failure to agree . . . consensus with the federal 
government, if the Agriculture minister would now agree that 
the Western provinces must develop a common front in 
response to unfair US trade action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of yesterday’s failure, will the Agriculture 
minister or will the Premier reconsider our proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, since this issue came to 
national and international attention, we have been applying 
ourselves to a variety, a variety of approaches. One was to have 
our minister fully engaged, leading the battle, if I may say, in 
Ottawa calling upon the national government to support 
Canadian producers to the tune of $1.3 billion, 100 per cent 
funded from Ottawa. 
 
I have met now with the Governor of North Dakota. I have been 
in contact, I have been . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to 
respond in this House when the opposition members would 
sooner play politics than hear answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken to the Chair of the Western 
Premiers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have met . . . spoken with 
the Chair of the Western Premiers and insisted — and have 
been ensured — that this issue will be number one in the 
Western Premiers’ meeting. 
 
I have been in touch with the Premier of Alberta on two 
separate occasions. I met last evening in Winnipeg with the 
Premier of Manitoba. We are very close to bringing the Prairie 
premiers together on an urgent basis, with discussion of inviting 
our leaders of the opposition to be a part of that project. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before I move further on scheduling this 
meeting, I need to know from the Leader of the Opposition 
unequivocally that he will support a position which calls upon 
the national Government of Canada to support producers to the 
tune of $1.3 billion for trade injury, and that that money must 
be 100 per cent funded by the national government. I need him 
to stand in this House and declare it today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yes, the Premier came back empty-handed from North Dakota. 
Yes, the Minister of Agriculture came back empty-handed from 
Ottawa. But, Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Premier, I can assure 
the Premier that we give our unequivocal support that Ottawa 
fund a program, a plan to compensate Canadian agriculture 
producers because of the unfair trade action of the United 
States. 
 
He can be assured, as we have shown in past affirmation of the 
motions that he’s moved here in this House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, I would 
assure the Premier that we are fully supportive. He can count on 
our support. He can count on, I believe, on the support of all 
governments of the four Western provinces and, I believe, all 
opposition leaders of the four Western provinces to state very 
strongly that Ottawa’s lack of action is not acceptable on this 
matter, that they have a responsibility to act, and that we’re 
going to be more forceful than we have ever been in the past. 
 
So I call on the Premier again to move as quickly as he can and 
to offer Saskatchewan as a place to host this meeting prior to 
the regular Premiers’ Conference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I did not hear the Leader of 
the Opposition and we need . . . Saskatchewan people need to 
hear this. Saskatchewan producers need to hear this. If we are 
going into a national negotiation trying to bring unanimity to 
Western Canadian position, I need to know that from this 
legislature we will enjoy that unanimity. 
 
Will the Leader of the Opposition commit that he and his party 
will stand with us on calling for trade injury payment from 
Ottawa . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Will he stand and commit that he will 
support a position which calls for trade injury support from 
Ottawa which is 100 per cent financed by the national 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
quite enjoy being able to answer the question — the answer is 
yes. Now I think I’m supposed to ask a question so my question 
to the Premier is will he convene this meeting or invite the other 
leaders . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
No, order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, my answer is yes, 
and so will the Premier call this meeting and offer 
Saskatchewan to host this meeting as soon as possible before 
the regular Western premiers’ meeting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with the absolute assurance 
that’s been provided, I think, from the Leader of the Opposition, 
I will be more than happy — perhaps as early as later today, 
certainly before the end of the week — to invite leaders from 
the Prairie provinces to attend to Regina to formulate — my 
hope will be, to formulate a unified position to put to the federal 
government on behalf of at least the three Prairie provinces. 
 
That said, Mr. Speaker, this issue will also be discussed and 
take prominence at the Western Premiers’ Conference about 
three weeks from now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality Concerns at Last Mountain Lake 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Environment minister. Today we found out something the 
residents around Last Mountain Lake have been noticing all 
winter — the quality of lake water. Usually it’s clean and very 
clear there; it has deteriorated rapidly over the past few months. 
And thanks to a local resident of Regina Beach who decided to 
call the media, we also know why. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Radio 
was reporting today that the Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
has been diverting treated sewage water from the city of Regina 
directly into Last Mountain Lake all winter. Now the water in 
the south end of the lake is turning into a potentially toxic 
brown and yellow mess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP (New Democratic Party) dumping 
Regina’s sewage water into Last Mountain Lake and why didn’t 
the government tell the people that live around the lake that the 
water could be toxic? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member opposite for the question. And I would first of all point 
out that Saskatchewan Environment has asked CBC to share 
with us a copy of their test results. To date we have not received 
them but we are hopeful that they will give us those results, 
because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Environment 
will be collecting additional samples as part of our annual 
spring monitoring program and we want to see the CBC 
samples as well to compare them. 
 
So we have not yet received the CBC results. I can’t comment 
on them. But I can say that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I want to make a couple of additional 
points, if I may, Mr. Speaker. First of all, the water in Last 
Mountain Lake is clearly not drinking water. It is surface water. 
And it is very important that people realize that they should not 
be drinking non-potable water. 
 
I also want to say, and I’m sure that the member opposite 
realizes this, the city of Regina treats its sewage at a very high 
standard. The water . . . The effluent from the treatment plant 

then flows into the Wascana Creek which then flows into the 
Qu’Appelle River which then flows into Last Mountain Lake. 
At the . . . 
 
(14:15) 
 
The Speaker: — . . . question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so I take it from that remark that 
the government . . . Sask Water is diverting sewage water into 
Last Mountain Lake. 
 
Terry Fleischaker, a resident at Last Mountain Lake, said the 
lake water has turned dark yellow and brown with little chunks 
in it. They told Terry that the brown, chunky water was just fine 
except for a little algae. That’s coming from the provincial 
government that’s tested the lake. 
 
But CBC Radio also had the water tested by an independent lab. 
They showed the results to a water specialist at the University 
of Regina. Professor Peter Leavitt concluded the water is not 
safe for any use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government tell local residents 
the water in Last Mountain Lake was safe when an independent 
expert said he wouldn’t risk washing his hands in it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I have to emphasize again, 
we are talking about surface water; we’re not talking about 
drinking water here. We have different objectives for surface 
water as compared to drinking water, and we have different 
water objectives for water that’s used for contact recreation 
purposes as compared to non-contact recreation purposes. 
 
I want to emphasize again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry, member, I just have to have a little 
order for you to be able to hear the question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I want to emphasize again, people should 
not drink untreated water. The water in Last Mountain Lake is 
not potable water; they should not be drinking it. That is just the 
bottom line. 
 
I don’t know how . . . what more I need to say about that. It is 
important that people understand that is water for recreational 
purposes. When it is used for contact recreational purposes, we 
have different objectives, different guidelines than when it’s 
non-contact purposes. 
 
We also, Mr. Speaker, require that the city of Regina . . . 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Until she became 
Environment minister, that lake you probably could drink out of 
it; but we’re not talking about drinking it. That lake is used by 
recreational people all over the province — a lot out of Regina. 
It’s used from swimming, showering, to brushing their teeth and 
bathing their children in it. 
 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

But the University of Regina biologist, Peter Leavitt, said the 
water in Last Mountain Lake is unsafe for any human use at all. 
It has extremely high counts of fecal coliforms, and I quote: 
 

The water has too high a bacterial concentration to use for 
anything, period. So you shouldn’t use it to wash your 
hands, you shouldn’t use it to brush your teeth — you just 
shouldn’t be in it at all. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Environment minister tell Terry 
Fleischaker the water in Last Mountain Lake was safe when an 
independent expert says it’s unsafe for any human use? And 
what steps is the government taking to stop the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation from pouring more sewage water into the 
lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I heard in the first part of that 
question the exact answer that I want to give the member in 
opposite now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from Saskatchewan 
Environment’s surface water quality objectives: 
 

Water quality objectives for recreational use. 
 
. . . recreationists are cautioned not to consume surface 
waters without prior disinfection (for example) boiling (or) 
chlorination of the water. Even waters which appear to be 
pristine may contain naturally occurring, disease-causing 
micro-organisms. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when we say don’t drink the water, we also mean 
don’t brush your teeth with it either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Yesterday Crown Investments Corporation president, Frank 
Hart, confirmed that the government has all but concluded a 
deal to invest up to $80 million in the construction and 
operation of ethanol plants in the province. This, despite the 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that less than two months ago the then NDP 
minister of Energy all but ruled out direct government 
investment in this important industry. 
 
Yesterday at the Crown Corporations Committee meeting, CIC 
president, Frank Hart, testified that CIC has been . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Yesterday at the CIC committee meeting, Crown 
Investments Corporation president, Frank Hart, testified that 
CIBC . . . CIC has been talking to the same US company about 
ethanol since last fall. Given that the deal is apparently close to 
being done, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the NDP knew 
full well they would be getting into this industry directly with 

taxpayers’ dollars even while the then Energy minister was 
promising that government intervention would be a last resort. 
 
So to the minister for the Crown Investments Corporation: 
which is it, Mr. Speaker? Did the then minister of Energy at the 
time, simply not tell the truth about the government’s intentions 
or did Mr. Hart and the minister’s other CIC officials not bother 
to tell the ethanol minister that they were working on an ethanol 
deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that the member opposite is unclear in a number of areas. And I 
think we understand that. 
 
Yesterday, I read into the record — and it’s in Hansard, page 
1229 — the former minister responsible for ethanol 
development in this province is a direct quote from what he said 
with respect to the process: 
 
The minister yesterday or today could have read Hansard. He 
would then know what I told him yesterday, which is what I’m 
going to tell him again today. He should get his facts straight 
before he comes into the House, which he hasn’t been able to 
do on this file; he hasn’t been able to do it on the purchase of 
natural gas in this province, Mr. Speaker, any more than he did 
when he was the economic development guru from Swift 
Current taking $200,000 of public funds to put together a guitar 
museum in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, that subsequently went 
broke three months . . . three years later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the expertise this member brings into this 
House. He knows full well what that member said. Why doesn’t 
he be honest with the people of Saskatchewan with respect to 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — This morning on CBC Radio, the president of the 
only operating ethanol plant in Saskatchewan, Brad Wildeman, 
was asked about the government’s apparent change in opinion 
on their direct investment in the ethanol industry and on the 
deal in general. Even among those who agree that there may be 
a role for strategic government involvement, Mr. Wildeman 
went on to say, went on to state some concerns. And I quote, 
Mr. Speaker, from the program this morning: 
 

This sort of approach just kind of blows me away a little bit 
that we’re asking taxpayers to first foot the bill for the fuel 
tax exemption trying to revitalize rural Saskatchewan and 
now we’re prepared to put . . . a bunch of equity (in). But 
we didn’t have time to wait (Mr. Speaker, he says, we 
didn’t have time to wait) for somebody in Saskatchewan or 
groups (or) . . . partner in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why did the government give up on the private 
sector investment potential of the ethanol industry only 60 days 
after they committed that the private sector would lead this 
industry in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member from Swift Current that the private sector will lead this 
development in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — What I want to say as well, Mr. 
Speaker, what I want to say to that member, Mr. Speaker, in 
spite of his objections, there will be development in this 
province. There will be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, there will be ethanol 
plants built and there will be an intensive livestock industry 
expanded as a result of the ethanol production that’s going to 
take place here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member cannot stand good news. When 
there’s a good piece of news in this province, whether it’s a new 
plant opening or new jobs happening, members in this side . . . 
on that side of the House run away as fast as they can, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan understand who they are, 
what they represent. This member is trying to set up the Crown 
corporations for privatization. It’s nothing more, and it’s 
nothing less, and people see through it, and they don’t accept it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the minister is always 
very, very angry in question period. A couple of weeks ago on 
The Simpsons, I think it was, they did a whole episode about 
how Homer couldn’t control his rage. I think it was called 
“Angry Homer.” And I always wondered, where did they get 
the inspiration for “Angry Homer.” Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
inspiration for “Angry Homer” is sitting in this Assembly and 
he’s going to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And he’s going to stand up, Mr. Speaker, in a few 
minutes after I ask this question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government promised only two months ago 
that, with respect to ethanol, the private sector would drive the 
industry. The minister indicated that again just now. They also 
promised though, Mr. Speaker, that they wouldn’t pick winners 
and losers. They promised that they wouldn’t get involved in 
questions of location or size of the plants. 
 
And less than 60 days later, the CIC and its officials, like Mr. 
Hart, have taken over. They’ve broken the former minister’s 
promises and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. I would ask the member now to go directly to his 
question please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, CIC officials have broken those 
promises and commitments made by the previous minister. 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister for CIC, will the minister tell 
the Assembly why are his officials so out of control? Why is it 
Crown Investments Corporation is running the government and 
not the other way around, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite 
may think this is a cartoon and that this is a joke process that 
we’re going through, Mr. Speaker. But I want to say to that 
member we’re deadly serious about one thing. We’re deadly 
serious about developing an industry to create jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to say to that member we’re 
also deadly serious about developing with that and through that 
an intensive livestock industry and growing that industry. 
 
And I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, that 
it’ll be a private sector business decision in terms of the 
locations. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, members opposite 
can lobby to have the investments in their riding and that’s 
acceptable, because we’re not going to choose based on whether 
it’s their riding or our riding. We’re going to choose based on 
whether it makes business sense or whether it doesn’t make 
business sense. Mr. Speaker, that’s what this is all about. We’re 
deadly serious about that. And it may hurt the member opposite 
to see this positive development, but he’s just going to have to 
grin and bear it because it’s going to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating Upgrade 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Moody’s Investors Services has taken the opportunity to review 
the province’s books in light of the March 27 budget for 
2002-03. And it is my duty to report to the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that this morning — and I know all members of the House will 
be pleased to hear this — Moody’s announced that 
Saskatchewan’s credit rating would be upgraded from A1 to 
Aa3. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I know that all members, all 
members of the House are pleased that this is our 10th 
consecutive credit upgrade since 1995. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that one reason why credit rating upgrades are 
significant is that they represent the views of objective third 
parties from outside our province that examine our books and 
finances. 
 
And I’m happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that only three 
governments in Canada receive a higher credit rating from 
Moody’s than . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just ask 
the minister to perhaps repeat a sentence or two so it would be 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

quite clear. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One reason why 
credit rating upgrades are significant is that they represent the 
views of objective third parties from outside the province that 
examine our books and finances. 
 
Only three governments in Canada receive a higher credit rating 
than Saskatchewan does from Moody’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they look at the books and finances of all 
governments and major corporations. These, Mr. Speaker, are 
reports from objective third parties; as distinct, Mr. Speaker, 
from political debate and editorial comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to say that we have a straight-A credit rating is 
almost selling ourselves short, because with this Aa3 rating, 
we’ve even improved on that. And I want to point out to the 
House, Mr. Speaker, that Moody’s lists one of the reasons for 
this upgrade as, and I’m quoting: 
 

Steady improvements in the province’s fiscal position . . . 
reflecting prudent policies that have produced budgetary 
surpluses and a reduced debt burden. 
 

Now what does this mean for the people of Saskatchewan? It 
means, Mr. Speaker, that they can have faith in their 
government’s commitment to carry out the affairs of the 
province in a sound, responsible, and accountable manner. It 
means they can have confidence that their government will do 
what it says it will do. And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it 
means we are building a solid foundation on which to continue 
to build a future of opportunity and growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that Moody’s has noted, 
and again I’m quoting here: 
 

Over the past several years a series of modest surpluses 
combined with strong economic growth has resulted in a 
marked improvement in Saskatchewan’s debt profile. 
Saskatchewan’s debt-to-GDP ratio has fallen from over 
50% in 1994 to 31.8% in 1998, 28.4% in 2000; and less 
than 25% (estimated) in 2002. 

 
I’m happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that Moody’s also 
commended the Crown Investments Corporation for 
rationalizing and restructuring operations and investments in the 
Crown corporations, and reducing the province’s guaranteed 
debt exposure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This credit upgrade tells us the path we’ve been on is the 
correct path; with a path of balanced budgets, controlled public 
debt, affordable tax cuts, and spending on priority areas like 
health and education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to have independent and objective 
confirmation that our province is on the right track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that economic growth and good 
money management go hand in hand, which is why 

Saskatchewan posted an average annual real economic growth 
rate of 3.5 per cent from 1992 to 2000 — the third highest 
among the provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, credit upgrades like this are the rewards of sound 
planning, commitment to goals, being in it for the longer term, 
and the desire to work with people across the province to build 
a bright future. 
 
The effect of the tax reductions over the last few years, 
combined with the tax savings announced in the latest budget, 
should further improve the province’s competitiveness and its 
economic growth prospects. 
 
This latest credit rating upgrade demonstrates to Saskatchewan 
people that we have every reason to take on the future with 
confidence. And just as we have delivered on our promise to 
turn our finances around, we will deliver on our plan for growth 
and opportunity, bringing tangible benefits for the people of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a 
moment or two to respond to the ministerial statement. This, 
Mr. Speaker, is a really good example of why we need to have 
summary financial statements in place in this province. 
 
We need to be able to have a full view of the finances in the 
province and not just the General Revenue Fund. We need to 
have some idea in this province of exactly what’s going on right 
across the . . . right across the whole piece. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about steady improvement in this 
province. I’m not sure that steady improvement or that 
confidence will be built up when we see the other side of the 
coin. Spending is on the increase in this particular budget and 
spending has been on the increase for the last several years. At 
the same time, revenues are going down. Revenues have been 
dropping over that period of time and yet the spending still 
increases. 
 
The overall debt of the province is increasing. That is a fact 
when you look at all the financial resources of this province, 
both General Revenue Fund, Crown corporations, and 
government agency . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The signs over the 
last short while — in fact over the last number of years — are 
really pointing in a different direction, and the confidence is not 
being built up when particularly you have to change the 
legislation of The Balanced Budget Act just to make sure that 
you can comply with your own budgeting problems that are 
very evident. 
 
You’ve got to remember, Mr. Speaker, that opportunity and 
growth — as the minister was talking about — opportunity and 
growth is based on confidence. And that confidence by the 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

 

investors is the key here. And when investors look at what’s 
going on in this province, that is where we come up short in 
terms of trying to get economic development in this province. 
 
We need that investment. We need that confidence. We need 
investors from both within the private industry in this province, 
as well as outside this province . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I want to take a 
minute here, members, just to advise the House that I’m finding 
it quite difficult to be able to hear the statements, and that I 
ought to be able to hear all of the statements that are being 
made. And that means I have to request all members to refrain 
from interrupting, particularly from . . . after they’ve been asked 
several times in the House to refrain from interrupting. 
 
And I therefore, at this time, would like to request the member 
from Lloydminster to complete his statement. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
problems in this province is a dropping GDP (gross domestic 
product). The minister talked about a GDP ratio and that might 
be one of the economic measures. 
 
But the overall GDP in the province is actually down. In fact 
it’s the lowest in Canada. That does not contribute to any 
confidence. If we have . . . No matter what the ratings show, we 
need investment coming in and apparently it just isn’t 
happening. 
 
So how does this, the GDP, how does this show any 
confidence? Why aren’t, Mr. Speaker, why aren’t investors 
swarming into this province if it’s looking that good? Why is 
the population leaving this province? Why are the job numbers 
decreasing in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to look at the fact, we have to look at the 
records. And in fact this province is just not competitive and we 
have to make sure that it is competitive and continues to be 
competitive because without that we are not going to be 
attracting the necessary investment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, as president of the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association, I am pleased to table the 33rd annual report for the 
year 2001. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, to move a motion of urgent 
and pressing necessity under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member briefly outline the nature 
of the request. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Impact of Proposed US Farm Bill on Canadian Farmers 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I will be 
very brief. This is the same motion that I have tried to introduce 
two times before with no changes. I am hoping that I will be 
third time lucky. The Minister of Agriculture has just returned 
from Ottawa, not reporting any progress in the way of funding 
from the federal government to counteract the unfair trading 
practice of the United States. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the motion that I would move says: 
 

That the province of Saskatchewan invite the government 
and opposition legislators from all four Western Canadian 
provinces to a conference hosted by Saskatchewan to 
discuss strategies in dealing with actions taken by the 
United States in terms of agriculture subsidies and 
softwood lumber tariffs, both of which will be devastating 
to the economies of all four provinces. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would move this, seconded by the hon. member 
for Saltcoats. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
this afternoon to stand and table a response to a written question 
171. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 171 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 25 — The Cost 
of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 25 is one 
of those Bills that sounds very good. And I think we’re going to 
have to have some discussion on it to see if it actually goes 
where it’s supposed to go. When we heard the statement from 
the minister presenting this one back on April 18, he made the 
statement: 
 

. . . this legislation is uniform legislation that fulfils (the) 
Saskatchewan’s commitment under the 1994 Agreement on 
Internal Trade. 

 
Interesting thing is why has it taken almost a decade for this 
government to introduce this Bill if actually it is as significant 
as they say it is. It basically deals with situations such as the 
advertisements we see about zero down, zero per cent 
financing, those sorts of things. 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I phoned a number of car dealers and I 
described what this piece of legislation was all about. And they 
said they weren’t at all concerned about that aspect of it because 
they have been doing this for years. But it seems the NDP over 
there being down on business, they sit there in their seats and 
they say, well, if it’s business it must be bad so let’s just go out 
and see if we can create some more rules for them to abide by. 
Business, Mr. Speaker, is obviously way ahead in the most part 
of this particular NDP government. 
 
It sets out the type of information that must be disclosed for 
different types of credit. When you make a particular payment 
on your . . . on the amount that you owe, there’s all kinds of 
paperwork that has to go back and forth. This does little more 
than just increase the amount of paper based on a lot of the 
things that most good lenders and good sellers are doing today 
in many ways. 
 
It also allows the borrower to pay off a non-mortgage credit at 
any time without penalty and that’s probably a particularly good 
aspect. 
 
But as I said, this brings this into line with the nineteen four . . . 
1994 agreement that was made on a national scale with other 
provinces. 
 
There are a number of loose ends that remain on this one. I 
think this government, as we know, is totally out of touch with 
rural Saskatchewan. This particular Bill shows us, again, a 
minister who has been running all over the province and all 
over Canada trying to get money for Saskatchewan for farmers. 
Premier comes back from North Dakota, says we agreed to 
disagree, but I had a nice flight. Minister comes back from 
Ottawa and said, I came back with nothing, but I had a nice 
flight too. 
 
And so, you know, they are busy buzzing around the continent 
trying to get some particular support. They are not getting any. 
They are totally out of touch with rural Saskatchewan. They 
need to get in touch. This particular Bill falls substantially 
short, Mr. Speaker, because it doesn’t address anything related 
to the rural economy. It doesn’t address anything that relates to 
lending for the purposes of farming. And for that particular 
reason, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more research that needs to be 
done. It’s another piece of misthought and miswritten 
legislation that this government is presenting on an ad hoc basis 
throughout this past session. 
 
And for that particular reason, Mr. Speaker, we need to do a lot 
more research on this particular Bill, Bill No. 25. It has 
substantial concerns we have about it and therefore at this time I 
move to adjourn Bill No. 25, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 26 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 
sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens procurations be 

now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 26, The Enforcement 
of Canadian Judgments Act — this is one of those particular 
pieces of legislation that I think everyone in Canada has been 
waiting for for a substantial amount of time. It refers to the Act 
that enforces monetary judgments across the country and makes 
it now unnecessary to go to court in every particular province 
when an individual moves. 
 
And I think that’s a definite advantage, Mr. Speaker. Because 
one of the concerns has always been that if someone had a 
judgment against them in one province, they could move to 
another province and sort of escape the long arm of the law, 
which in fact proved in Canada to be a rather short arm of the 
law. 
 
And this particular Bill, Bill No. 26, lengthens the arm of the 
law that if you move from one province to another one, Acts 
that . . . or judgments that are passed dealing with monetary 
issues now allow that long arm of the law to extend to other 
particular provinces. 
 
This deals with things such as injunctions, adult guardianship 
orders, restraining orders, all sorts of things that now if they are 
passed in one particular . . . judgments made in one particular 
province, they take effect all across this country. And I think 
that’s good. 
 
This is quite a non-controversial piece of legislation and we see 
no particular reason to hold it up at this particular stage of the 
proceedings, Mr. Speaker. It’s important that these types of 
legislations are easily moved across from border to border 
across our particular land. It does not, Mr. Speaker, apply 
internationally, obviously. But on a national scale, these 
particular judgments would then be enforced. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is our desire to move Bill No. 26 
to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 27 — The 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution 
des ordonnances alimentaires procurations be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that, 
just in the little interlude, the Minister of Agriculture said it’s 
nice to see this thing is moving across and we’ll be out of here 
in a week. Well we won’t be out of here in a week. It might get 
us someplace into from October to the month before that. 
 
But I think there’s one thing that is indicated by what’s 
happening here is that the Sask Party is quite supportive, Mr. 
Speaker, of good legislation. We’ve passed quite a number of 
Bills already to Committee of the Whole. These are pieces of 
legislation that had some value in them. 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

 

But there’s many others that we’re going to have to hold up, 
we’re going to have to debate. We will need to get much more 
information from the public on that, because the government 
across is very much out of touch with the people of the 
province. That’s not to say, from time to time, they don’t have 
an idea and they do go ahead and have a piece of legislation that 
is actually worthwhile passing. When that’s the case, it would 
be far from us, Mr. Speaker, to hold up legislation in any way, 
shape, or form. 
 
Bill No. 27 is what we’re discussing here this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, enforcement of maintenance orders, and does 
something fairly similar, Mr. Speaker, to the Bill that we just 
finished discussing. And it brings into force those kinds of 
issues that traditionally again were on a province by province 
basis. 
 
The main provisions of this Bill, Bill No. 27, Mr. Speaker, it 
applies to those who attempt to evade their responsibility — 
and remember, this is dealing with enforcement maintenance — 
by funnelling income through a corporation. This Bill allows 
the maintenance enforcement office to enforce an order against 
a corporation where the respondent is the sole shareholder. And 
I think that’s important to underline that, Mr. Speaker, that the 
. . . that the person that this is against then must be the sole 
shareholder. 
 
If the person happens to be a minor shareholder in a business, 
the maintenance order cannot be applied to that particular 
business because that would be extremely destructive and unfair 
to all the other individuals who were members and shareholders 
in that particular corporation. 
 
Also if the respondent owns a corporation with other family 
members but is found to be in control of the corporation, the 
maintenance order can be enforced. So that’s also there. But 
again the person who the . . . who’s the respondent on this 
particular one must then be the major or the controlling 
individual in that corporation. 
 
Another provision will remove the requirement for serving a 
second notice on a driver’s licence suspension. And this 
basically just speeds that up somewhat. SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) can be directed, Mr. Speaker, to 
suspend a respondent’s driver’s licence or withhold it from 
renewal after 30 days notice. 
 
And that 30 days notice needs to be in there to give the 
respondent the opportunity to bring his maintenance 
enforcement requirements up to date and then to maintain his 
driver’s licence and in many cases maintain a job as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It also allows the director to request and receive information 
respecting the status of dependants in the relationship of the 
respondent to any other person or corporation. Basically, Mr. 
Speaker, it allows the director to go ahead and do the research 
that’s necessary, to do the due diligence to make sure that the 
maintenance enforcement that needs to be there can be done. It 
is one of those things, Mr. Speaker, that there’s been many 
concerns about. 
 
It also streamlines the process for out-of-province 

garnishments, allowing that to be served on a respondent by 
general mail, by fax, or by other prescribed means. And again it 
has some similarities to the previous Bill in that it allows things 
to happen across provinces that are deemed to be important in 
our particular society. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, we also 
see no reason to hold that one up at this particular juncture. 
 
And we are also prepared to move this one, Bill No. 27, 
enforcement maintenance orders, move that on to Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 
Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Act/Loi sur les 
ordonnances alimentairies interterritoriales be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 28, An Act 
respecting Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders, a fairly 
straightforward piece of legislation. And it does, to a large 
extent, exactly what the title indicates that it does do in that it 
moves to an inter-jurisdictional area, support orders. And I 
think it’s been one of those things that is fairly, fairly important. 
 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, as it stands at present, a Saskatchewan 
resident would first have to have their evidence reviewed by a 
Saskatchewan court and then send it on back to the court in the 
respondent’s jurisdiction. With this change, a support 
application package will be sent directly to the respondent’s 
jurisdictional court. And what this does then is speed up support 
orders in a major sort of a way. 
 
Ten provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan in 
this case happens not to be leading. We seldom do. We are the 
fifth jurisdiction in Canada, fifth jurisdiction in Canada to 
introduce this piece of legislation. 
 
And I think this is a fairly critical piece of legislation. It’s 
surprising the government again has taken years to get around 
to doing it, especially a government that says their full . . . have 
a social conscience. This should have been on one of their lead 
issues years ago. Especially when, for the most part, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ve been for so long the only socialist government 
in Canada and here they are, you know, at the back of the pack 
— they’re lagging, they’re lagging. 
 
It’s absolutely a shame, Mr. Speaker, that this particular 
government across has to be dragged kicking and screaming to 
go ahead and put legislation in place that is for the betterment 
of families across our province and across Canada. That’s a 
shame, Mr. Speaker. The fifth jurisdiction in Canada — the 
fifth. And I’m underlining that but it needs to be said very 
often. 
 
We would expect more from the government opposite. 
Unfortunately over the years, we’ve found out, Mr. Speaker, 
that our expectations have been much too high, have been much 
too high. We’re lowering our expectations, and I think if we 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

lower them substantially more, we’ll be about in line with the 
reality that exists over there. 
 
Saskatchewan, as I said, is the fifth jurisdiction in Canada to 
introduce this legislation. And it seems that probably by August 
or September of this year, Mr. Speaker, year 2002, this should 
all be in place and all of Canada should be on the same page. 
 
So we’re going to be crossing the finish line; we’re going to be 
crossing the finish line however, Mr. Speaker, with the last in 
the group. That’s unfortunate. 
 
But other than that, this legislation has some definite value. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re quite prepared to move this on to 
Committee of the Whole in the spirit of co-operation and 
decency and helpfulness to the people of this province that we 
always are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 20 — The 
Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 20, 
consumer protection Act. As the title of the Bill says, it’s to 
protect the consumer in making Internet purchases. With the 
changing times, Mr. Speaker, of commerce, we need to bring 
the laws up to date concerning transactions in the area of e-mail 
and the Internet. And as we know, even though the Internet 
commerce had a meltdown recently, there still is a considerable 
number of transactions taking place and will be a growing 
industry and type of transactions in the future. 
 
As we know, many consumers around the province and around 
the country are using the Internet purchases. And on the face of 
it, this Bill on paper is putting in place some rules and 
regulations concerning protecting consumer purchases. 
 
It says that it’s putting requirements of companies that are 
doing business over the Internet to supply sales contracts within 
15 days, and gives the consumer an opportunity to cancel 
Internet purchases up to 7 days after receiving the contract or if 
the goods are not delivered within 30 days. And these are 
obviously measures that need to be taken and — in principle — 
and we support these features of this Bill. 
 
It also speaks to some changes that are in relationship to stolen 
or lost credit cards and some limits are put on the liability of 
cardholders in those cases. And I believe that is probably a 
good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister stated that this piece of legislation is as a result of 
a template agreed upon by the Minister of Justice across this 
country, and it’s very important that the country as a whole 
harmonizes its laws in this area as we need to harmonize 
legislation in many areas of this country. It’s not only . . . we 
not only have to harmonize our laws concerning the Internet 
transactions in this country between provinces and the . . . with 

the federal government, but it’s very important that we also 
harmonize these laws internationally. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And I just question whether the federal government . . . or the 
provincial government has spoken to the federal government 
concerning transactions, particularly in North America. We 
have a free trade agreement with the United States and Mexico, 
and the Internet obviously is used in many cases across North 
America. And it’s very important that we all live under the 
same rules across North America and in the global community. 
Now that speaks to the question concerning enforcement of this 
Bill in the wake of the global market. 
 
And so I just would like to question the minister at some point 
in the future concerning those problems that may arise over 
enforcement of a Bill in a province or in one country in an 
economic area, and trying to enforce those rules in another 
jurisdiction. 
 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, we have . . . the critic in this area has 
been doing a lot of work on this Bill, and has spoken to a 
number of the stakeholders concerning this legislation. We’re 
still waiting for some word back on certain key areas 
concerning the legislation so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 21 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 21 — The 
Collection Agents Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand up and speak 
to this piece of legislation, The Collection Agents Amendment 
Act, Bill No. 21. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the Bill has some good intentions. 
However, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues and I have been 
finding out, there are some major concerns with this piece of 
legislation as well. 
 
On one hand, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Bill and in 
view of the consuming public, you can appreciate where . . . 
and I appreciate where the minister’s coming from in regards — 
regarding the Bill. The fact that some of the collection agencies 
that we have out there that are working to try and recover some 
of the costs or the bad debts that may be owed their clients, can 
be very unscrupulous; can be very heavy-handed at times; and 
just treat the public generally with very . . . with such disrespect 
and become very obnoxious. And, Mr. Speaker, I think in that 
regard we need to take a close look at the piece of legislation. 
 
I think something is needed to make collection agencies know 
that they’ve got some responsibility. At least I believe they have 
some responsibility in how they go about their work. 
 
Now one of the problems I have with collection agents, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that a business, or in some cases 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

 

government, goes to a collection agent and asks that collection 
agency to collect this bad debt. And the collection agent just 
gets on it right away. 
 
It just seems like collection agents just enjoy going after people, 
and almost appearing like they’re policemen or they’re little 
gods on their own turf, the way they treat individuals. And they 
can be very, very persuading at times. They can make, when 
they come at an individual, make a person feel like they’re 
nothing. 
 
And the facts are, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions when I’ve 
been contacted by a constituent, I’ve found at times that had the 
collection agency demanded a little more of the business or the 
lending institution, demanded a little more information; they 
may have found that the person they are dealing with wasn’t 
really that hard an individual to deal with and, as in one case, 
they may have found there was already an agreement in place 
between the person and the agency as far as repayment of an 
overpayment. 
 
And one case that comes to mind was one that just happened 
recently, and it happened between a government agency — a 
government department in fact — where an overpayment had 
inadvertently had been made to a client and the client had sat 
down and they had come to an agreement about a monthly 
repayment that would fit within their ability and the job they 
had nicely acquired of making that repayment over a period of 
months. And it wasn’t that long, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And unfortunately about two or three months after they had 
come to this agreement all of a sudden a collection agency is 
calling the individual and saying pay up right now or we’re 
going to go into your savings account. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I don’t understand is how in the world 
a government department who has come to an agreement with a 
client on a monthly payment can go and ask a collection agency 
to begin . . . go after this individual for full payment when they 
had already agreed to a monthly payment. 
 
So as a result this individual gets a collection agency on the 
other end of the line demanding full payment or else. In that 
case, Mr. Speaker, I think that collection agency needed to do a 
little more research before they just went off and started trying 
to collect something that was already being . . . had already 
been taken care of and agreed to. And as a result of a contact 
through my office and a contact through the minister, we were 
able to resolve that issue and get the collection agency off the 
back of the client because there was an agreement already in 
process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this piece of legislation, in that 
regard I don’t have a problem with the legislation because I 
think we need to put some guidelines in place that cause 
collection agents to . . . or agencies to act a little more 
responsibly. 
 
And maybe, Mr. Speaker, we need to go a little bit further than 
that. We need to hold businesses and groups that would look at 
collection agencies — maybe they need to be a little more 
responsible in the fact of how they go about their . . . the bad 
debts that are on their accounts. And maybe they need to work a 

little harder at recovering and working out arrangements rather 
than just going to collection agents because someone can’t 
make that payment immediately. 
 
But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of delinquent 
accounts out there. There are a lot of situations where people 
just refuse to make payments. And as a result, a business or a 
lender has no other alternative to go and seek the services of a 
collection agent because they don’t have the tools and they 
don’t have the time to continue to nag at a customer to pay their 
bill. And so they go to a collection agent. 
 
And that’s where we have a problem with this Bill, the way the 
. . . what the Bill does. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been getting a 
number of letters. And I just want to make a few comments 
from some of the letters that we’ve received. And this comes 
from one collection agent: 
 

Many of our clients have called recently expressing their 
concerns as to the huge impact that this proposed 
legislation will have on their business(es). Without the 
assistance of a collection agency, many of these businesses 
feel they will experience much higher bad debt losses in an 
already tough economy. 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

The real sad fact of the situation is that credit granters in 
general were never informed fully about the proposed 
changes until very recently, and then only at the time that it 
was already being introduced in our Legislature on April 9, 
2002. 

 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the major concerns we 
have — the fact that there didn’t seem to be an appropriate time 
of consultation prior to. And while the government can argue 
that, yes, we did consult and we had a form of consultation, it 
certainly wasn’t the type of consultation that businesses and 
lenders across the province expected that they would have prior 
to the introduction of the legislation. 
 
And I quote from this letter: 
 

As a collection agency, we received a questionnaire about a 
year ago, asking us our opinion on various proposed 
changes which we were told “was for the purpose of 
harmonizing legislation throughout all provinces in 
Canada. 

 
The letter goes on to say: 
 

The next we heard was in the way of a letter dated April 5, 
2002, which we received April 12, 2002, three days after it 
was introduced into the Legislature to be passed as (a) law. 

 
And the question is: 
 

Who made this decision? Most certainly it was made 
without taking credit grantors concerns into consideration, 
as most businesses knew nothing about this new legislation. 

 
And the letter goes on to say: 
 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

We could only imagine how devastating it would be to 
have no Police Departments controlling crime in our 
communities. Without our Police, crime would double and 
triple or even worse. 

 
(And) I believe (it says) I believe this Legislation, if passed, 
would have a similar effect on credit grantors. Bad debt 
would (triple), double, triple, (or) worse. Businesses would 
have nowhere to turn in assistance in recovery (of) bad 
losses effectively, resulting in huge losses and many 
business bankruptcies. 

 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, there’s two sides to this piece of 
legislation. And unfortunately the legislation, I think, needs to 
be reviewed a little more carefully and closely and we would 
hope the government would look at it a little more carefully 
before we really move forward with any further debate on the 
legislation to make sure that the people that would be affected 
the most would have been consulted. And if any changes are 
needed, Mr. Speaker, that they are brought forward so that they 
address the concerns of all those involved so that, Mr. Speaker, 
we aren’t penalizing those businesses who are just trying to 
recover the losses that they are facing as a result of individuals 
who are taking advantage of the credit that they have been 
granted. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate 
that we take more time to review this legislation and therefore 
at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 24 — The 
Powers of Attorney Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 sur les 
procurations be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 
stand and enter into the debate on The Powers of Attorney Act. 
 
I understand that this Act is replacing the Bill that was 
introduced in 1996 and it came as a response to a report by a 
committee that was dealing with the abuse of adults that are in 
vulnerable situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us know that there are people in society that 
actually need help and need looking after and we have to ensure 
that the ones that are in charge of their rights are ones that are 
competent and ones that we can feel assured are doing their 
very best to look after these people. 
 
We know that the intent behind this Bill is to protect vulnerable 
adults mostly from potential financial abuse. And normally 
when we think about a power of attorney it’s to do with older 
people. But it’s not always the elder people that require help 
with their financial situation. 
 
This Bill is actually looking at provisions that are going to 
ensure that a person that is appointed as a power of attorney is 
trustworthy and reliable. And obviously that would mean that 
this person must be an adult and capable of making some very 

important decisions. 
 
There is a limitation set out in this Bill that is saying that 
someone who’s been convicted of a criminal offence or an 
offence related to violence, fraud, or breach of trust in the last 
10 years cannot be given this position. I know that there are 
provisions also for pardons. Or if there is extenuating 
circumstances, there may be an opportunity for this power of 
attorney to be given to a person, but it’s probably very valuable 
that this be looked at. 
 
No one that’s in the business of providing care to someone who 
requires a power of attorney can act in this position. Again, that 
is a very important aspect of the Bill. 
 
The Bill provides flexibility regarding the appointment of the 
attorneys and the corporate powers of attorneys. And this is 
something that we would like to ask further questions of when 
we get to in the opportunity to in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Contingency powers of attorney is also discussed in the Bill — 
an example, that the grantor becomes incapacitated. And there 
are provisions that’s going to help determine what will happen 
in that case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all in all, this Bill is something that, although it’s 
going to affect a large number of people and it’s going to have 
an impact on them, it’s something that we feel is going to be . . . 
the number of people that have consulted it and are looking at it 
are very happy with the outcome of it. So at this time we’re 
going to move to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 3 — The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill, unlike the one we discussed just a moment before, is 
something that is affecting a lot of people and something that is 
actually going to bring a lot of questions up to people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that Saskatchewan has one of the 
highest, if not the highest crime rate in Saskatchewan. And we 
have the dubious distinction of being the car theft capital of 
North America. We all know that crimes are not limited just to 
urban centres but we’re seeing an increase in crimes right across 
Saskatchewan and rural areas as well. Regina and Saskatoon 
have the two highest per capita crime rates in all of Canada. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Actually there was a recent report to Regina City Council that 
indicated that the members of the Regina city police have the 
highest workload of any major Western Canadian city. I would 
imagine that makes it difficult to attract the officers that we 
would need in this province. When we look at that we should 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

 

suggest that we have a very little crime rate when we have the 
highest number of officers, but obviously that’s not happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the justice system in this province is something 
that’s a concern to many people. In fact most people have a 
story dealing with justice in their area or something where they 
feel they’ve been unduly treated. 
 
Statistics Canada reports that Saskatchewan has the highest rate 
of youth crime in Canada. The youth court caseload is more 
than double the national average, with 946 cases for every 
10,000 young people compared to 400 cases for every 10,000 
people in the rest of Canada. 
 
In fact last year, Mr. Speaker, the province’s caseload increased 
7 per cent — that’s in the last five years — but nationally there 
was a decline of 10 per cent. Overall people in different 
categories of different jobs in this province are saying: why is 
this happening? Why do we have this crime problem in the 
province? 
 
The minister just a few minutes ago indicated that we have . . . 
the economy is rebounding, that wonderful things are 
happening. Yet most people are saying, if we have a wonderful 
growing economy, why is there an increase in crime? 
 
The ministers haven’t addressed this issue and I guess this is 
something that we have to be looking at. Youth and custody 
services tells us Saskatchewan has the highest incarceration rate 
of youth in Canada — 37 per 10,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know from speaking with the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) that they are very 
concerned of the rate of young Aboriginal people that are 
incarcerated. They by far have a disproportionate number of 
young people with Aboriginal background in our justice system, 
and it’s something that has to be addressed. 
 
The Bill that we’re looking at today has amendments in a 
number of areas and it’s a very significant Bill. One of the more 
significant amendment involves changing legislation that will 
require corrections officers to notify the victims of crimes when 
an inmate is being considered for release. The victim is also to 
be notified when a release has been granted. 
 
I think this is something that people have been asking for not 
just in the one area that we’ve been dealing with a lot in the 
legislature in the last couple of years, that being offenders that 
are dealing with sex crimes, but in other areas of crime as well. 
 
I think that the Victims’ Fund that we’ve been talking about in 
the House for the last month indicates or shows that there are a 
number of people who are very concerned that we talk about the 
people who have committed crimes, but the victims of the 
crimes are people that are often forgot. So I do hope that the 
minister, when he’s looking at these changes, is going to realize 
that there are two sides to the coin; that we have to be talking 
about the people who have been victimized as well as those 
who have committed the crime. 
 
There are other amendments that are brought forward in this 
very comprehensive Bill. And we know that instead of 
automatically being credited with reduced sentence times, 

inmates will have to earn this reduction through good 
behaviour. 
 
I know most of us have people or friends or relatives that work 
within the justice system and I feel that this is a very good 
move. There’s going . . . there’s opportunities for people who 
are within the system to show that they are indeed reformed; 
that they have a willingness to make a change. And until that is 
done I think it is only fair that people should show that they 
deserve the opportunity to be out earlier, not just they’ve earned 
it with time. 
 
I think that the word responsibility is something that we have to 
be looking at in many areas of our province, but in the justice 
system it’s something that is very important. 
 
People that have been victimized for sure would want to know 
that people who have committed the crime are actually earning 
some time off. 
 
Removing the limitations. Respecting options for rehabilitative 
activities ensures that facilities like healing lodges can be used. 
In my speaking with various Aboriginal communities they are 
again excited about this opportunity and I believe that it is 
something that maybe can be beneficial. 
 
We have to find a way to ensure that our correctional facilities 
are not always filled to the hilt. If there’s a better way to deal 
with people who have been part of a crime, we have to find a 
way to do it. We also have to make sure that when there is a 
crime, people are paying for this crime. 
 
So we’ve been doing the same thing for years and years. If it’s 
not helping, then it’s time we looked at a different way of doing 
it. So I applaud the opportunity to look at another alternative. 
 
This Bill also provides for changes to how rules respecting 
reduced custody programs and criteria for offender 
participations are established. And again, when we take this Bill 
further we will be asking questions on this area. 
 
Allowing the Criminal Code provision and recognizing 
conditional sentences is something that on the federal level has 
to be coincided with our provincial jurisdiction. And really with 
the young offenders, it’s another area of justice that has to be 
looked at. 
 
Revising wording to show consistency with the new federal 
justice criminal Act also is important. 
 
Probation officers are going to be allowed to arrest an offender 
who has committed an offence. This is probably something that 
the police officers will be applauding and I know that this is 
going to put additional responsibility on our probation officers 
and probably make them busier yet. I know that a number of 
them are already saying that their workload is very high and I’m 
wondering how this is going to be affecting them. 
 
Changes that are responding to the Criminal Code which allows 
the gathering of information about an offender’s maturity, 
attitude, and willingness to make amends is something that 
again maybe is trying to make a different . . . put a different 
slant on what’s happening in the justice system. And we are 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

getting responses from people who are dealing with individuals 
and they have some interesting remarks to make. 
 
Changing provisions that allow for searches in correctional 
facilities, to include urinalysis, is the search procedure to 
determine if an inmate can participate in a program is 
something that is very important. I have . . . we have friends and 
relatives that work within the correctional system and I’m 
always intrigued to hear about some of the situations that they 
have to deal with within the walls of the correctional facility. 
 
Many of us feel that once an offender is finally picked up and 
works his way through the justice system, the court system, and 
makes it to jail, they think okay, then the job is done. But we 
forget that there are people working within the system that are 
trying hard to work with . . . to rehabilitate and to ensure that 
the right thing is done for individuals within the system. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, looking at all . . . the comprehensive Bill that 
is in place right now and the changes that are required and the 
fact that there are many people still making submissions to us, I 
would like to adjourn the debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sitting to my 
right, the deputy minister of Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs, Brent Cotter; to my left, Donavon Young, 
who’s the acting assistant deputy minister of Aboriginal 
Affairs; behind the deputy minister is Wanda Lamberti, who’s 
the executive director of finance, administration, and 
information technology. 
 
Behind me is Glen Benedict, who’s the executive director of 
Indian land and resources; and to my left and second row, Al 
Hilton is the assistant deputy minister, federal-provincial 
relations; and Paul Osborne, who’s the assistant deputy minister 
of trade and international relations. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good afternoon to the 
minister and all of his officials, who we’re very pleased to see 
here today. And I’m not too sure that I can make use of all of 
your knowledge, but I certainly hope that the minister can refer 
these questions to you, if necessary. 
 
Mr. Minister, some time ago I posed a written question to the 
Assembly — to your government — asking for the total amount 
of funding that was granted by the province to the Métis Nation 
of Saskatchewan as well as the organizations that are affiliated 
with the Métis Nation and the agencies. And I’m wondering if 
today, your department has the answer to that question for me. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 

member’s question, I was just kind of thinking back to where 
the money to the Métis Nation comes from in the government. 
And as the member will appreciate, it comes from a range of 
different places. 
 
And so I think . . . She says she sent us a written question and 
that is being completed. I’m not sure if she’s received the 
answer yet but if she hasn’t, she’ll get it shortly. 
 
From the Department of Government Relations and Aboriginal 
Affairs, the Métis Nation receives $425,000. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister: Mr. Minister, I thank you for that amount, for 
revealing to me what that amount is. 
 
But I have had questions from different Métis individuals and 
agencies throughout the province that are wanting to know just 
exactly whether there are lump sums of money or incremental 
amounts of money that are distributed to specific Métis 
organizations or agencies other than the 425,000, or if in fact 
the $425,000 is apportioned to the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan and they are under obligation then to distribute 
that money to organizations or agencies. So if that’s not the 
case, are there any other organizations or agencies that receive 
funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The 425,000 to the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan is made available to the Métis Nation. It is not 
monies which are directed to locals or goes from MNS (Métis 
Nation of Saskatchewan) to locals. And it is money which is 
provided to deal with the bilateral relationship between the 
Métis Nation and the province of Saskatchewan, and also the 
bipartite relationship between the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
Government of Canada. And it enables there to be appropriate 
discussions about jurisdiction, about specific issues as they 
affect the Métis Nation bilaterally and trilaterally. 
 
And for example, some of that money would have been used to 
deal with hunting and fishing rights; some of it would have 
been used to deal with election planning and election structures 
— as just two examples of what that money was used for. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just in 
respect to part of your comments, the distribution of funding. 
Two different locals throughout the province is certainly a hot 
potato right now because it has come to the Saskatchewan Party 
official opposition’s attention that a number of locals are being 
disenfranchised, almost arbitrarily. And there is a question as to 
whether there is authentic reasoning . . . good reasons for that 
happening. 
 
We have coming to our attention from Métis people throughout 
the province that more and more locals have been 
disenfranchised and therefore are not able to have the 
availability of funding for their locals and their specific 
programs within those locals that they would like to issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just wanted to ask you if you could give me an 
update on how the problems within the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, the problems regarding democratic elections, the 
problems regarding unfounded reasons for disenfranchising 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

 

certain locals, and also the problem brought forward by a 
number of Métis people in Saskatchewan last year when The 
Métis Act was passed in this Assembly that had to do with the 
autonomy and the all-encompassing power that the Métis 
Nation of Saskatchewan now has. 
 
So there have been a number of questions and there has been a 
desire by the Métis people of Saskatchewan to have this 
resolved and to have some amendments made to that Act. And 
I’m wondering if you could give me an update and let me know 
today what measures you have taken as the minister responsible 
for Métis affairs in addressing these issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises an important 
point, not only for Métis people in the province but for all 
people in the province. And we share also her and many 
members of the Métis Nation’s concern and frustration with the 
way some of these matters have been addressed. 
 
As the member will know, the department provided $25,000 for 
a study on electoral reform. That report was presented and has 
recommendations for the Métis Nation, has recommendations 
for the province of Saskatchewan and for the federal 
government, and we are all committed to ensuring that the 
process is one which is regarded as being fair and acceptable to 
all members of the Métis Nation. 
 
We have had numbers of meetings dealing with this question, 
and one in particular I’ll relate to the member. It was tripartite 
meeting between President Chartier, Minister Goodale, as the 
federal interlocutor, and myself where we discussed at some 
length the importance of resolving this issue so that we all can 
move forward. 
 
The matter is one for, strictly speaking, one for the Métis 
Nation to resolve itself, but it is one which . . . in which we all 
have an interest and also the federal government has an interest. 
 
So we’ve voiced our concerns. We’ve funded a study which has 
recommendations for all partners. And we anticipate and 
certainly hope that these measures will be implemented and that 
all members of the Métis Nation will perceive the next elections 
as being, as being fairer. 
 
The matter she raises of locals I think is, again, a matter which 
is more properly dealt with not by another minister but by the 
Métis Nation, the Métis Nation itself. Again, something that we 
all have an interest in and will . . . we are ensuring, we will 
ensure that the Métis Nation treats these matters seriously, 
treats our concerns seriously, and hopefully makes changes 
which are acceptable to everyone. 
 
But I think it is important to recognize that, at the end of the 
day, the Métis Nation is as it should be — self-governing. And 
the solutions to these challenges are within the nation itself. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, one of the concerns brought forward to 
myself by a number of Métis people in the province was that 
the study on electoral reform, which your government put 
forward $25,000 for, was certainly needed. But they expressed 
some concern that the Métis person that was appointed . . . or 
self appointed or appointed by your government to deal with 

this issue in fact was — in the interpretation or the words of the 
Métis people — one of the very people causing the problems 
with the electoral process and so they wondered about the 
rationale. 
 
And I just want to make that point because it was brought 
forward to me, and there was certainly some question and 
consternation in the minds of a number of Métis people 
throughout the province as to why that kind of a measure would 
have been put in place by your government. If in fact they 
wanted to heal and they want to be able to make sure that there 
is proper process in place and an issue looked at that was 
causing a lot of problems, certainly an independent person 
would have been a most likely . . . a better choice for this study 
on electoral reform. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you have a 
copy of the report that . . . the report with recommendations in it 
for electoral reform that you say the federal government has and 
that you have, if its possible for me to get a copy of those 
recommendations, I would really appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — With regards to the member’s first 
point about the credibility of the author of the report, I think it’s 
not wise to be — bearing in mind the person who did the report, 
the report itself — to be critical of her credibility. I don’t think 
anybody would legitimately question her. She was a 
Department of Justice lawyer, became a consultant, and was 
chosen by all to write this report. 
 
And I think the proof of her credibility and the proof of her 
independence is indeed in the report itself which makes a 
number of, a large number, of wide sweeping recommendations 
for Métis Nation itself, and also makes a number of helpful and 
constructive recommendations with regards to what the 
provincial government and what the federal government can do 
to facilitate the process. 
 
I have every faith in Ms. Poitras and her capacity to do this 
work. I think the report was very helpful and constructive and 
should, if responded to appropriately, have a significant impact 
on the next election process. 
 
So I take issue with the member’s characterization of Ms. 
Poitras. I think she did a good job in this not very easy situation. 
 
And as regards to the report itself, I thought the member was 
going to ask me if I had a copy of it sitting right here. I don’t 
think I do, but I will make sure the member gets a copy. It’s a 
public document and one that should be available to all. So by 
the close of day we’ll make sure the member gets a copy. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister: Mr. Minister, the person and the name that you 
relayed to me was certainly not the name that I had been given 
as far as the Métis representative to deal with electoral reform. 
 
And I just want to clarify very clearly that the whole issue of 
me asking this question is pretty well nullified because I was 
given, then, information that was not correct. And certainly I 
commend Ms. Poitras — I guess is her name — on her work. I 
have yet to see it but I want just to clarify that this was not the 
person that I was told was on the reform process. 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

(15:45) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to, just before I go on with another issue 
that involves First Nations people that has come to my attention 
and needs to be addressed, I want to just mention to yourself 
that I came, just came from, a one-day conference entitled 
Sexual Exploitation of Children Services Update that was being 
held at the Scott Collegiate here in Regina. And I was heartened 
by the number of different people attending from different 
agencies and organizations that are basically giving us an 
update on what kind of services are provided in the province, 
what kind of things yet need to be done. 
 
And I bring this up in Aboriginal Affairs because just about 
every one of the presenters — or a number of them anyway — 
mentioned that 90 per cent of the children on the street are of 
First Nations or Métis descent. 
 
And so I was very heartened by a number of the initiatives that 
are being taken and I commend Brenda Dubois for bringing all 
of these organizations and agencies together to enlighten each 
other on what we do have within the city. And it’s certainly a 
good initiative because it talks about . . . they talked about the 
number of agencies that need to work together now and I guess 
it sort of surprised me that this kind of initiative had not been 
taken before. But nonetheless, it’s important that it be noted and 
that Ms. Dubois be given a lot of credit for that. 
 
One of the things that came up at this conference this afternoon 
was the idea that First Nations people, different tribal councils 
and so on, have been contacted by your government to make 
sure that their input is in play as far as services and the kind of 
services and programs that would assist children in their present 
situation as well as helping them off the streets. 
 
So I did have assurance that the Minister of Social Services had 
been in touch with the First Nations people of Regina and area, 
but I am wondering whether or not First Nations people, for 
instance the tribal council from Prince Albert, La Ronge tribal 
council — La Ronge Band, rather — and the Saskatoon Tribal 
Council have also been contacted in order to make sure that 
they have a venue to come together to put forward their ideas 
about different services. So if you could relay to me today 
whether or not that has been done I would be pleased. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, the member rightly 
identifies the important . . . the importance of more integrated 
services and mechanisms, better mechanisms whereby those 
who are working in areas to enhance the lives of First Nations 
and Métis peoples in the province — and in particular, perhaps 
with regards to young people — that they have an opportunity 
to have a full and complete input into the decision-making 
process which affects so many of their own citizens. 
 
And that certainly is a priority of the Department of Aboriginal 
Affairs. And I think the member will know that the Department 
of Social Services did ensure that there were opportunities for 
people to . . . for First Nations and for tribal councils and the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations to participate in the 
building of strategies in this area. 
 
And I might say too, most of my time as the Minister of 
Aboriginal Affairs is taken up meeting with and visiting First 

Nations and First Nations leaders to discuss ways in which we 
can better coordinate these services and ways in which the 
province can play its role. 
 
The member will know that with regards to First Nations 
communities, the primary responsibility is the relationship First 
Nations have with the federal government, but this is a 
challenge for all of us in this province and one which the 
provincial government treats . . . takes seriously. 
 
We have programs on-reserve. The member will know in 
particular justice programs, but a range of other programs — 
victims services and so on — which assist First Nations in 
meeting the challenges they face. 
 
So while there plainly is a border around the reserve, we very 
often don’t pay much attention to it because it’s our view that 
we all have to find solutions to the challenges that we have in 
the province. I think the member raises an issue that we all, I 
think, should take to heart, and that is there is really never 
enough consultation and work done before policies are 
generated. 
 
But it is absolutely critical no matter what area of work we are 
in, that with First Nations and Métis peoples constituting a large 
and growing proportion of our population, that to move forward 
effectively and to move forward together, we need to partner 
right from the very beginning — from when we ask the 
questions about what needs to be done, on to developing the 
appropriate strategies, and then through on to protocols, and the 
work that actually gets done at the front line. 
 
And I might just use one example of another department that I 
look after, the Department of Justice with regards to the 
Aboriginal Justice Commission, in which right from the very, 
very beginning, we worked — the provincial government, 
officials in my department, and myself — worked with First 
Nations and Métis leaders from day one. And came to — over 
time, after much discussion and much differences of opinion, 
worked out, through give-and-take — a strategy that we all 
thought would work towards finding solutions and that would 
be constructive rather than pointing the finger. 
 
And I think there’s a good example of how, if we sit down right 
from the beginning and work the issue through, we can all come 
to a solution which is both respectful and constructive. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
just move from that issue to concerns brought to me by First 
Nations women. And actually, this possibly doesn’t have a great 
deal of bearing on provincial responsibility, but there is a 
connection between provincial responsibility and the federal 
responsibilities and so on. 
 
And as you, I’m sure, have noticed in the last six months to a 
year, we have had a lot of First Nations women speaking out on 
issues and different policy changes, and so on, that they would 
like to see that would call for more accountability all the way 
around; not only from First Nations leaders, but from everyone 
as far as focusing on how things get done and funding for those 
things that need to get done. 
 
So I’ve had some First Nations women in Regina bring to me, 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

 

or to my attention, their concern about the Indian Act changes. 
And they say that they’re very detrimental to off-reserve Indian 
people. She also brought up — the woman that talked to me — 
also brought up her concern that even though off-reserve Indian 
people may vote for chief and council, they are not privy to be 
able to be elected or voted for themselves on that council if 
they’re living off-reserve. 
 
And I’m just wondering whether or not you have been in 
discussion at all with the federal government as far as the 
changes to the Indian Act that most likely are going to 
perpetuate these problems that this First Nations woman sees? 
 
She indicated to me that Corbier intended for off-reserve 
Indians to have those rights, and in fact if the Indian Act goes 
forward the way it is, that will not be available to them. 
 
So I’m wondering if you can comment on that and whether or 
not you had some discussion with the federal government 
regarding these matters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the important 
question of elections on First Nations and the role of and the 
right of those living off-reserve to participate in those elections, 
and she raises the question of accountability — all issues which 
are important questions for, again, for both First Nations people 
and the people of the province in general. 
 
I might say — and I don’t say this in order to pass the 
responsibility off to the federal government — but this is 
primarily a federal, a federal issue. One which the federal 
government and individual First Nations are working on. Not 
finding it as easy to resolve as one might, one might hope. 
 
The Supreme Court of Canada has made it clear that people 
who live off-reserve have the right to participate in the running 
of affairs on-reserve. And what you will find, as I’m sure the 
member knows, is . . . are many chiefs running for election, 
spending a lot of time in the cities of not only Saskatchewan but 
as far — in Alberta too — and as far afield as British Columbia, 
even in the United States, some members in larger American 
cities as well. 
 
So a challenge for a person running for office, for a First Nation 
office at the present time is not just to work with those members 
who live on-reserve but in fact the members who live 
off-reserve, and those members who live off-reserve can be as 
many as live on or sometimes even more. 
 
And it’s also the case, as the member I think indicated, that 
some First Nations make it rather easier for off-reserve 
members to vote and to participate and to stand for office. 
Others make it rather more difficult. 
 
But I can’t recall certainly the numbers, but there are many First 
Nations who provide for mail-in ballots, for example, from 
members who live off the First Nation, making it very easy for 
members to participate; and indeed, making it easy for members 
who don’t have a very strong connection to the First Nation to 
participate. And the member will know too a number of chiefs 
who’ve been recently elected who actually lived off-reserve 
before the election. 
 

So this is a matter which is more preferably to be dealt with 
between First Nations and the federal government. It’s a matter 
we discuss with the federal government at considerable length. 
Because one of the challenges we have in this province is to 
address the federal off-loading for those who live off-reserve. 
It’s First Nations view, and our view, that the federal 
government should maintain its trust relationship with First 
Nations people, whether they live on-reserve or off-reserve, and 
that rights should follow the First Nations people who move 
into . . . move off their First Nations communities. 
 
The federal government doesn’t take that view. And in fact the 
federal government hasn’t been more responsive to our view 
over the last little while; in fact, the reverse. The federal 
government has been more aggressive in its view that 
on-reserve is their responsibility and off-reserve is our 
responsibility. 
 
So the kinds of issues the member raises generate a lot of issues 
for us too. And our concern and our focus is to try to do our 
part, to enable First Nations people to have the kinds of 
opportunities that other members of our society has, and to not 
be obsessed with jurisdictional questions but to be obsessed 
with trying to find solutions together. 
 
And before the member stands up, I have to say that I think 
we’ve agreed that we will have Aboriginal Affairs until 4 
o’clock. And it being 4 o’clock, I’m sure the member has some 
questions for the Minister of Government Relations about 
Aboriginal people or whatever. But I’d be happy . . . of course 
we’ll be happy to be back dealing with some other of these 
important issues as time goes on. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
would suggest that Government Relations have to deal with the 
very issue that we’re just talking about because provincial and 
federal government relations, this issue of whether off-reserve 
Indian people can in fact be entitled to be elected as council 
members is a very important issue. 
 
I’m understanding what you’re saying, but it’s such a very 
important thing to come to some resolve with and to make sure 
there’s fairness with because there’s really no protection for 
off-reserve First Nations people as far as ensuring them that 
they have a say and funding that’s needed for off-reserve 
services, like care homes for instance, like safe houses for their 
people, like any services that they may need. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And of course the bands, the reserves are granted funding on a 
per capita or per head basis, and so that money should be used 
for . . . or should be able to be used for off-reserve First Nations 
people who have some concerns, because they are being 
included in that head count. 
 
And so I’m not quite sure whether or not you feel really 
desirous of speaking to the federal government once again on 
behalf of off-reserve people because we as a province are 
certainly conscientious and want to make sure that healthy 
initiatives are in place to assist people that are now off-reserve. 
But they are themselves saying that some of the funding for that 
should come from bands, and the council . . . chief and council 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

should make sure that some of that happens, some of that 
money is forthcoming to off-reserve First Nations. 
 
But it often does not work like that. And so there is a concern, 
and it’s not only a funding concern for the taxpayers of the 
province but it’s also a major concern for First Nations women 
that are bringing this issue forward. 
 
I will take my seat at this time and turn the questioning over to 
my colleague for — what is it? — Intergovernmental Affairs. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — If I can just make a brief response, 
Mr. Chair. The member’s absolutely right about the challenge 
that we face here. 
 
And we would be spending a great deal of our time in our 
discussions with the federal government on this very question. 
There simply are not enough resources in the Saskatchewan 
treasury to respond effectively to these challenges alone. And 
so we have to find solutions which work and which fulfill not 
only the federal government’s responsibility, but a notion of 
assisting First Nations to achieve the goals they set themselves. 
 
And this would be a matter in which the provincial government 
and First Nations are in full accord and do not support the 
federal government’s view. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — The next area of this department that we’ll be 
covering is Government Relations, and we’ll make a brief pause 
while the minister brings in his officials. 
 
I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
introduce again someone who was just recently here and 
continues to remain to support me in this matter, deputy 
minister of Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, Brent 
Cotter. 
 
On my immediate right, Paul Osborne who’s the assistant 
deputy minister, trade and relations; Al Hilton, who’s the 
assistant deputy minister federal-provincial relations; and 
Wanda Lamberti, who’s the executive director of finance, 
administration, and information technology. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Chair. Before we get started, Mr. Minister, 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and your 
officials for agreeing to sit and answer questions regarding 
Intergovernmental Affairs this afternoon. 
 
And before getting into specifics, I’d just like to ask you to 
briefly outline what changes you have made in the department 
this last year, from personnel, program, and policy standpoints. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member. As she 
will know, the province having embarked on this new direction 
to focus on specific areas as far as municipal, local 
governments, provincial and international governments are 
concerned, it’s in order to be more focused and efficient in 
responding to some specific needs in those areas. 
 
As one department responsible for Government Relations and 

Aboriginal Affairs, we have an opportunity to focus more 
clearly on the relationship between our Aboriginal, municipal, 
provincial, and federal governments. 
 
What perhaps might be of assistance is to indicate the mandate 
of the department which is to promote Saskatchewan’s interests 
through management of the province’s relations with other 
governments in Canada and abroad, and to work with 
Aboriginal peoples in the province and their organizations to — 
once again — to advance our common interests as we move 
into the future. 
 
The department works in partnership with communities to 
support local governance, provide financial and technical 
support, and as well develop legislation, regulations, and other 
policies to meet the changing needs of municipal governments. 
 
The department also coordinates and manages matters related to 
Government House, French language training — French 
language services, pardon me, and official protocol, provincial 
honours, and also provides administrative services to the Office 
of the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Specifically, perhaps a little more specifically, with respect to 
Intergovernmental Relations, what this particular responsibility 
is the support for the minister and the Premier at all Canadian 
intergovernmental and international meetings. It supports the 
development, coordination, and implementation of the 
province’s intergovernmental activities and policies and is 
directly responsible for policies regarding trade, immigration, 
and constitutional and international relations. It also coordinates 
and manages matters relating to French language services. 
 
Now there are another . . . there are several other headings 
within the department, such as federal/provincial relations, 
international relations, constitutional relations, trade policy, and 
immigration as well. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, if the hon. member wants me to specify any 
specific area or . . . I believe your question was with respect to 
numbers as well. And please, if you would clarify that for me. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Well I’ll get into . . . Thank you, Mr. Minister 
and Mr. Chair. To the minister: I will get into some numbers 
but it’s . . . you said about efficient and focused government 
and, boy, I beg to differ on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
It seems where one minister used to be handling the affairs of 
Municipal, Aboriginal, the Provincial Secretary, and 
Government Relations, now we’ve all got that, you know, 
we’ve got that spread around with different ministers. So we 
really don’t know who to contact anymore because even under 
Aboriginal Affairs or municipal relations, you’re dealing with 
different ministers. 
 
So I fail to see where that is a more focused and efficient 
government. So perhaps if you could just, you know, help me to 
understand, you know, how it is compared to the way it was 
prior to this shuffle. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That is a good 
question from the hon. member. Those jurisdictions which we 
now deal with, at least to this point, have not brought it to our 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

 

attention that there’s been any difficulty with respect to their 
understanding of the relationships. 
 
And I just want to focus particularly on municipal relationships 
which . . . nothing has changed in that respect. Our municipal 
sector, the commitment to the municipal sector has remained 
strong and continues. As a matter of fact, we are able to consult, 
and we have consulted, with the municipal sector on various 
areas of responsibilities with respect to information and tools 
that they would require to assist them in local governance. 
 
So that, from that perspective those open lines of 
communication, I believe have been strengthened and the 
mutual relationships and needs of municipalities, the urban and 
rural, are such that allow us to more . . . to more actively 
interrelate with their needs. 
 
So I’m not sure specifically which areas and if you’d like to . . . 
Mr. Chairman, if the member would like to specifically address 
what areas or where there might be some concerns, I’d be very 
pleased to hear about those so we can address them. 
 
Our efforts have been to ensure more easy contact and 
responding to people’s concerns or individuals, whether they’re 
individuals or community’s concerns with respect to any 
changes that are made within departments, and in order that we 
can focus on specific relationships with regards to 
communications; and as I mentioned, tools that particularly 
other governments, local governments, can utilize or have 
access to for assistance with the Department of Government 
Relations in assisting them in their efforts on behalf of the 
communities that they serve. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in all due 
respect, you’ve just mentioned to my colleague that your 
Department of Intergovernmental Affairs includes duties to 
look at the interconnectedness and also the duty to make sure 
that there is — I guess affairs of municipal governments, First 
Nations governments, federal and international governments are 
looked at. 
 
Now that includes Aboriginal Affairs so why does the Minister 
of Justice also have an Aboriginal Affairs portfolio? The other 
day when I was doing some questioning in estimates, I really 
came up with some questions about gaming pertaining to 
Aboriginal Affairs and he . . . the minister told me to refer that 
to you. 
 
So does . . . my question for you is: does the Minister of Justice 
and Aboriginal Affairs have different duties than do you as 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs? And could you please 
clarify where the differences are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the hon. 
member, the alignment that we have created with other levels of 
governance is conducive to more open lines of communications. 
 
Now your question with respect to why does the Minister of 
Justice . . . The Minister of Justice has to this point in time 
created that open lines of communication with the Aboriginal 
Affairs governance. However, it still ties in under the umbrella 
of governance structures — whether it be municipal, provincial, 
federal, or international. 

So I guess . . . I guess, in effect, although it may be looked at as 
the responsibility under two ministries, there is a need to, under 
Government Relations, a need to still have . . . and as there is an 
interconnection with some other ministries with respect to 
specific issues dealing with perhaps treaty land entitlements, 
which would still require some participation by the Justice 
minister on those specific issues. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So it’s an umbrella that’s created under Government Relations 
which still engages, and as you will see as well, will also 
engage the Provincial Secretary under that particular umbrella 
which then allows the open lines of communications with the 
different levels of government, both locally, provincially, and 
internationally. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, those open 
lines of communication that are needed, I agree with that 
concept. What I do not agree with and I cannot understand is 
why you need to have two ministers that are both designated 
with a task, the same task basically. Intergovernmental Affairs 
is pertaining to Aboriginal people, in this instance, and so every 
issue that is brought forward that involves First Nations or 
Métis people is . . . we need open lines of communication for 
that, that’s correct. But why can’t one minister take care of all 
of those things? It seems to me to be only sensible. 
 
It seems to me that it’s not sensible to have a number of 
ministers that are to be expected to address or that are supposed 
to address or answer questions from the general public as well 
as the official opposition, because there are no clear lines of 
duties that are given to us as official opposition. There’s no 
clear lines of duty that have been described to us by your 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, once again, the Aboriginal 
Affairs provincially is still the responsibility of the Minister of 
Justice where he has developed these relationships. Under 
Government Relations, dealing with Aboriginal Affairs would 
relate to more of the international relationships with Aboriginal 
Affairs. 
 
So again there’s still a need to have the Minister of Justice 
who’s developed the connections, the contacts, with Aboriginal 
Affairs in the province. And when in the international . . . on the 
international scene is where Government Relations becomes 
involved and would still probably need to consult with and 
discuss issues with the Minister of Justice who is directly 
responsible for Aboriginal Affairs within the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you talk 
about your portfolio having the responsibility for international 
issues dealing with First Nations and whatever. Mr. Minister, 
your portfolio, one of your responsibilities is First Nations 
gaming in the province. That is not international, that is within 
this province. So your explanation that you’ve just given me 
doesn’t seem to hold any point. 
 
I just can’t quite understand . . . I mean I think that my . . . The 
issue I brought forward to you about getting some clarification 
as to the kind of duties that you have as opposed to what the 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

Minister of Justice and Aboriginal Affairs has, and being able to 
relay that to us, is really very important. Because your duties 
are not only dealing with international duties, they have proven 
. . . you have proven that you’re dealing with Aboriginal affairs 
in the province pertaining to First Nations gaming. 
 
So why would the Minister of Justice and Aboriginal Affairs 
not have had that responsibility also? I mean it’s something that 
you’ve taken on and the whole thing is very confusing. So you 
can comment on this if you would, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the hon. 
member, I regret that it’s . . . And let’s not confuse the issue 
further by involving First Nations gaming . . . (inaudible) . . . 
these responsibilities. Because that is, that is a separate ministry 
— Liquor and Gaming Authority with First Nations partnership. 
So that is a different ministry that deals specifically with those 
particular issues provincially. 
 
So as I mentioned previously, the Justice minister will still 
maintain the responsibilities for dealing with Aboriginal issues 
such as treaty land entitlements and governance as it comes to 
First Nations. 
 
The international aspect of other First Nations or Aboriginal 
affairs would come through Government Relations office and 
be dealt with in that fashion. 
 
And as I mentioned whether it comes through my office or 
through the Justice minister’s office, there is still a need perhaps 
for the different ministries to work together on some of these 
very, very complex issues. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I’m just going to take this in a little bit of a different 
area now, out of the Aboriginal area. 
 
And in the annual report for 2000 and 2001 it says here the key 
challenge will be to continue to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
interests and objectives are effectively advanced through its 
relations with other governments. To address this challenge, the 
department plans to, and it lists several points here, but the one 
I want to get at is: 
 

. . . aggressively advance to the federal government the 
interests of Saskatchewan agricultural producers and the 
economic interests of rural Saskatchewan. 

 
And then back a little further it says: 
 

The department will identify and achieve federal and 
provincial acceptance of Saskatchewan’s objectives in a 
full slate of trade liberalization negotiations at WTO . . . 
(NTAA), NAFTA and AIT. It will also successfully (and I 
point out successfully) defend Saskatchewan measures and 
interests in international and domestic trade disputes such 
as U.S. trade actions on softwood lumber, steel, agriculture, 
and cultural industries. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, that brings me to a couple of points and 
then a question. 
 
Today I found that our government’s actions were very 

uncooperative. But having said that, I feel we also have a very 
uncooperative and a very arrogant federal government. And it 
seems like when something happens in the province of Quebec 
— and I’ll use Bombardier as an example — it seems that they 
are so successful in lobbying the federal government to come to 
their aid. And I guess it’s because that’s where the Liberal 
support is and we all know that trying to find a Liberal in 
Saskatchewan, they’re about as rare as hen’s teeth. 
 
So I would like to know: is your department lobbying the 
federal government and have you . . . how have the meetings 
turned out that you have pointed out in here that you will be 
working towards? Were your meetings successful with the 
federal people as far as enhancing agriculture in Saskatchewan 
and the US trade tariffs and subsidies that they have 
implemented recently? Could you just enlighten us on that 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
question, which is an important one. 
 
Can I just perhaps review for the member the . . . what has 
happened in fact is, through Government Relations, there has 
been a coordination and management of the development . . . 
and management of the development of the communication to 
the federal government of the province’s position with respect 
to some of the issues that the member has raised. 
 
World Trade Organization negotiations broadened beyond 
agriculture and services, including dispute settlement. These are 
some of the ongoing discussions that are carried on including 
such things as trade remedies, procurement, trade, and 
environment, the NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement) clarifications, as well as it relates to investment and 
services. 
 
Free trade area of the Americas — that’s another issue that the 
department becomes involved with, those negotiations; and 
negotiations which lead to free trade agreements with European 
free trade area, Costa Rica, Singapore, Central America, and so 
on. 
 
As well, during the past, the department’s managed 
Saskatchewan’s participation and in . . . (inaudible) . . . 
represented the province in the ongoing negotiations of the 
built-in agenda of the trade to expand the procurement 
commitments and to complete an energy chapter and revise the 
code of conduct. 
 
As it relates to the current situation, we are very actively 
working with, again, other ministries to ensure that the federal 
government is aware of our concerns and our position on this 
issue of softwood lumber and the recent farm Bill in the US 
which is of grave concern. And certainly we’re continuing to 
work on those specific issues. This is not over and it will be 
something that will be ongoing. And hopefully we’ll be able to 
convince the central government to assist us, perhaps jointly or 
with other provinces, in addressing some of the very serious 
measures that have been taken by the US which so . . . which is 
so devastating to our economy not only in the agricultural 
sector, but also in our lumber industry. 
 
So those are key issues that we do become involved in and 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

 

ensure that it’s brought . . . brought to the forefront and 
reinforced on an ongoing basis, as I say, working again with 
other ministries that are affected by some of those issues. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I am very aware that, you know, the issue of subsidies 
and that isn’t over. I’m actively involved in agriculture. And I 
mean, right now the future is not that bright out there, as I’m 
sure you are aware. 
 
But I’m just wondering, what other ministries have you met 
with when you stated that you had met with other ministries and 
were working with them? What other ministries have you met 
with? How many times have you met and what were the results 
of the meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, just . . . the hon. member, 
just to clarify, within the province or outside of the province? 
Outside of the province? 
 
Mr. Chairman, for clarification to the hon. member, you 
addressed that question specifically: how many times have I 
met? I have not, given the brief period of time that I’ve been in 
this responsibility. But officials on an ongoing basis both from 
this ministry and others who continue on an ongoing basis to 
meet with and discuss these issues with counterparts in Ottawa 
in the International Trade minister’s office, the agricultural 
minister’s office as well, and as well with our federal 
representative, Minister Goodale. 
 
So it’s not . . . These issues are not taken lightly and there are 
ongoing discussions and meetings, not necessarily with 
individual ministers but with senior officials that ensure that 
these issues are brought to the forefront. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I guess, as outlined in the beginning, that I 
would now defer to the Provincial Secretary for . . . and look 
forward to the opportunity to perhaps continue some of the 
discussions that we’ve had up to this point in time. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to defer now to the Provincial 
Secretary. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, thank you 
for those answers. And it’s unfortunate that we have run out of 
time today because there are a few more issues I would like to 
discuss with you so I look forward to the next time this comes 
up in estimates. 
 
But for now I would like to thank you very much, and I would 
also like to thank your officials for being gracious enough to 
come here this afternoon and assist you. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The next area under consideration will 
be the Provincial Secretary (GR03). We’ll pause for a moment 
while the minister gets into position. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Subvote (GR03) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister responsible for 
the Provincial Secretary and ask her to introduce any new 

officials you may have. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Joining us for 
this portion of the questions is Wanda Lamberti, executive 
director of finance, administration, and information technology. 
And she’s seated just behind the deputy here. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Madam Minister, you have a new 
official who has just joined you for this part of the . . . so would 
you introduce the new officials, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m joined by Florent Bilodeau, who’s 
the director of the Office of French-language Co-ordination, 
who’s seated . . . You could move down, if you’d like. And, of 
course, behind myself a man who needs no introduction, 
Michael Jackson, the executive director of protocol and 
Government House. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Madam 
Minister, for agreeing to sit this afternoon and also to your 
officials for coming today as well. 
 
It feels like we’ve been having a little bit of musical chairs this 
afternoon. We’ve been dealing with three different ministers in 
the same department. But can you give those watching, who 
may be watching today, the basic functions of what the Office 
of the Provincial Secretary does and why this role is necessary? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The Office of the Provincial Secretary 
basically coordinates matters related to official protocol and 
Government House and provides administrative services to the 
Office of the Lieutenant Governor. So for the Lieutenant 
Governor’s office we provide both administrative services, help 
with the arranging of hospitality events, ceremonial and 
constitutional functions of the viceregal office as well as 
providing liaison with the government and coordinating the 
province’s anniversary messages. 
 
From a protocol perspective, the office plans, organizes, and 
supervises visits of foreign diplomats, heads of states, and 
foreign delegations; oversees state ceremonial and symbols; 
organizes special events and anniversaries; provides protocol 
consulting; policy organization of provincial honours and 
awards program; and responsible for the Legislative Building 
art collection and the government gift policy. 
 
And as well, for Government House provides management, 
programming, and policy and planning for heritage property 
including museum, hospitality facility and public tours, 
supervising Government House heritage property, centennial 
project. 
 
And as well we have the Office of French-language 
Co-ordination which coordinates provincial initiatives in the 
area of French language services, providing linguistic support 
and translation services to government departments but as well 
liaising with the francophone community in the province. 
 
And I think I’m tired. I might have to go soon. I don’t know. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And the hon. 
member said it was almost time to adjourn now after you listed 
all of those. 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

In this newly reconstructed government that is supposedly to be 
more efficient, we now see that the Department of Government 
Relations, where the Provincial Secretary is located, that we 
have three ministers. 
 
Can you tell us the wisdom in having a different person in the 
role of Provincial Secretary than either of the two ministers 
currently in this department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I believe the wisdom of having this 
particular responsibility be connected to the other duties that I 
hold right now is the link that it has to the culture and heritage 
portfolio that is the main responsibility that I have. 
 
Now this is a very important responsibility because it does 
operate at a high level with many important guests and visitors 
and responsibilities from the point of view of our relationship 
with the Crown and with visiting people from other countries 
— visiting diplomats and others from other countries. So it’s a 
high-level activity, but at the same time it is very connected to 
the interests that we have in culture and heritage. 
 
And I think that . . . I think it’s a very good thing to have people 
be able to be responsible for things that are in other people’s 
departments if in fact it makes sense to do that. It’s sort of 
organization by function, rather than just by structure. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister: can you tell us how the staffing levels have changed in 
the Provincial Secretary office, outside of the Anniversary 
Secretariat? Were they affected by the hiring freeze? Is there 
any positions vacant right now and do you expect them to be 
filled soon? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The only reductions at the moment 
were the Anniversary Secretariat and there’s no vacancies at the 
moment. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So the hiring 
freeze never affected your department at all. 
 
We see a rather large expenditure increase for the operation of 
Government House this year. Could you just enlighten us to 
what this increase reflects. Is it all related to renovations or are 
there other areas that we see an increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m just . . . (inaudible) . . . to get you a 
few more details, but generally this is for the revitalization of 
Government House as a major historical and visitor site in the 
province. And we appreciated very much the support of the 
Leader of the Opposition in coming to that opening, and 
certainly people within that community feel that it’s important 
that he supports it as well. 
 
It is a national historic site and this is work that’s going on 
towards the centennial in 2005. So 2002-03 is the second year 
of a five-year redevelopment plan, and so increased funding of 
112,000 is being provided for the work going on in this year. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So you expect the 
completions to be done in 2005. Is that the idea of it all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes. In fact we will be most 

disappointed if we have to delay the centennial because 
Government House isn’t ready. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell me 
how many official functions are held at Government House 
each year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because Government House is used by 
the Lieutenant Governor, by outside agencies, by government 
when there’s honours and awards types of things involved, we 
would have to get the numbers from a variety of sources but we 
will pull that together for you and provide it to you. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I thank you, Madam Minister. What is the 
number of staff employed at Government House on a seasonal 
as well as a year-round basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The number of permanent staff would 
be five, and then seasonal could run around a dozen depending 
on the time of year and what the visitor demand is. But they’re 
part-time and casual so there’s a fair bit of flexibility in that. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — When the renovations are complete on 
Government House, will the number of functions increase as 
well as the type of functions — will that increase as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because the rationale of this upgrade is 
to make it more attractive for visitors and for tourists and for 
school groups, there will be actually more ability of 
Government House to host functions. And so we do, very much, 
believe that there will be increased visitor numbers and that this 
intention was built into the redevelopment. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
getting back to the cost, and I believe you said it was $112,000 
each year, are those, are those . . . is a 100 per cent of those 
costs being funded by the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The 112,000 that we’re providing is the 
operating cost to manage the project, but the actual funding 
formula for the 2 million, which will be the total cost of the 
redevelopment, is one-third provincial, one-third federal, and 
then one-third fundraising. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you have any 
plans as far as the fundraising — what avenues they’re going to, 
to raise funds for this? Are there just private donations 
involved, or can you just tell me what you have in mind in that 
area, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s a foundation made up of 
people from the private sector and it’s their responsibility to do 
the fundraising and to manage that part of it. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I’m sure the 
number of tourists will probably increase as well when this 
project is all completed. But I’m wondering if you can just give 
me an average number for the tourists that visit Government 
House per year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well after hearing the number myself, 
I’m thinking we’re going to have to be replacing rugs once in a 
while — 30,000 a year apparently, and that’s expected to 



May 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

 

double. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Yes, that is a 
large number. Do you have any information as to the amount of 
meals that are supplied through Government House? I 
understand that when meals are served that they are catered to; 
they don’t keep cooks on staff all the time. 
 
But I’m just wondering if you have an idea of how many meals 
are catered. I know when I visited the Governor General’s 
house in Ottawa, I was told that they catered 85,000 meals a 
year, and this was two or three years ago. So I’m just 
wondering if someone has kept track of that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’ll again have to get that 
information, but we can provide you with a pretty close 
estimate once we have a chance to look at the details of the 
events that were held over the year. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Madam Minister, are changes being made to 
make this a large tourist attraction and does the government 
have a goal? I’m sure that the numbers will increase from 
30,000 once this is all said and done. But I’m just wondering if 
the government is making some changes as far as attracting 
tourists and what their goal is? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — One of the objectives in the 
reconfiguration that’s taking place with Culture, Youth and 
Recreation was to get a number of the heritage facilities, tourist 
attractions, the science centres there, now the WDM (Western 
Development Museum), Wanuskewin, Government House. The 
idea to get some focus on I guess the value-added opportunities 
of the tourism that can be taking place in all of these facilities. 
 
And certainly I’ve had comments from tour operators that they 
would like to work with us in enhancing the understanding of 
what people who are involved in the tourism business and the 
moving of tourists around are expecting from facilities that they 
work with. 
 
And so I think there will be an emphasis over the coming 
couple of years, and certainly towards reaching full momentum 
during the centennial, to have a stronger emphasis on, you 
know, the value-added potential of all these facilities with 
enhanced promotion and marketing and closer linkages with 
other partners in the tourism sector. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
when the renovations are complete and the tourists start pouring 
in — as I’m sure they will — will there be an admission charge 
to get into Government House? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — So far it’s been our policy with as 
many facilities as possible to have them fully accessible to the 
public without any additional charge. 
 
Now every year, whenever dollars get tight, that discussion gets 
had again. But certainly a facility like this that’s seen very 
much as a provincial treasure, I think the notion is that people 
have contributed towards its existence and continuation. And 
because of the strong link it has to protocol and to the Crown, I 

think it would take quite a bit to go to that step of charging 
admission. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have noticed 
though that the science centre and other museums do charge, 
and I’m not saying one way or the other that you should charge, 
but I mean it might be something to consider, especially if the 
rugs need replacing. 
 
Do you plan on having a souvenir booth in Government House? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We will, but we will call it a gift shop 
as opposed to a souvenir booth. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now as far as the 
gift shop’s operation, will you be putting it up for tender as far 
as who operates it, or how is that going to work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Currently the historical society has a 
small gift shop there and I think because of that would feel they 
have dibs on that activity. And I suspect that, like the hospital 
gift shops and other things, there’s likely a strong volunteer 
component as well because a lot of the people who are involved 
in Government House and whatnot have strong interests in 
history and artifacts and whatnot, so I think, I think there likely 
would be a discussion of whether that had merit or not. But 
because the Historical Society has a traditional relationship I 
think they would be, I guess, the first on the list in terms of 
people who would operate that gift shop. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister and I’m . . . I 
know we all appreciate the work that volunteers do and in the 
end they are instrumental in whether a project flies or sinks. So 
I appreciate that, that volunteers are given the opportunity. 
 
The total budget for the Provincial Secretary has fallen by about 
$500,000. And all of the savings we see this year are on account 
of the Anniversary Secretariat being moved out of your 
department. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that would be the case. 
 
Now at the moment we’re undergoing a bit of a rethink of 
what’s the best use of our, I guess, combined investments, 
resources, and assets to support the centennial. But certainly, 
with the connecting of the Anniversary Secretariat to the 
department, it linked it to a fairly strong network of resources in 
the culture, youth and heritage area. And what we’re hoping to 
do is to increase the ability to pull those resources together 
around the centennial, as opposed to adding more layers of 
administration in preparing for the celebrations. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Is it true, Madam Minister, that the functions of 
the secretariat are now handled by a new Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, it’s a very small group of staff 
within the department. We never did move on the question of a 
Crown corporation. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As we all know, 
as you have mentioned before that Saskatchewan will be 
celebrating its centennial in 2005, and we can’t delay it till 
2006, so I was just wondering what the province . . . what kind 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2002 

 

of plans the province is making in celebration of this wonderful 
event? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think at the moment I would highlight 
three things. One is that we did have the committee that 
worked, produced the report and we can — if you haven’t seen 
a copy of the report, we can send it to you. They actually 
published a booklet that had a variety of opportunities for the 
centennial that people could decide to move on. 
 
As well there is an Internet site that people can post events that 
get information, share information. And then as well, there are a 
number of meetings going on with all the interested groups in 
the province who would have a stake in this like the Tourism 
Saskatchewan, the organizations that are organized under the 
lotteries — the, you know, Sask Culture, Sask Heritage, all of 
these kinds of people. And so anybody who is normally in the 
event celebration, provision of community and tourism service 
are involved in this discussion. 
 
We haven’t finalized yet exactly what people will be eligible 
for. The only funding that has been specifically directed at this 
at this point is for the Centenary Fund that’s been directed at 
capital, and that’s been the fund that many sectors have taken 
advantage of and that we were able to provide when we had a 
large surplus from oil and gas — that was 120 million over four 
years in six core areas. And so there’s been a lot of work being 
done on infrastructure under that particular program. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And we are 
running out of time, Madam Minister, so before I ask my final 
question, I would just like to thank you for being here today in 
estimates and also to your officials for agreeing to be here. 
 
And finally are there any expectations of any member of the 
royal family coming over being that it’s our 100th birthday as 
well as the ribbon cutting for the restoration of Government 
House? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We feel that the centennial would be 
worthy of a visit from the Queen herself, and we have extended 
an invitation and certainly are hoping that we will be taken up 
on it. 
 
And I will just now thank the member for her genuine interest 
in this area and look forward to any work we can do together on 
this in the future because, after all, it is the whole province’s 
centennial. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 


