















































Hansard: April 18, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 823 
 April 18, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
who are very concerned about the increase in long-term care 
fees. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
have a petition to present on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan concerned about the long-term care home costs. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Willowbrook and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today on behalf of people who are very concerned about the 
long-term care home increases in this province. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from the very good 
city of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens of Yorkton who are very concerned about the 
exorbitant increases to long-term care rates. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with long-term care home rates. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the Deputy Premier’s 
constituency of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed 
fee increases for long-term care services. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Weyburn, Ogema, and Pangman. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of signatures gathered on . . . from citizens 
in the Eastend area concerning the crop insurance premium 
hikes and coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
who have very deep concerns regarding the long-term care 
home increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is also signed by the Deputy Premier’s 
constituency of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the raise in long-term care fees. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Fillmore, Midale, 
Weyburn, and Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I have a petition here, Mr. Speaker, with 
citizens opposed to possible reductions in services to Davidson 
and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctorial services available as well as lab services, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Craik, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon about citizens who are concerned about the attack by 
this government on those that are already vulnerable in our 
society. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases from 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people from Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the exorbitant 
fee increases for long-term care services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from citizens 
from Borden, Vanscoy, Radisson, Cando, and Biggar. Thank 
you. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have yet another petition about the deplorable state of Highway 
No. 15, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns or the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And not surprising, yet again, the signatures are from a lot of 
areas, Mr. Speaker, which demonstrates how much this 
highway is used. They’re from Davidson, Humboldt, Unity, 
Luseland, Young, Watrous, Nokomis, Saskatoon; Chilliwack, 
BC (British Columbia), Airdrie and Drumheller, Alberta; and 
Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
are hereby read and received as addendums to previously tabled 
petitions being sessional papers no. 7, 10, 11, 16, 18, 23, 24, 
and 31. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give noticed that I 
shall on day no. 28 ask the government the following question. 
 

To the Minister of Health: how many patients per day on 
average were added to the waiting list for MRIs in 2001; 
how many patients per day on average received MRIs in 
2001; at the projected rate of procedures to be done, how 
long will it take to bring the waiting list to within a 
four-week waiting period? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
shall give notice on day no. 29 and ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture and Food: are silage trucks 
in the alfalfa dehy industry in Saskatchewan required to use 
clear fuel or can they use farm fuel? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a group of Saskatchewan public servants who are 
touring the legislature and are now seated in your gallery. 
 
Now these participants, Mr. Speaker, are employees from the 
departments of Government Relations; Agriculture, Food and 
Rural Revitalization; Health, Legislative Assembly 
administration, Industry and Resources, Social Services, 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

 

Justice, Environment, Highways and Transportation. 
 
And I’ll ask that all members of the legislature join me in 
welcoming these members and thanking them for their good 
work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And I look 
forward to meeting with them after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to welcome 
the public servants to the Assembly. I hope they enjoy the 
proceedings this afternoon, and a few of my colleagues are 
looking forward to meeting with you a little later on. So 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker through 
you and through all the . . . or to all the members of the 
Assembly today, I’d like to introduce the grade 12 class from 
my home community of Eastend, Saskatchewan. 
 
This class has . . . the teachers of this class anyhow, have made 
this an annual pilgrimage and this particular class is benefiting 
from the very deliberate and conscientious efforts of their 
teachers, Marie Hanson and Shelley Morvik. And we’d like to 
welcome them, as well as the bus driver, Curt Humphrey, who 
also happens to be the best backhoe operator I know. 
 
And we’d like to welcome them to the Assembly today. Hope 
they enjoy the proceedings. We’ve already warned them about 
what to expect during question period. They should be well 
prepared. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you to the members of this Assembly, in the east 
gallery, I’d like to introduce 23 grade 5 students from the 
Grenfell Elementary School. They’re accompanied by their 
teacher Constance MacKenzie, bus driver Garry Cole, and a 
number of parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of meeting with the students for 
a few moments on Monday, just to sit down and discuss the role 
of government and the role of MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative). I found the discussion very informative, but I 
found out, Mr. Speaker, as well, that while the students were 
interested in the role of government and their MLA, they also 
kind of wanted to know a little bit about agriculture, about 
farming. That was very interesting 
 
This group of students, as well, Mr. Speaker, was part of the 
D.A.R.E. (Drug Abuse Resistance Education) graduation 
program in the community of Grenfell that I attended in 
January. So I want to congratulate them. I look forward to 
visiting with them for a few moments later this afternoon. At 
this time, I’d like to invite members of the Assembly to 
welcome the students from Grenfell. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. In my 
introduction earlier, I neglected to mention a rather important 
element of the visiting students from Eastend today. Among the 
15 that are represented here, we have two that are exchange 
students. And I’d like to introduce the exchange students from 
Germany and Brazil. And unfortunately I didn’t get both of 
their names before the session today, but if they’d like to stand 
today, we’d like to recognize them in a special way. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, on the west gallery on the front 
row, we have a special visitor from Cumberland House. Her 
name is Francine Chaboyer. She is trained to be an RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) special constable. She’ll be 
starting the auxiliary program on, I suppose, tomorrow — on 
April 19. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the word in Cree for police is simagunis. And the 
word, simagun, means spear point. So that indeed as we look 
from tradition to the modern-day history, she’ll be a 
modern-day spear point protector of the people. So I would like 
everybody to please welcome Francine, and I would say . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And I would like all members to say, Ta wow, and welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canadian Soldiers Killed and Injured in Afghanistan 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
sadness that I stand before the Assembly today. Four Canadian 
soldiers were killed and eight injured during a training exercise 
in Afghanistan. These fallen and hurting soldiers were members 
of the Third Battalion of the Edmonton-based Princess 
Patricia’s Light . . . Canadian Light Infantry. 
 
My thoughts, and I’m sure the thoughts of all the members of 
this Legislative Assembly, are with the families, friends, and 
loved ones of these brave soldiers whose armed service led 
them into the war against terrorism. These individuals served 
their country with valour in a struggle for justice and freedom. 
 
The cause of death and injury appears to be a terrible accident, 
and I understand that an investigation is underway. But that 
does not lessen the pain the families feel for their loss. The 
casualties of war set a sombre tone especially when they are 
your own. Although the war is miles away, it affects many 
Canadians. 
 
We must applaud the efforts of men and women who 
unselfishly have put their lives at risk or given their lives to 
defend our freedom and our way of life. 
 
I know that all Canadians today, including the members of this 
Legislative Assembly, offer their condolences to the families of 
the deceased soldiers and wish a speedy recovery to those 
injured. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Tribute to Canadian Soldiers Serving in Afghanistan 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The British 
poet and soldier Siegfried Sassoon wrote from the trenches of 
World War I that, quote: 
 

Soldiers are citizens of death’s grey land 
Drawing no dividend from time’s to-morrows. 

 
Sadly, what was written nearly 90 years ago is still true today as 
we’ve learned from the overnight news from Afghanistan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for the constituency which includes 
the Canadian Forces Base 15 Wing Moose Jaw, I speak on 
behalf of the government, joining the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, in expressing our grief at the death of four 
Canadian soldiers and the injury of eight others. 
 
We’re especially concerned that one of the injured is originally 
from Cupar, Saskatchewan where his family still resides. 
Master Corporal Curtis Hollister is reported to be in stable 
condition in Germany, for which, Mr. Speaker, we are very 
thankful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tragic circumstance of the four deaths does not 
soften our nation’s loss nor diminish the sorrow of their 
families. And it is, of course, to the friends and families of these 
young soldiers that our sympathies go out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you and I, most of the members of this Assembly 
are parents. Most of us are fortunate that our children have not 
left home to be placed in harm’s way. We can only imagine the 
anguish of parents who have had to wait for further news upon 
hearing the first announcement. 
 
As we have said before in this House, we are proud of our 
Canadian men and women who are serving their nation in a 
hostile environment a world away from home, and we support 
them. 
 
We wish the injured speedy recovery, the whole Canadian 
contingent a quick return home, and we pray for eternal rest for 
the four soldiers and solace for their families. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Master Corporal Curtis Hollister 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 
member from Moose Jaw has indicated, Master Sergeant Curtis 
Hollister of Cupar was one of those soldiers that were injured 
yesterday in Afghanistan in that unfortunate incident. 
 
Curtis’ parents, Val and Len Hollister of Cupar received the 
word of their son’s injuries last night when a Chaplain informed 
them, about 2:30 in the morning, that he had sustained neck and 
face injuries from the Air US (United States) bomb. His parents 
were told that his injuries are non-life-threatening and that he is 

being transported to a hospital in Germany. His parents have 
also asked me to tell people and the media that they would not 
like to have calls at this time because they really don’t have a 
whole lot of information as to Curtis’ condition but they 
certainly will be willing to talk to anyone tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could at this time, I’d like to tell you just a 
little bit about Curtis Hollister. Curtis is a pleasant, polite young 
man that it’s a pleasure to meet. He’s always been a very decent 
young fellow when he was growing up. He grew up on a farm 
only a few miles from our farm. Our middle son is one of his 
best friends. They played hockey together; they played fastball 
together. Curtis also refereed those two sports and whenever a 
coach needed someone to referee that extra game Curtis was 
always there to ref for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the thoughts and prayers of all the residents of Cupar are 
with Curtis and his family and especially with those families 
who have lost their loved ones, Mr. Speaker. We are all looking 
forward to the day when Curtis returns home safely and we can 
take off those yellow ribbons that are up all around our town 
and we can take them down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Special Librarians Day 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A few years ago 
the Library Association published a list of 12 ways libraries are 
good for the country. Reason no. 12 was libraries preserve the 
past, which is true enough. 
 
I would add a 12(b) to that list: libraries help us define the 
future. Libraries like the invaluable corner of knowledge we 
have right here in our Legislative Building, staffed by the 
incomparable Marian Powell and her intrepid staff of 
ink-stained wonder workers. 
 
You guessed it, Mr. Speaker, it’s that day again — International 
Special Librarians Day, the one day of the year in which we 
publicly acknowledge and express our gratitude for the 
incredible load of knowledge that passes each year from their 
hands to ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a moment ago I used the phrase ink-stained. The 
theme of this year’s Special Librarians Day is Expanding 
Global Knowledge Frontiers, and in light of that theme I 
suppose I should have come up with something more current. 
How about IT (information technology)-tinted? 
 
Well although my phrasing may need work, Mr. Speaker, they 
do not. Our special librarians are expert at every form of 
gathering information for us, whether it be in dusty hard copy 
or any of those brand new knowledge portals by which the 
global knowledge frontier is explored and defined for us. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, our virtual hats are off to Marian and 
her staff. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

 

Samuel McLeod Awards for Business Excellence 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening, April 
17, 2002 the Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce held its 
annual Samuel McLeod Awards for business excellence, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sam McLeod was chosen as the model and hence 
the naming because of his commitment to Prince Albert. When 
the La Colle Falls hydroelectric project failed, Sam McLeod 
literally held the city of Prince Albert together for two years in 
order that the restructuring that was necessary could be put in 
place to prevent civic bankruptcy. 
 
Nine businesses in Prince Albert were honoured, Mr. Speaker, 
for their commitment to business and community excellence. 
And I wish to list them for our Assembly. New product or 
service went to Mortgage Alliance Company of Canada; 
investment to Cyr Contracting; new business to Prince Albert 
Alarm Systems Ltd.; community involvement went to the 
Scotia Bank; the service industry award went to Adams Institute 
for Learning; marketing, Mr. Speaker, went to Palm X Route 
Accounting; job creation to Humpty’s Family Restaurant; and 
the business of the year went to Ashly Cabinets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the chamber recognizes a business for 
long-standing exceptional business success and community 
commitment. This legacy award, Mr. Speaker, went to 
Anderson Motors. 
 
So congratulations to the Jones family for their success and 
commitment to Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all 
members please join me in congratulating all the nominees and 
winners at last night’s gala festivities in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Building Independence in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to share some good news with the 
Assembly. Members of the legislature will be aware of our 
government’s building independence program. And that 
program, Mr. Speaker, has now provided extended family 
health benefits to more than 20,000 low-income working 
families with children in Saskatchewan every year. And more 
than 6,000 low-income working families each year receive 
income supplements under the plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now these financial supports are helping more and more 
families pursue training and employment as an alternative to 
social assistance. As a result, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report 
to this Assembly that Saskatchewan Assistance Plan caseloads 
are down 2,309 cases, that is 7 per cent less from March of last 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve now had 88 consecutive months of decline 
in the social assistance caseload and the current March SAP 
(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) caseload is the lowest since 
1992. Now, Mr. Speaker, our building independence strategy is 
the most significant reform to welfare in Saskatchewan in the 
last 30 years. And it’s a set of reforms that stands in marked 
contrast to the slash-and-burn strategies of the Saskatchewan 
Party who say that they’re going to take $50 million away from 

the Department of Social Services including the building 
independence program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
 
Last night the Saskatoon Public School Board was fussed . . . 
face . . . to look at really tough decisions. One of the decisions 
they had to look at was firing 44 teachers. And the reason why? 
The answer’s really simple, Mr. Speaker. It’s because the 
Saskatoon Public School Board doesn’t have enough money to 
maintain its staff. 
 
They don’t have enough money because the tax base in which 
they’re getting their funding has taken a beating from this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government. People are leaving 
Saskatchewan in record numbers. We have the worst job loss 
record in all of Canada for the last decade. Education taxes are 
going up and teachers are being fired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the disaster is a direct result of the NDP’s failure 
to grow the province of Saskatchewan. What steps is the 
Premier taking to grow the province of Saskatchewan, to stop 
the loss of teachers, to stop the loss of students, and to stop the 
loss of jobs from this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 
records with regard to education and we talk about our increases 
to the foundation operating grant, well we’ve had increases over 
the past three budgets that have totalled over 20 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The members opposite in their ’99 campaign promised no new 
additional dollars for funding. So when they talk about what 
would be cut or what would be downloaded to the property tax 
base, they are the worst offenders, Mr. Speaker. Because we 
have a priority for education and we have been putting dollars 
behind that priority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the Minister of 
Learning has not listened to the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association), he hasn’t listened to the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), and he hasn’t listened to 
the school divisions. Because they know they’re not getting the 
money they need to fund learning in this province. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Learning made it 
official finally. He’s decided to join the NDP. And today, true 
to form, the newly minted NDP Minister of Learning is falling 
right into line with the NDP colleagues and he’s breaking 
election promises. 
 
It’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that those promises were made 
when he was Leader of the Liberal Party. 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister himself at that time said that 
promises were nothing more than political rhetoric. But the 
people of Saskatchewan know better. 
 
Why is the Minister of Learning breaking his election promises 
to increasing funding to education? And why is he forcing the 
public school division to fire as many as 44 teachers? And why 
is he causing the Education department to be in the same state 
of chaos as the Liberal Party of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I think the only group 
in chaos in this province is the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And I can tell you why the members 
opposite are in chaos, because they call themselves a coalition, 
a coalition of malcontents — former Liberals, former 
Conservatives. And now their spiritual leader, Bill Boyd, has 
left, Mr. Speaker. They are left with no leader, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And when we talk about this 
coalition and what it has done for education, Mr. Speaker, it has 
done more for education in the last three years of any 
government in the previous 10. And last year we had the largest 
increase in our foundation operating grant in over 15 years. 
That’s what we’re doing for education in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, if this new Minister of Learning 
would care as much about education as he does about 
politicking around this province, maybe our students and our 
teachers would have a better chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the NDP’s Minster of 
Learning needs to learn . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Maybe, Mr. Speaker, the new Minister of 
Learning needs to look at last year’s budget. Last year the NDP 
and Liberal budget for NDP education was $514 million. It’s 
right here in black and white, Mr. Speaker. This year, K to 12 
education is $502 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funding for education isn’t going up, it’s going 
down. And now the Saskatoon Public School Board is being 
forced to consider firing 44 teachers in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP’s new Learning minister explain 
why his government is cutting K to 12 education and forcing 
Saskatoon and other school divisions to fire teachers in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s incredible that the 
member opposite can stand on her feet and ask these questions. 
 
When she went to the electorate in the last election and her 
campaign brochure was presented to the electors in 
Kelvington-Wadena, not one word on education — not one 
word. And then when they got together and designed their 
platform, Mr. Speaker, guess what they said they would do for 
education, post-secondary, K to 12? They said they would 
freeze spending — not one dime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they have the incredible audacity to get up in this House 
and say why aren’t we doing more, when all they said was 
we’re going to cut taxes 20 per cent, we’re going to throw a 
little bit into highways, and everything else frozen. The 
Popsicle party, Mr. Speaker, everything frozen. No money for 
education. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, may I remind that 
minister in Learning over there that in the last election his 
Liberal Party had only three people get . . . actually came to the 
Assembly under his education budget and under his education 
platform period. Mr. Speaker, not only is the NDP education 
fund . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Ms. Draude: — People of Saskatchewan did not appreciate the 
Liberal platform on education. That’s why there’s only three of 
them in this House, and now there’s one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is the NDP education funding cuts 
forcing the Saskatoon public school board to consider firing 
teachers, they are also being forced to consider another property 
tax increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister in Learning has promised to get 
things so screwed up that the Saskatoon public school board 
and possibly many other school divisions in this province are 
going to have to increase property taxes and fire teachers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister in Learning admit that the NDP 
government is downloading education costs onto property taxes 
and forcing school divisions like the Saskatoon Public School 
Division to fire 44 teachers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The education budget was increased 
by 7.2 per cent this year, Mr. Speaker. And with our Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation there’s been an increase of 
65 per cent of dollars available for capital and building, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when we roll out our capital plan and we talk about what 
facilities we’re going to be building in the province of 
Saskatchewan soon, guess what? I will be going into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

 

Implications of Increase in Long-Term Care Fees 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is receiving 
many letters, calls, and e-mails from Saskatchewan seniors who 
are very upset about the NDP’s massive increase in long-term 
care rates. 
 
I know the Premier is getting the same message. The NDP tries 
to pass off the increase as only affecting those wealthy, 
high-income seniors. 
 
Clearly, this is not the case. Anyone with a monthly income of 
more than $994 is going to see their rates go up. Some of the 
rate hikes are as high as 148 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and seniors 
are being left with only 10 per cent of their income to buy other 
necessities like prescription drugs. It’s a tremendous burden on 
Saskatchewan seniors in the final days of their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier reverse his decision? Will he 
cancel this massive rate increase? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite amazing. I think 
the members opposite took my advice yesterday and got some 
better advisers. They gave the question to the Health critic so I 
got a very reasonable question. So I thank the members 
opposite for doing that, and I thank the member for his 
question. 
 
In this budget this year we are increasing the amount of money 
for long-term care by $10 million, up to $337 million. That’s 
how much money is being spent for 8,900 seniors in our 
province who receive long-term care — $337 million. 
 
What we have done in this budget is we have gone to some of 
those seniors and said, we would ask that you pay some more 
for this particular service. But instead of paying 76 per cent of 
the total costs for the whole province, we’re now paying 74 or 
73.9 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we believe and we’re . . . we want 
to care for our seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker there hasn’t been 
anything wrong with the questions from the opposition. The 
problem is the answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read from one of 
the letters that we’ve received, and I quote: 
 

My father has been in the nursing home for the last three 
years. It began with a heart attack, then a stroke, then 
Alzheimer’s. My mother has remained strong, going to the 
nursing home every day and dealing with the once shared 
responsibilities solely on her own. 
 
When this budget was announced, she was devastated. This 
budget leaves $166 a month for drugs and personal 
expenses. My mom pays over $320 a month for these 

expenses alone. This will take all of the money my dad 
saved in RRSPs and retirement funds. This government is 
now taking away everything my parents worked so hard 
for. This is a cowardly action. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier reverse his decision and cancel 
the NDP’s attack on Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s fair to 
Saskatchewan people that the members opposite are 
fearmongering among the seniors. 
 
And what I would say to those people who are listening on the 
television, who get this information, is that we have a phone 
number in the Department of Health at the income assessment 
unit. We actually have three numbers, and I will read them to 
you right now. Phone either 787-5023; or if you live in Regina, 
787-3543; or the toll-free number, 1-800-667-4884. 
 
If you have specific questions about how the present policies 
affect your status if you go into long-term care, these people 
will very carefully explain the answers for you. If you’re 
concerned about what the new policies will say, they will help 
you deal with that as well. 
 
It does not serve anybody to have the health critic, who I 
respect — he goes around and he does a very good job in what 
he’s doing — it doesn’t help to have him, but for sure it doesn’t 
help to have the Leader of the Opposition to raise fear among 
our seniors in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to read from another letter dated April 14, 2002, and 
I quote: 
 

Please advise how tax-paying senior citizens will be able to 
cope under the proposed formula. Our drug bills, eye care, 
and dental care supplies are between 6 and $7,000 a year. 
We have been hard-working citizens all our lives, and 
therefore have been highly taxed. Now in retirement we 
will be left destitute. Is this what the taxpaying seniors 
deserve? 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Is this what Saskatchewan seniors 
deserve, or will the Premier admit he made a mistake, and 
instead of providing phone numbers, will he cancel this attack 
on Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are programs that we 
have to deal with those extraordinary costs or extra costs that 
happen for some of the other kinds of things that affect your 
income. 
 
And what we do is we work together with the individuals, and 
it’s not fair to the people of this province that the members 
opposite create a level of fear among everybody around our 
program. 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

We have $337 million in the long-term care program. We also 
have other parts of the program that will assist people who run 
into difficulties. That’s how we operate. That’s how we do 
things. 
 
What we want to make sure is that, in the long term, our system 
will be sustainable. We’ve asked some of our citizens in this 
province who have a few more assets and income to pay a little 
bit more. That’s what this is about and we’re going to continue 
to work with the people of Saskatchewan to develop a very 
good system for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it is the NDP that instilled the 
fear in this province on seniors, and it is real fear — not this 
side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read from another letter that we’ve 
received. 
 

My dad is currently at Pioneer Village. He is 82 and suffers 
from dementia. My dad worked hard all his life. When he 
finally needs the help of the health care system, after 
having paid taxes all his life, what do you do? You decide 
that people in long-term care should have their fees raised 
an exorbitant amount. 
 
At $4,100 in income a month, charging $3,875 leaves $225. 
My dad’s drug costs are $250 a month. He needs clothes 
and other incidentals for about $100 a month. And to top it 
off, he has to pay income tax to the provincial government 
and the federal government. 
 
Hard to believe an NDP government would not think such a 
ridiculous increase through. 
 
In effect . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Would the member put the question please? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — 
 

My dad deserves more than having a government take 
away all his monthly income. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is the Premier listening? Will he cancel the NDP’s 
attack on our seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier, this 
government, is carefully listening to the people, and we will 
work with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. A little more 
order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, our programs are designed 
to listen to the people who have the concerns and deal with 
those particular problems. And that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
But I think that what we also have to recognize in this whole 

process is that we are looking about the . . . at the long-term 
sustainability of our whole system of health care. 
 
And what we’re also looking at is, how much money can we 
afford? And some of the seniors that I have talked to have said, 
well let us pay some more if we can afford it because we want 
to contribute to the whole system. 
 
And I think the members opposite have said that they’re going 
to . . . they wanted to freeze the whole health care system, social 
services, all those things, and basically try to collapse 
everything. 
 
We don’t want to do that. We’ve set out in our action . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve set out in our action 
plan where we’re going, and that includes providing good care 
for the people of the province. 
 
What we’ve done in his particular instance is ask some of the 
people who have some income, that they would share that 
income to pay for the cost. We’re not taking their assets; we’re 
looking at their income. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here are some excerpts from a letter 
from a lady in Swift Current: 
 

I was shocked that the government was so heartless, 
picking on the most helpless patients to try and balance 
their budget . . . 
 
My husband . . . has Alzheimers and a heart condition . . . I 
had no choice but to put him in a nursing home. 
 
. . . There are dental problems at times, which are not cheap 
and we both wear glasses so those things have to be looked 
after . . . 
 
I’m trying to keep up our home, but at the rate things are 
going I might be forced to sell it . . . 
 
The rest of our dollars will be gobbled up by the 
government for nursing home care. 
 
Would the government stop and reconsider the blunder they 
have made? 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier do that today? Will he stop and 
reconsider the blunder this government has made and stop the 
attack on Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we will do is we will 
listen carefully to the concerns that individual people will have, 
and we’ll work with them to see how our various programs will 
work to provide the kinds of services that they need. 
 
I remind everybody that the average cost in a nursing home for 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

 

this year is estimated to be $50,000 per year. So even the person 
who has a large amount of income and pays the top rate of 
$3,875, they still receive a subsidy around this long-term care. 
 
So what we are trying to do, Mr. Speaker, is ask those people 
who have a little more income than some of the others to share 
that income in this particular way. 
 
What we are doing is asking all of the people of the province to 
help us deal with the budget issues we have this year. It’s our 
goal to make sure we have a good health system, good health 
care system for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And no 
matter what kind of a spin the minister wants to put on it, the 
seniors of this province recognize that this is a government that 
is out to gouge every last cent out of them. 
 
Here’s another letter, Mr. Speaker. I quote: 
 

My grandmother is 89 years old and is handicapped with a 
prosthetic to replace her leg. She still has to pay for her 
prescription medicines, transportation by Regina 
Paratransit, personal toiletries, haircuts, clothing and shoes, 
and dentures, and a $20 fee for medical supplies although 
she does not use this service. 
 
The proposed increase would leave her with less than $200 
per month for all of these personal needs. Surely the 
Government of Saskatchewan can avoid putting this 
financial and emotional stress on seniors who have given a 
lifetime of diligent work and dedication to this province. 
Please consider the proposed rate increase. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier do that? Will he consider . . . 
reconsider and cancel this attack on Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate all of the 
members raising these issues because that’s the kind of thing 
that they’re supposed to do. We’re listening and we will deal 
with the individual concerns that are there. 
 
But what is especially galling right now from that member is 
the fact that she was the constituency assistant for Mr. Grant 
Devine and that she was part of that government that put our 
whole province in a situation where we are having to make 
some very difficult decisions. 
 
And so what we have done over many years is work and work 
and work to make sure that we can have a long-term sustainable 
health care system. 
 
And no matter how much they want to distance themselves for 
those people, that’s where they come from. That’s what they 
would do to our system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Equitable Provision of Medical Procedures 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Susan Schmidt was suffering 
from dizziness, severe headaches, and fatigue. Her daughter 
told . . . her doctor told her she needed an MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging). She was then told that she was on a 
12-month waiting list. That’s right, Mr. Speaker — 12 months 
to get an MRI. 
 
While not rich, Susan did what anybody not on welfare would 
do. She went out of province, paid $1,000, and received an 
immediate MRI. Unfortunately, the test revealed a serious 
health problem. 
 
Now the Minister of Health says he will not reimburse her 
because she didn’t have prior permission to go out of the 
province. Apparently she was a bad person for going to 
Edmonton instead of waiting 12 months to have it done here. 
 
This is two-tier medicine at its worst. One tier for those 
prepared to go out of province and pay out of their own pockets 
and an in tiered province . . . in-province tier that the bottom is 
falling out of. 
 
Since the Minister of Health will give no help, what does he 
advise patients to do? Should they suffer in silence while 
waiting for treatment in Saskatchewan? Or should they go out 
of province and pay out of their own pockets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we 
need to do in our system is make sure that we rely on the 
professional advice of the medical doctors and all of the other 
very capable people within the system. 
 
We have set up in our province a method whereby if people 
require the services on an urgent basis, the doctors have the . . . 
can bring those cases forward. And what we also have is if 
people need to go out of the province for any particular test, that 
they can get prior approval. That’s a system that provides equity 
across the whole system. 
 
But what we also have to look at is how do we provide services 
in a way that allows for everybody to have access to the funds. 
That is a major difficulty, because there are not enough funds 
from that member opposite’s party — the federal Liberal Party 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I would table 
responses to written questions 105 through 124 and, once again, 
like to thank all those civil servants who have worked very hard 
to come up with the answers to these questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

The Speaker: — Responses to questions 105 through to 124 
have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002 
Loi de 2002 sur les procurations 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Powers of Attorney Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in December of 1997 the Steering Committee on 
the Abuse of Adults in Vulnerable Circumstances, a group 
made up of representatives of community agencies and 
provincial government departments, presented its report and 
recommendations to the government. The recommendations of 
the committee followed extensive community consultations 
respecting the abuse of vulnerable adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in response to that report, this government 
introduced amendments to The Saskatchewan Evidence Act in 
1998 aimed at facilitating the participation of vulnerable adults 
in the justice system. 
 
The steering committee also made a number of 
recommendations respecting adult guardianship and the 
financial abuse of vulnerable adults. In response to those 
recommendations, Legislation Working Committee was formed 
in May of 1998. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Legislation Working Committee has 
developed new legislation relating to adult guardianship and has 
now turned its attention to new legislation respecting powers of 
attorney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to inform you of the hardworking 
community agencies represented on this committee and 
contributing to this work: the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living, the Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan, 
the Autism Resource Centre of Regina, the Schizophrenia 
Society of Saskatchewan, the Canadian Mental Health 
Association, Saskatchewan branch, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres, the Saskatchewan 
Seniors Mechanism, Senior Power of Regina, the Seniors 
Education Centre in Regina, the Council of Canadians with 
Disabilities, Saskatchewan Voice of People with Disabilities, 
the Office of Disability Issues, the Native Counselling Services, 
Regina General Hospital, Capacity Assessment, Department of 
Psychology at the University of Saskatchewan, Regina and 
District Personal Care Homes Association, Elmwood 
Residences in Saskatoon, Family and Friends of Cosmo and 
Elmwood in Saskatoon, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations, System-wide Admissions and Discharge 
at the Regina Health District, Long Term Care at the Regina 
Health District, the wills and estates section of the Canadian 
Bar Association, Saskatchewan branch, the Law Reform 
Commission of Saskatchewan, the Royal Bank, the Sherwood 
Credit Union, and Credit Union Central, Mr. Speaker. All 
contributing, all contributing to this terrific work. 

Mr. Speaker, a consultation paper on enduring powers of 
attorney was prepared by the Law Reform Commission for the 
working committee. The committee sent this document to about 
250 persons and groups throughout the province and 
incorporated many of their responses in the legislation. 
Consultees included persons with legal and financial expertise, 
and organizations working with or representing seniors and 
persons with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Act will replace The Powers of 
Attorney Act, 1996. The proposed Act will codify the law 
respecting enduring powers of attorney and provide protection 
against financial abuse of persons granting powers of attorney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an enduring power of attorney is one that remains 
in effect upon the incapacity of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Would the 
minister maybe kindly revert back a sentence or two so that it 
can be heard on record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll go back to the beginning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Act will replace The Powers of 
Attorney Act, 1996. And this proposed Act will codify the law 
respecting enduring powers of attorney and provide protection 
against financial abuse of persons granting powers of attorney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an enduring power of attorney is one that remains 
in effect upon the incapacity of the grantor and the use of such a 
power of attorney allows an individual to appoint a trusted 
person to make decisions on his or her behalf when he or she is 
no longer able to do so. 
 
This Bill provides that the grantor of the power of attorney must 
be an adult with the capacity to understand the nature and effect 
of an enduring power of attorney. And in order to make a power 
of attorney an individual must understand that he or she is 
giving the attorney decision-making authority respecting their 
financial affairs. 
 
To guard against financial abuse of grantors, the Bill includes 
limitations on who may act as an attorney under an enduring 
power of attorney. In order to act as an attorney, one must not 
be an undischarged bankrupt; a person who has been convicted 
of a criminal offence related to violence, theft, fraud, or breach 
of trust in the last 10 years may not act as an attorney unless 
there’s been a pardon, or the fact of the conviction has been 
disclosed to the grantor and the grantor, while he or she has 
capacity, has consented. No one in the business of providing 
care service to the grantor may act as an attorney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains provisions respecting the 
appointment of more than one attorney and of corporate 
attorneys. These provisions will clarify the law in this area and 
ensure that grantors of powers of attorney have the flexibility 
they need. 
 
Another provision that provides flexibility to grantors is one 
allowing for the use of contingent enduring powers of attorney. 
Those powers of attorney come into effect on a future date or on 
occurrence of a specified contingency. Mr. Speaker, often the 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

 

contingency will be the incapacity of the grantor. 
 
The Bill contains provisions respecting how to determine when 
this contingency has occurred, and the consultations of the 
steering committee indicated that such a provision will be 
welcomed by many consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill clearly sets out the procedures required 
for valid, enduring powers of attorney. They’re to be in writing, 
dated, signed, and independently witnessed. The Bill also sets 
out the authority and duties of an attorney. Attorneys must act 
honestly, in good faith, in the best interests of the grantor, and 
with the care reasonably expected of a person with the 
attorney’s experience and expertise. 
 
The Act will require accounting in some circumstances. Anyone 
who charges a fee for acting as an attorney will have to provide 
an accounting. As well there’s always a duty to account to the 
grantor. In some circumstances, accountings may be requested 
by persons named by the grantor or by family members of the 
grantor, and they may be directed also by the Public Trustee or 
by the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
The Bill also specifies when the authority of an attorney under 
an enduring power of attorney ends. An authority will end on a 
date specified in the power of attorney on written revocation, on 
death of the grantor, on death of or incapacity of the attorney, 
on the written resignation of the attorney, on the attorney being 
prohibited from acting under the law, on the appointment of a 
property decision-maker for the grantor or the . . . or attorney, 
on the attorney and the grantor ceasing to be spouses, or 
pursuant, Mr. Speaker, to a court order. The certainty provided 
by this section will be welcomed both by attorneys and those 
dealing with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill provides protection for third parties who 
rely — there’s more, Mr. Speaker — the Bill provides 
protection for third parties who rely on powers of attorney in 
good faith. It also protects attorneys in some circumstances if 
the attorney did not know of the existence of the circumstance 
and could not, with the exercise of reasonable care, have known 
about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these provisions will be welcomed by lawyers, by 
consumers, and others who deal with enduring powers of 
attorney. The protections against financial abuse will please 
those who work with vulnerable adults. The legislation will 
provide clarification and guidance respecting powers of 
attorney, procedures, and the authority and obligations of 
attorneys, and a number of provisions will provide flexibility to 
those making powers of attorney. 
 
Provision of a non-mandatory form will be welcomed also by 
customers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in closing, let me thank the legislative . . . 
Legislation Working Committee, congratulate them for a work 
. . . for a job well done, for all of their input. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act 
respecting Powers of Attorney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(14:30) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 24, an Act representing powers of attorney is quite an 
extensive Act. It’s . . . it is quite a bit . . . and it was obviously 
witnessed by the minister with his fairly long description of the 
Bill. It was interesting to hear the minister talk about the 
number of organizations and groups that he has met with and 
talked to prior to introducing this Bill. Some 250 people and 
groups he had mentioned he had had the opportunity of talking 
to. 
 
Unfortunately, we on the opposition side haven’t had that much 
opportunity to talk to a number of groups as to how this will 
affect them. 
 
On the surface it looks like it’s going in the right direction. I 
think any time you start dealing with power of attorney — and I 
just know from my own self — I’ve never had an opportunity 
or the occasion to experience the whole range of issues that can 
take place around being granted power of attorney, or around a 
person that will have to give up the . . . the ability to give up the 
power of attorney to someone else. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues here that the minister 
talked on, and on surface seem like they make perfectly good 
sense. But unfortunately until we’re able to talk to a number of 
those groups, and a number of people that have had more 
exposure to this sort of . . . to the whole subject of power of 
attorney, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we would adjourn 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002. 
 
This Bill will protect consumers against unfair credit practices 
and provide them with accurate and comparable information 
enabling them to make better informed credit decisions. 
 
The proposed Act applies to virtually all lending by provincially 
regulated lenders, including credit unions and retailers, who 
offer credit to individuals for borrowing for personal, family, or 
household purposes. 
 
The Bill significantly broadens the scope of the existing 
legislation. In addition to consumer loans, the proposed Act also 
applies to mortgages, credit card transactions, leases, lines of 
credit, and credit offered by retailers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains new requirements for the 
information that lenders must disclose to borrowers, both before 
and after the consumer enters into an agreement. The Bill 
prescribes the information that must be disclosed for different 
types of credit, as well as the timing and delivery of disclosure 
statements. 
 
In addition, the proposed Act prescribes the manner in which 
annual percentage rates, and non-interest finance charges are to 
be calculated and disclosed. The proposed Act also restricts the 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

kinds of charges that can be imposed upon borrowers. 
 
Specifically the Bill allows consumers to prepay all 
non-mortgage loans without penalty, and provides an additional 
right of refund of certain non-interest finance charges when 
early repayment of a loan is made. In addition, the proposed Act 
contains specific requirements as to the content of advertising 
for credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is uniform legislation that fulfils 
Saskatchewan’s commitment under the 1994 Agreement on 
Internal Trade. The provisions contained in this Bill are 
harmonized with the legislation that has already been passed in 
Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, and Nova Scotia. In 
addition, Manitoba and New Brunswick, we understand, will be 
introducing harmonized legislation this spring. 
 
The federal government introduced new regulations governing 
banks in September of 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, extensive consultations have been conducted with 
respect to this legislation. Canada-wide consultations were 
conducted by the Uniform Law Conference and the Consumer 
Measures Committee in 1996 through 1998. In addition, 
Saskatchewan has consulted with a large number of 
stakeholders over the past two years including consumer 
groups, representatives of credit unions, retailers, and other 
lenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one issue that has not yet been determined is the 
manner in which this legislation will deal with lending for farm 
related purposes. We’re continuing to consult with a number of 
stakeholders on this issue. 
 
We’re proposing that the new Act come into force on July 1, 
2003, thereby allowing financial institutions and other lenders 
sufficient time to amend their documents and procedures to 
conform with the new legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The Cost 
of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a fairly large and comprehensive Bill dealing with a large 
part of our economy and our society and how the economy and 
society is funded. 
 
It deals not just with business, Mr. Speaker, but it deals with 
consumers and how they buy their automobiles and how they 
buy their deepfreeze and their fridge and whatever else it might 
be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has a large impact on our financial institutions 
and all of those groups, Mr. Speaker, in society that provide 
interest, that provide financing for various purchases. And we 
need to take a look, Mr. Speaker, at just how this is going to 
affect that kind of borrowing, that kind of lending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will . . . some of the effects of this particular Bill, 
such as the prepayment of non-mortgage loans prior to the 
agreed time, what impact will that have on the interest rates 
being charged on those kind of loans because, Mr. Speaker, 
those loans predetermine, in some cases, the amount of interest 

that will be paid on a deposit or on an investment from which 
that loan is drawn. If that prepayment is made early, then the 
person who has put their money on deposit or has invested in 
that lending institution that would provide that loan, they’re not 
going to be getting the rate of return that they had — they had 
— been promised. And so it’s going to have an impact, Mr. 
Speaker. When that becomes riskier, when there’s less certainty 
in that area, my fear would be that that interest rate would then 
rise. 
 
So in this effect, Mr. Speaker, of the Bill, may very well be to 
raise the interest costs to consumers. And I wonder if the 
minister has thought about that. So we need, Mr. Speaker, to 
talk to the third parties that are involved in this — the lending 
institutions, the retail institutions that provide credit on their 
purchases, Mr. Speaker. We need to talk to the consumers to 
determine what they think of this Bill, and whether they have 
had any concerns about the possible increase in interest rates 
because of some of the functions of this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I would move at this time that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 
25. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 10 — The Tax 
Enforcement Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
this afternoon to make a few comments about Bill No. 10, The 
Tax Enforcement Amendment Act. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we have an Act here that’s set out some 
rules that have been in place for a lot of years. And as we’re all 
aware in the House, Mr. Speaker, since the early- to mid-’90s, 
tax collections have risen in the province but unfortunately the 
regulations surrounding it that were in legislation, that are in 
legislation, have not kept up to the massive increases that have 
taken place in the last several years in property assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many areas in rural Saskatchewan and 
certainly for a large part also in urban Saskatchewan where 
assessment has risen to a significant degree. In the old Act, Mr. 
Speaker, there were actually two rules in force in regards to the 
enforcement of tax collection. 
 
If a piece of property, Mr. Speaker, is assessed at under $2,000, 
the taxing authorities throughout Saskatchewan can simply, on 
their own accord, when the tax arrears are risen to a point where 
it’s become unmanageable are simply able to proceed at their 
own pace to be able to do a collection on those tax dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the assessment of property is over $2,000 under 
present legislation, then what needs to happen is that a local 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

 

government then must proceed to the Provincial Mediation 
Board to seek approval, to begin with, in order to proceed with 
the process, to advance the process to . . . for the collection of 
unpaid property taxes. 
 
Now when we first looked at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and then 
began to send it out to those people who have the most interest 
in it — and that would be the municipalities, both urban and 
rural and northern, Mr. Speaker — our first glance at it, we 
thought well this will be a great idea, some changes need to take 
place. Property assessment has risen at a significant increase in 
the last several years. And probably the base for whether a 
municipality can be able to proceed on their own without going 
to the Provincial Mediation Board needs to be changed. 
 
And so when we looked at this Bill, you would think that the 
government would have seen fit to raise the limit so that it 
would ease the pressures that municipalities are going to place 
upon the Provincial Mediation Board so that there’d be a lot 
less unpaid tax challenges having to be taken to the board, so 
that municipalities then would be able to proceed, as soon as 
they deem it reasonable, for unpaid taxes. 
 
But one of the things that we noticed in the preamble from the 
minister, the minister for Government Relations, whereas that 
even though they’re looking at changing this Bill, certainly we 
want to make sure that everyone understands, Mr. Speaker, that 
the changes that are going to be made are based upon requests 
from urban municipalities, from northern municipalities, from 
rural municipalities throughout the province, that the $2,000 
limit is simply not acceptable any more. 
 
But in the preamble, as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, there 
is no mention of approval from any of these municipalities. The 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) is not 
. . . there’s been no indication from SUMA whether this is a 
good Bill. There’s no indication from SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) whether this is a good Bill. 
There’s no indication from the urban municipal authority . . . 
administrators authority whether this is a good Bill. There’s no 
indication from the rural municipalities administrators 
association whether this is a good Bill. 
 
And so then it began to leave us wondering, Mr. Speaker, if 
those people who are most intimately involved in the tax 
collections for their own governments, for school boards 
throughout the province, then why is the government bringing a 
Bill that does not seem to have the approval of these many, 
many associations throughout the province? 
 
Now I guess this is where the problem for this government is 
going to begin, Mr. Speaker. They say they want to change the 
limits. And certainly when you take a look at having a limit of 
$2,000, and probably back in the ’70s there were many 
properties assessed at $2,000 in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
when we look under today’s circumstances especially in today’s 
cities, in towns, in rural settings, farmland, there are no longer 
any properties in those jurisdictions assessed at less than 
$2,000. 
 
There are still, unfortunately, some small villages, some 
hamlets, some northern municipalities that have properties 
assessed at less than $2,000. And so then they would probably 

see that these changes would not be that significant. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, should the changes that could be 
reflected here would be of an upward, would be of an upward 
assessment, Mr. Speaker, we could find a lot of favour with 
that. It would certainly ease the pressures that would be brought 
forth on the Provincial Mediation Board. 
 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, in today’s circumstances because the 
assessment limit is $2,000 almost every time that a municipality 
needs to enforce The Tax Enforcement Act they’re going to 
have to go to the Provincial Mediation Board because virtually 
all properties other than those that I’ve already stated are going 
to be in excess of $2,000. 
 
So when the government was first approached by SUMA and 
SARM to take a look at this Act to see if some adjustments 
couldn’t be made certainly the government agreed, I would 
assume because they’re bringing the Act forth, that what’s 
going to happen is that this has to be looked at and changes are 
going to have to be brought forth. 
 
And so as we understand it, we’re talking with the 
municipalities throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, is that 
they at first showed some excitement that this was going to 
finally happen, that there would be fewer opportunities where 
they’d have to take advantage of the Provincial Mediation 
Board. Unfortunately, imagine their dismay, Mr. Speaker, when 
they found out that on examining the changes that the 
government is bringing forth, there is no clear direction as to 
what’s going to happen. 
 
(14:45) 
 
In fact what it says here, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re not going 
to define any specific limit. In fact what this Bill talks about, 
Mr. Speaker, is that what they’re going to do is remove the limit 
from legislation. They’re going to put it into regulations so that 
the cabinet, at their whim, will make a determination of where 
the limit is going to be; where The Tax Enforcement Act is 
going to be enacted and how it’s going to be enacted; whether 
jurisdictions have been able to start out on their own for tax 
enforcement or whether they’re going to need to seek approval 
from the Provincial Mediation Board. 
 
So what is that limit? Is it going to be 5,000, is it going to be 
10,000, is it going to be 15,000, is it going to be 20,000? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, as we read through the, read through the Bill, in 
fact what it could be is zero. It could be zero, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact, what could happen is that in this Act every single tax 
enforcement that will need to take place in the province will 
have to go through the Provincial Mediation Board. 
 
That kind of fuzziness that is going to be left out in the open has 
a great deal of concern for urban municipalities, for rural 
municipalities, and for northern municipalities. And certainly, 
we have also found out that it is a great deal of concern for the 
administrators — whether they be urban or rural or northern — 
that without that definition being in legislation, they’re very 
concerned that what’s going to happen because of the . . . if, and 
I say if this Tax Enforcement Amendment Act, 2002 is brought 
. . . is enacted, is that they’re going to be left at the indiscretion 
of a cabinet. 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

And maybe what they should have is the . . . this Bill, as 
brought forth by the Minister of Government Relations, should 
have laid out definitively what the change was going to be and 
left it in legislation. 
 
This is what we’re beginning to hear when we see legislation 
such as this, Mr. Speaker, a directional change by this 
government to remove pieces of legislation from the books and 
turn them over to regulation. What that means, when you take a 
look at an Act such as this one, Mr. Speaker, is that from now 
on, members of the House are not going to see the changes that 
are extremely relevant to the people of Saskatchewan brought 
forth for debate so that perusal can take place and solid debate, 
Mr. Speaker, on the relevance and the importance of the 
changes that a government would like to see take place. 
 
So when we see a Bill like this brought forward, where a 
government is talking about taking legislation and replacing it 
with regulations, is leaving the people . . . and certainly with all 
the discussions we’ve had out there, it’s leaving the people of 
Saskatchewan with a great deal of consternation that again the 
government is going to be enacting upon them — behind closed 
doors, in dark rooms — some ideas that they really are 
significantly opposed to. Why, Mr. Speaker, cannot these 
remain in legislation? Why can’t the people of Saskatchewan 
know in an upfront and honest manner what is going to be 
happening to their taxation in this province? 
 
And I think that municipalities out there are going to be, on an 
annual basis, Mr. Speaker, extremely concerned that one day in 
every spring they’re simply going to receive a note in the mail 
from the Minister of Government Relations, or whatever they 
may call it at some given time in the future, is that this year, 
next year, the year after, whatever year it may be that the limits 
are going to be adjusted. 
 
They could go up, they could go down, they could go all around 
— very much like the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think because of the great deal of concern 
out there, this government should have put a lot more thought 
into this Bill. Certainly they indicate, and the minister has stated 
that in his remarks when he opened debate, that there was a lot 
of organizations out there very concerned about the $2,000 
limit. It needed to be addressed. Times have changed. And 
certainly the government appears to be addressing that change. 
 
But again, as I’ve stated, this government is very reluctant to 
make changes and would rather take over and behind closed 
doors and in dark rooms prefer to run this province in a manner 
that is not open for public debate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess we need to stop and spend some time 
in debate today to understand that these type of Bills where 
legislation is being taken off the books that . . . and put into 
regulations where the cabinet is going to be able to at their 
whims, be able to make changes that are going to be drastically 
affecting municipalities — urban, rural, northern, throughout 
Saskatchewan — I think needs to take some extensive time to 
address. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the government is very keen in 
hearing debate and I’m glad that I had the . . . been given the 

opportunity today to do that so that the Minister of Government 
Relations can hear from this side of the House some of the 
concerns that are out there are that the people of Saskatchewan, 
who on first looking at this Bill, thought well it’s a government 
going in the right direction, but on very close examination sees 
that it is a government that instead of doing what is appropriate 
is actually doing nothing more than something. It is a 
government who brings forth bills of something and they’re 
going to do stuff. 
 
So here we have again a Bill that talks about . . . wants to make 
changes, doesn’t have the heart to do so, is afraid that should 
they put something in place that they’re going to lose some 
control of what’s going on in municipalities throughout the 
province. We know that when you take a look at Bills like this 
it certainly does not line up with the recommendation that was 
in the . . . brought forth by the cities of the province when they 
wanted changes brought forth to urban municipality legislation. 
 
What’s recommended here, of course it certainly doesn’t line up 
with what rural municipalities have been talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, and certainly the government in their deliberations and 
consultations with the administrators of the province whether 
they be urban administrators or rural administrators or northern 
administrators, this is not exactly what they were looking for. 
What they were looking for was a definitive piece of legislation 
that would allow them to become more independent from the 
Provincial Mediation Board. There’s no clear indication, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s going to happen under this legislation. 
 
And so then I think what’s important at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
that a significant amount of time be set aside to work with the 
people of Saskatchewan to ensure that what’s in this Bill is 
going to be appropriate, that municipalities are going to get 
what they need, and it’s at this time I would like to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 11 — The Urban 
Municipal Administrators Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
again to rise this afternoon and make a few comments on Bill 
No. 11, The Urban Municipal Administrators Amendment Act, 
an Act that’s been brought forth at the request of urban 
administrators, Mr. Speaker. And I’m certain . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for . . . And certainly 
I enjoy the encouragement from the members of the 
government for my getting up to say a few words about this 
Bill. It’s always encouraging when we get their participation. 
It’s not often we get their participation in this Assembly. 
 
Now certainly the minister for governmental affairs said that 
what’s going to happen here is they want to bring a Bill forth 
that responds to the . . . some requests from the urban municipal 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

 

administrators. And that’s appropriate. It’s not often that this 
government actually brings forth a piece of legislation at the 
request of citizens of Saskatchewan that actually falls in line to 
some degree. 
 
As we take a look at the comments that were made by the 
minister for Government Relations, is that urban municipal 
administrators throughout the province were seeing some 
loopholes in legislation that helps to regulate them so that they 
can also be self-regulators and be able to provide the 
professional development that is required for urban municipal 
administrators throughout the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we take a look at this Bill after looking at 
some of the other ones that have been brought forth in the last 
couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to be awfully careful 
that we peruse this Bill very, very closely. It’s important that 
the people of Saskatchewan had a chance to take a look at this 
Bill, how is this going to affect them. 
 
The urban municipal administrators administer a large portion 
of local tax dollars throughout the province. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to want to know that this professional 
organization is going to have the tools that are necessary in 
order to maintain their professionalism and that this association 
will be able to provide the services that are necessary for their 
membership. 
 
So imagine, Mr. Speaker, as we went through this Bill, The 
Urban Municipal Administrators Amendment Act, 2002, that 
we were pleasantly surprised that this Bill looks like it could be 
upfront and certainly probably providing just some 
housekeeping changes that were necessary for the urban 
municipal administrators. 
 
So in our due diligence — and certainly on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, we are very concerned about due diligence 
— and it’s one of the things that we like to remind the 
government on a constant basis that due diligence is an 
appropriate process to do when you’re in government. 
 
The Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association was pleased 
with this Act; that it’s taking care of some of their concerns out 
there certainly. And when we take a look at the proposal from 
cities throughout the province for changes to municipal 
legislation, this was part of it. There are some changes here that 
will help move things along for urban municipal administrators 
throughout the province. 
 
And so . . . But the . . . And the questions that we do have left I 
think need to be more appropriately addressed by the minister, 
and I think it would be more appropriate then that at this time 
we move this Bill along to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 14 – The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter the debate on Bill 14, The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . while it’s an Act that hasn’t received 
a lot of public attention, I’m sure it will both throughout this 
session here and as SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
outlined some of the measures that are in this particular Bill. 
And certainly there are some elements of the Bill that the 
official opposition Saskatchewan Party certainly finds 
encouraging that the government is pursuing. 
 
The bulk of the Bill and the most substantive changes for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have to do with the new 
technology that is available called the ignition interlock — a 
device that is attached to a vehicle’s ignition system. And this 
particular device renders that vehicle inoperable if the driver 
has been drinking past the legal limit. The driver must blow into 
the interlock system before the vehicle will start. 
 
It’s a great piece of technology, I think everybody would agree, 
and the use of it in the province of Saskatchewan, according to 
the minister responsible for SGI, has been significant in the 
only four months it’s been available with a . . . I believe he said 
in his second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, that 134 devices 
have been installed in vehicles with offenders paying all of the 
cost to have this there. 
 
(15:00) 
 
You could see the merit of this sort of a system, especially for 
offenders who need their vehicles to continue to make a living 
in the province of Saskatchewan. And now there is a system in 
place that ensures they, indeed, will not be operating their car 
under the influence of alcohol. But it does allow them to use 
their car and their trucks to do their work and provide for 
themselves and for their families. 
 
There’s some significant changes to the existing provisions 
governing these ignition interlocks in this particular Bill 14. For 
example, it extends the program’s availability to repeat 
offenders. Previously, only first-time offenders were able to use 
these ignition interlocks and the program . . . the Bill quite 
rightly extends the availability of this technology to repeat 
offenders, citing some success with that kind of expansion in 
other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also appropriately lays out consequences 
to those who try to get around the equipment, the apparatus. For 
those who try to get around the provisions of the ignition 
interlock program, the Bill outlines some penalties for that and 
that too seems reasonable. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, there is a process set out in the Bill for 
those people who might feel aggrieved by a decision made by 
authorities with respect to the ignition interlock to appeal to the 
Highway Traffic Board. 
 
Some other changes include clarifying provisions around failing 
to stop for a peace officer, as an offence that is now listed and is 
listed as part of those offences that can result in a statutory 
driver’s licence suspension. 
 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other substantive portion of the Bill has to do 
with medical conditions and here we do have some questions in 
the opposition. 
 
The monitoring of medical conditions receives special attention 
in the Bill and while the Bill does . . . takes some positive steps 
in terms of streamlining the medical certification process so . . . 
especially for those commercial drivers who need a speedy and 
efficient system with which they can be certified from a medical 
perspective. The Bill does take some positive steps to 
streamline that and they indicate that some of those 
streamlining procedures have been endorsed by the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
But there is a change as well, Mr. Speaker, that does, I think, 
warrant some further discussion and some further debate and 
that change is as follows. And that’s: as of January 1, 2003 
periodic medical reports — medical certifications if you will — 
will be required of commercial drivers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the rationale the minister gave for this particular change is 
that these kinds of medical reports are needed if drivers, 
commercial drivers, wish to operate in Saskatchewan but more 
specifically in the United States. And it’s an interesting 
provision. Certainly we would want our government doing 
whatever it could to ensure that commercial drivers in our 
province are enabled to compete for work anywhere in Canada 
and certainly in the United States. 
 
We understand that it’s important to ensure that sort of 
uniformity in the regulations between Saskatchewan and the 
United States. I come from a family in the trucking industry, 
Mr. Speaker. My father has been in the trucking industry since 
he was a teenager. He started out on his own and he’s been in 
various kinds of trucking industries . . . he started with cartage 
or general freight and ended his career 40 years in 
self-employment and in trucking in the furniture moving 
business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my brother followed in his footsteps and is involved and he 
too is in the furniture business and also in grain hauling. And 
his licence to do that of course has enabled him to do some 
other work as well in agriculture, unfortunately in Alberta, but 
in agriculture nonetheless. 
 
So we’re very aware, Mr. Speaker, of the importance of 
ensuring that our drivers, truck drivers in the province of 
Saskatchewan and operators and all commercial drivers can ply 
their trade in the United States. What the minister did not 
elaborate on in his speech however is what particular provisions 
in the United States require these periodic medical reports. 
 
And it’s interesting that the minister also didn’t cite any other 
Canadian provinces with which we’d be making our regulations 
uniform. So we’ll want to ask the minister questions about that. 
We will want to ensure that he has consulted with the trucking 
industry here in the province of Saskatchewan and other 
commercial drivers to ensure that this doesn’t put them at an 
unfair advantage, this particular regulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the questions that we in opposition 
have on that front specifically, on the medical condition 

reporting in Bill No. 14, at this time I would move that we 
would adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 4 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the Crown 
corporations critic for the opposition, it’s also a pleasure to 
offer a few comments on this particular Bill. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, for the most part this Bill is fairly 
positive. It’s intended, for the most part, to enable the oil and 
gas industry to be . . . have a little more flexibility, a little more 
self-reliance in terms of getting natural gas to various parts of 
. . . of energy oil and gas fields in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the minister in his speech, in his 
second reading speech, focused on that, understandably so, it’s 
a fairly popular part of the Bill. But, Mr. Speaker, the concerns 
the opposition has is not what the minister had to say about the 
Bill because frankly, on that count, we’d be in agreement. 
 
The concern the official opposition has with Bill No. 4 is what 
this minister did not say in his second reading speech. There are 
provisions in this Bill that he just rushed right over, Mr. 
Speaker. There are significant elements of this Bill that he 
didn’t even bother to mention, he did not even reference in his 
second reading speech. 
 
And I know that the former minister of Energy — I know the 
former minister of Energy and Mines, the member for Regina 
South, probably advised him on that, because that member is 
very politically astute. And that member would know that you’d 
want your minister to stand up and outline what elements of the 
Bill are good for the oil and gas sector, but to avoid any 
reference at all to those parts of the Bill that the people of the 
province would find odious, that the people of the province 
would object to. And so I have no doubt that the member for 
Regina South offered that very good political advice to the 
minister. 
 
But what is often politically good advice to any government 
doesn’t really serve a public purpose, Mr. Speaker. And so I 
would like to comment a little bit on one specific element of 
this Act that, I think it’s fair to say, the opposition has some 
significant problems with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a section of this Act that governs exactly 
how much SaskEnergy can spend in a commercial transaction 
before they need any sort of cabinet approval. That is the way 
The SaskEnergy Act is currently worded. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill though, sets out to 
change all of that. And the change can be found in, I believe, 
Mr. Speaker . . . well we’ll find the section. But the change can 
be found specifically to the restrictions that the previous Act 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

 

placed on SaskEnergy. Anything over and above $200,000 that 
they wanted to spend, that they wanted to . . . (inaudible) . . . the 
Crown corporation, they needed the permission of the cabinet. 
And it was set out in legislation, and frankly, I think rightly so. 
 
And, I mean, I know that limits on these things have to change 
from time to time. You know, limits might get dated in terms of 
the amount you spend. But the setting of limits in legislation — 
that concept I don’t think has to change, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s what this Act, that’s what this Act sets out to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s section 19 that the Bill No. 4 presently before 
the Assembly sets out to amend: 
 

Subsection 19(4) is amended by striking out “$200,000” 
and substituting “the amount fixed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council”. 

 
So what we have currently, Mr. Speaker, is an Act that says to 
SaskEnergy look, up to $200,000 go ahead, make the decisions 
you need to make to operate the Crown corporation. Not an 
insignificant amount of money by most people’s standards. And 
not a huge amount of money, granted, by the standards of a large 
gas corporation operating in Canada in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It sets that limit out in legislation. 
 
This Bill, this provision of this Bill that the minister didn’t 
mention in his second reading speech, removes the limit and just 
says, well we’ll just let cabinet set it. And, you know, were the 
opposition a little bit more comfortable with who exactly the 
cabinet is in the province of Saskatchewan, we might have less of 
a problem with this particular provision of the Bill. 
 
But given the track record of the government, given the track 
record of the NDP as it relates to Crowns, and given their track 
record very, very, very recently in terms of their willingness to 
disclose large-scale expenditures, like the $1.7 million buy in to a 
brokerage company in High River, Alberta — and we saw more of 
it this morning — they’re simply not willing to force SGI to report 
to the committee on a significant transaction basis. 
 
Because of that kind of intransigence in terms of wanting to do the 
right things with these Crowns, I don’t think the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan are very comfortable with members of 
this Assembly basically letting the cabinet set behind closed doors, 
and in privacy and in secrecy, letting them set the limit that 
SaskEnergy can spend without so much as deigning to come 
across Wascana Lake and ask the cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province like the fact that 
there is a legislated limit that SaskEnergy can spend. I think 
they like that. 
 
And you know, we’ve looked through other Acts. We’ve looked 
through . . . I’ve looked through other Crown corporation Acts. 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? There are precious few 
references like this across government. 
 
So here is the one good example in the NDP family of Crown 
corporations of this body — this Legislative Assembly and the 
taxpayers’ representatives — being able to say, look, 
SaskEnergy, up to $200,000, go ahead and run the business; we 
trust you. And over $200,000, we still trust you but we think 

you need approval; we think you need to come to the people’s 
representatives for approval. 
 
The minister didn’t reference that at all. He didn’t mention it at 
all in his second reading speech, and I think that should be of 
concern to the people of the province. And it’s certainly a 
concern to us. It’s why we continue to talk to groups, 
understanding the importance of the changes they made to the 
oil and gas industry, but not wanting them to slip in a quick 
change that the people of the . . . would not serve the province, 
under the guise of an Act that may be quite positive here to the 
oil and gas industry. 
 
So as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation to introduce his officials and if he wishes, make 
a brief statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Before I introduce my officials I’d like to give a brief overview 
of the successes we’ve achieved in the Department of Highways 
and Transportation as well as our plans for this fiscal year. 
 
The key to success is having a good plan. And we have such a 
plan. As Leader-Post columnist Murray Mandryk so accurately 
detailed in his column last year regarding the 2001-2002 
budget, and I quote: 
 

What the public and other stakeholders appear to appreciate 
about this year’s budget is that there appears to be a 
long-term plan for the province’s highways network. 

 
I couldn’t have said it better myself. And I would like to 
commend the two ministers who preceded me in this portfolio 
and did so much to move this plan forward. I would like to 
commend the hon. member from Meadow Lake and the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
I have had the good fortune to see this plan in action first-hand 
on the province’s roads and highways. In fact one of my first 
duties as minister was to open, with the Premier, the newly 
twinned 21-kilometre section of Highway No. 1 West at the 
Alberta border in the Cypress Hills constituency. A couple of 
weeks later I was able to highlight the centre line rumble strips 
installed as a safety pilot project on Highway 11 northeast of 
Saskatoon in the Rosthern constituency. And last month I was 
in Kindersley constituency to open a lighting safety project on a 
1.6-kilometre stretch of Highway No. 7 in the town of 
Kindersley. 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

I had hoped that the former member from Kindersley would 
have been able to attend that grand opening of the lighting 
project. I thought it would have been a very good opportunity 
for him to see the light. He wasn’t able to be there and I assume 
now that he did finally make it there a few weeks ago. 
 
And so I’d like to invite any of the members opposite to go and 
take a look at that, considering the results. That light project is 
really impressive . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s exactly 
it. 
 
It’s by driving these roads, meeting the people who live in the 
rural and urban areas that I hear what great work we have been 
doing. And I have been getting significant feedback, Mr. 
Chairman. I have also heard that there’s lots more work that 
needs to be done. My government listens to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, and we will continue to listen 
and move forward with our plan to build better highways. 
 
In 1997, we committed to spend $2.5 billion over 10 years on 
highway improvements. We had the vision and mission for this 
money but we also knew that we couldn’t spend a quarter of a 
million dollars a year right at the very start of this program. We 
knew that we would need to ramp up this funding to fix our 
roads faster and we wanted to do this in a fiscally prudent 
manner. So that’s exactly what we did. 
 
In 1999, we stepped up our spending and dedicated at least a 
quarter of a billion dollars each year over four years to fix our 
roads. But even this quarter billion dollars over four years was 
not enough. 
 
In 2001-02, this government announced an historic high budget 
of $311 million. You’ll see from this year’s budget that we 
know we have a good thing going because by the end of this 
fiscal year we will have invested 885 million of that $1 billion 
target. We are also well on our way to exceeding the 2.5 billion 
in spending over 10 years. 
 
So what does this show us? It demonstrates our ability to listen 
and to act in a proactive fashion. It also shows my 
government’s ability to manage a massive economic 
undertaking in a time when other provinces are drastically 
cutting their transportation budgets. 
 
In 2001-02 we committed to spending $900 million over the 
following three years. This year’s budget of 300.3 million 
shows our government is committed to a long-term strategic 
plan that builds better highways and makes our roadways safer. 
 
With this year’s budget we will be at 68 per cent of the way to 
meeting the $900 million target. So what will the people of 
Saskatchewan get for $900 million? They will get a better, 
safer, and more sustainable transportation system that supports 
economic and social development. 
 
For example, here are a few of the things we accomplished last 
year. We paved and opened 68 kilometres of twinned highway. 
We resurfaced almost 315 kilometres of provincial highways, 
and we upgraded over 300 kilometres of rural highways. And 
we started construction of a second North Saskatchewan River 
bridge and the associated roadways at the Battlefords. 
 

We’re going to add to this impressive list with a host of new 
activities this year. Paving and reconstruction crews will work 
on more than 700 kilometres of highways. We’re going to twin 
24 kilometres on Highway No. 1 West in the Cypress Hills 
constituency. And we’ll also do twinning work on Highway No. 
16 through Lashburn in the Lloydminster constituency. 
 
We’ll continue to upgrade 800 kilometres of TMS (thin 
membrane surface) roads and upgrade primary pavements to a 
20-year life cycle. You can add resurfacing another 370 
kilometres of rural and primary highways to our list of 
accomplishments as well as making safety improvements to 
intersections, bridges, and short-line railway crossings. And, 
Mr. Chairman, our lighting projects are making this province 
safer for everyone. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ll also be improving northern roads, 
highways, and airports. And while we’re doing all this work, 
we’ll be creating hundreds of jobs for road builders, 
construction crews, private engineering firms, and summer 
students. 
 
Meeting these levels of historic budget targets isn’t just about 
spending taxpayer dollars. It’s about having a vision. And our 
vision is to transform Saskatchewan’s transportation system to 
meet the social and economic development opportunities of the 
21st century. We continue to achieve this vision by focusing on 
a sustainable transportation infrastructure, strengthening 
economic development and serving social needs, and the safe 
movement of people and goods. 
 
Before we move on with this business of estimates, Mr. 
Chairman, I would also like to take time . . . take this 
opportunity to recognize the member for Cypress Hills and his 
tenure as the department’s opposition critic. The member for 
Cypress Hills has been the Highways critic for the last three 
years and as such I have found him to be thoughtful and 
challenging, a respectful gentleman. And I look forward to 
having him as the opposition critic for many, many years to 
come. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would now like to introduce the department’s 
officials who will be assisting me with the estimates debate. I 
would like to introduce to you Mr. Harvey Brooks, who is 
deputy minister; Barry Martin, assistant deputy minister of 
operations; Don Wincherauk, who is assistant deputy minister 
of corporate services; and Carl Neggers, assistant deputy 
minister of policy and planning. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to answering any 
questions or replying to any comments that the members 
opposite may have regarding this estimates package. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to open up this first session of estimates for the Department 
of Highways and Transportation by acknowledging the kind 
comments of the minister, although they weren’t all kind, I 
might mention. And we will address the issues as we get 
through the estimates today, I’m sure. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the minister has had his role now 
for about six months, I believe. And within the next three 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

 

months we will see his tenure be among the longest of all of the 
most recent ministers. And I think that by now he will have 
been brought up to speed by his department and his officials, 
and I think that he’ll be asked to provide us some very clear and 
definitive answers this afternoon. 
 
I appreciate the fact that the officials are here today; I’d 
welcome them to the Assembly, and I look forward to a good 
afternoon of question and answer. 
 
As the officials will know, and probably as the minister 
recognizes, I do tend to emphasize philosophy and policy more 
than I do specific numbers. But I think there are some 
individuals on this side of the House who have questions that 
will directly be attached to numbers, and I will step aside now 
and allow my colleague from Rosthern to open up the 
questioning this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials. It’s always an interesting time to get 
into a discussion in estimates on Highways. We had the 
minister read his prepared speech on where he thought his 
philosophy was and what they were going to do. That in itself 
was interesting. I think he must have been worried that we 
weren’t going to ask where he was going to go in case we were 
really convinced that they weren’t quite sure where they were 
going to go. 
 
I think the best statement on Saskatchewan highways was — is 
indicated by some of this government’s own highway signs. 
Coming back from Medicine Hat some time ago, there’s a 
number of signs that sort of indicate that you’re coming to 
Saskatchewan. And we won’t comment on the quality of the 
highways in Alberta because I think everyone knows what 
they’re like. But you just come to the Saskatchewan border and 
there’s one big sign just says, “Saskatchewan.” And then you 
drive about another 200 yards, and you hit two or three major 
holes in the highway and there’s another big sign that says, 
“Naturally.” 
 
Just bizarre. This government actually put up signs right beside 
the holes saying, “Saskatchewan,” “Naturally.” That’s what 
they expect. It’s truly amazing that they advertise the conditions 
in this province in such a negative sort of a light. 
 
The questions in the House during question period for the last 
two or three weeks haven’t been, Mr. Chairman, based on 
highways in particular. And it’s not that there aren’t concerns in 
highways but it’s that this government has created such a 
disaster with their budget, with their situation in health — and 
we had that today and we’ll see some more of that in the days to 
come — the situation in education, utilities, the way they 
mismanage the Crowns. We just haven’t been able to get 
around to highways yet but I’m sure we will by the time 
October shows up, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Having said that, as my colleague mentioned, some of us have 
some specific questions and I do have a few specific ones. Most 
of them have been raised by my constituents and so I’m just 
bringing these forward on their behalf particularly. 
 
The first one, and I’m sure the deputy minister is going to be 
very aware of this one, is Highway 312 had some work done on 

it last year, and everyone appreciated that work because it was 
very much needed. I don’t think there’s any question that when 
you look at secondary highways, Highway 312 is obviously 
among the busier ones. And so to have that one identified as a 
highway that needed some work on it I don’t think surprised 
anyone. 
 
But that highway and the work that was done up to fall and 
freeze-up lasted most of the winter. Now we’ve got some major 
holes developing. In fact in some cases there’s holes that are 
long. A few of them that stretch halfway across the highway, 
maybe a foot to a foot and a half wide and they get deeper every 
day. 
 
So I guess the question I have, because as soon as I get home 
I’ll be asked this by everyone I meet on the street is, what are 
the plans for 312? What sort of timelines are on that? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this 
opportunity to answer the member’s question. 
 
A couple of pieces. I would like to comment just a bit on the 
entrance to Saskatchewan. And I know it’s a bit ironic that we 
have the sign up there, “Naturally,” and that he encountered a 
hole. But you have to have the connections. And I think the 
member from Cypress Hills, who lives over in that country, will 
understand that Saskatchewan is a holey land. And so when 
people come in it is natural that they would experience that. 
 
We are doing our very best to patch the holes that are in 
highways all across this province and I think from the feedback 
we’re getting from the public, we’re doing an excellent job on 
that in a timely manner. 
 
So, yes, they will encounter the odd hole. But I think you have 
to look at it a little more philosophically as the member from 
Cypress Hills said, recognize that you’re entering a holey land 
when you come out of Alberta into Saskatchewan. 
 
So thank you for that notice that there is some work to be done 
there. 
 
Now I’d like to also speak directly about Highway 312 where 
there has been some work done. The contractor still has work to 
do, but up until May 15 we will be responsible as a department 
for patching that. But there’s over $200,000 worth of work left 
to be done on there by the contractor. So it’s our expectation 
that that road will be raised in standard. It is an important road 
for the area and that work will be underway after May 15. 
Thank you. 
 
Sorry, Mr. Chair, excuse me, there were two of the staff that I 
did not introduce earlier, and the officials here. And I would 
like to introduce Fred Antunes, who is to my right and behind 
me. And I’m just going to have to make sure I get Fred’s title 
right here — director of operations and planning and business 
support. And then directly behind me in the third row is Cathy 
Lynn Borbely, the leader of the budget development. And I 
thank them for attending and apologize for not introducing them 
in the first part. 
 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and welcome to the 
officials that you introduced as well. 
 
I’m glad to see that . . . We had hoped, from people in the area, 
that that work would be on 312, but we just weren’t sure 
because with budget situations and that whether it was going to 
be left to have some work done on it. I think your reassurance 
there is going to be good news for the people of that particular 
area. 
 
The department did some . . . or had some people do some work 
on possible entrances to the communities of Hague, Osler, and 
Rosthern, sort of setting the stage for twinning that will be 
down the road sometime, and I’m not going to ask you when 
that twinning will take place because obviously that’s a fairly 
major project and you have Highway 1 and Highway 16 to look 
at first. And for my part, I’ve always supported finishing off 
Highway 16 and Highway 1 before you get on to this one. So 
we’re quite satisfied with that particular direction. 
 
I’m wondering on those three entrances. I think, I believe a 
statement came back to all of the town councils that they had 
sort of assessed those entrances and now the decision was made 
and when twinning happens, this is the way the entrance 
situation is going to be. 
 
I’m wondering how carved in pavement that answer really is. 
Or can communities, if they want to, come back to Department 
of Highways and say, we have some other ideas, we just really 
don’t want to lose those entrances, or some other situations that 
are there? Or is this now the final plan and is basically taken 
care of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — One of the key pieces of all the work 
that we’re trying to lay out is to try and make it as safe as 
possible, and that’s what is happening with those particular 
intersections. We’ve had Clifton Associates consultants do the 
basic work and line out what at this point the best options are in 
terms of safety, in terms of preparing for future highway 
development. 
 
And I think it’s important to note that there is still time and 
room for people to put forward alternative ideas, and we’re 
open to consult until we’ve basically got all . . . everything laid 
out, ready to work at it. 
 
And I think at this point we’re still willing to take some ideas. If 
there are new ideas that are brought forward and we can fit 
those in and make sure that the entrances are as safe with an 
alternate plan, then there’s a possibility of adopting an alternate 
as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Because I think at least two of 
those communities may want to have some further discussion 
on that, because as we know and as you’ve said, this work was 
not done by Department of Highways; you had an engineering 
firm look at those. And as you know, engineering firms love 
grandiose plans. Having worked on town council, I’m quite 
aware of some of that mentality that’s there. And sometimes in 
an effort to have the perfect, most grandiose plans, things get 
rather convoluted. 
 
I think a good example might be when we look at the 

Grasswood situation. It is no doubt a safer entrance at this point 
than it was before. However the access to the Grasswood 
service station complex, particularly one that takes you way 
around the west side of the service station must make people’s 
heads just spin a little bit and say someone must have been able 
to come up with a better plan than that. 
 
And so this is what I’m somewhat concerned about, that we 
have a grandiose plan which there’s no question it’s safe, but 
sometimes there are plans that can be a whole lot simpler and 
still be more functional for everyone concerned, particularly in 
those communities that do have, do have things in their 
community that are very much a business activity. 
 
As you well know, Hague has been a community that’s had a 
number of active car dealerships, has a very active lumberyard 
and construction business, has two vibrant service stations, and 
removing them from that entrance is going to be a major 
economic hit to that community. 
 
Rosthern, for example, has . . . with its proximity to Seager 
Wheeler, the Station Arts house — which is a drama and a tea 
room on the side — and also, as I said, its proximity to other 
things such as Batoche, Fort Carlton, and those sorts of things, 
there’s a lot of tourists that have a desire to come in and do a lot 
of business in town. If we have some access that becomes quite 
far removed, we will have those business districts die as we see 
as happened on a lot of the communities between here and 
Saskatoon where the highway just goes by and there’s 
sometimes a rather weak entrance that’s there. 
 
But anyways, I’m glad to see that there’s some opportunity for 
change and I hope Highways doesn’t kind of close the book on 
that too quickly. 
 
Couple of specific questions on Highway 11. One that I’ve had 
asked to me by a number of long-distance truckers, particularly 
people driving for NRT (Northern Resource Trucking) in the 
large trucks that use Highway 11. 
 
There’s a stretch north, just north of the town of Hague to about 
Rosthern, halfway to Duck Lake, that has some very serious 
jarring ruts, sort of, straight across the highway. And you notice 
it when you come from Saskatoon, the highway is good. As 
soon as you get through Hague, there seem to be these sharp 
ruts across. Is that because there was a different type of 
construction used there? Or why is that sudden difference in the 
quality of highway for that stretch of about 10 to 15 kilometres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — A couple of comments first. You were 
talking about the consultants’ plans and I think it’s really 
important to remember that we don’t just take a consultant’s 
plan in and then just immediately implement what the 
consultants have said. 
 
One of the things that I’ve discovered, Mr. Chairman, as I’ve 
gotten to know the department and how it works is just how 
frugal and what good managers our own engineers are. So that, 
when we receive a report by the consultants, it may in fact be a 
little extravagant . . . a little more extravagant than what we 
could handle. 
 
But our engineers do a very good job of tailoring that to what 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

 

our resources are and I appreciate the stewardship of the 
department in terms of extending those resources as far as they 
can be stretched. 
 
And to the member, I also would like to just ask a question in 
terms of the ruts. These ruts are going across the highway — 
and are there visible cracks with those ruts as well? 
 
Just small cracks in them? Okay. One of the things that does 
happen in those, where those cracks come in . . . And they can 
happen anywhere from the changing temperatures and then 
depression begins to build. And there is a type of patching that 
can be done. You can’t do it when it’s too high. And those . . . 
When the department determines that they can do that patching, 
they’ll get out there and do a particular type of patch that holds 
in that kind. And that particular piece of highway will not be as 
rough any longer. Okay. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that. Having driven semi 
down that particular stretch myself, I’m quite aware that if you 
sit in a semi, particularly if it’s one that doesn’t have all the 
fancy bells and whistles for being a comfortable ride, you get 
quite a jar out of that. And I could see your official sort of 
identifying exactly what was going on there and I think he 
understands the situation. 
 
You mentioned putting in the rumble strips on Highway 11 and 
I think in the interim, between now and when the divided 
highway comes in — because as your own numbers will show, 
that’s an extremely busy highway and very much so during the 
summer — I think those rumble strips will provide some sense 
of safety for the people who just don’t pay much attention, and 
there are those. 
 
On my way home from the legislature here two weeks ago, I 
passed an individual driving on that divided stretch — driving 
fairly straight I might say — reading a book. And I was trying 
to decide if I should slow down and get her licence number and 
phone it in to the police and do something with it, and I thought 
well, she’ll probably find out that she shouldn’t be doing that. 
 
I did keep my eye on the mirror because I was convinced that 
car would end up in the ditch but it didn’t — like I said, driving 
amazingly well, reading a book. But that rumble strip is the 
kind of thing that can just catch people who are not paying full 
attention. 
 
But I do have one question. It was raised by one of my 
constituents. And when I looked at it, the question makes sense 
so I hope there’s a good answer for it. 
 
Those rumble strips that are going down the middle of the 
highway — and most people are used to the ones that go on the 
shoulders; this one goes right down the middle and it will go for 
a stretch and then quit — lines up perfectly or overlaps totally 
the yellow strip. And the question was: why aren’t those rumble 
strips between the yellow strips instead of on the yellow strips 
because by being on the strip, it to some extent lessens the 
illumination or the reflection you would get at night from the 
yellow strips? So why . . . what’s the rationale about having it 
right on the coloured part instead of in between the coloured 
part? 
 

(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I thank you for your comments on the 
rumble strips. And we do have high hopes that they will 
certainly increase safety on that piece of road, I think not just 
for people who are inattentive but . . . well I guess you’re 
inattentive if you’re falling asleep. But that was one of the 
pieces as well that was raised, that for people who are falling 
asleep to hit that centre line rumble sure is a jarring kind of a 
thing. 
 
The other piece just in response to the question about the paint. 
In this first year while they have just been ground out they are 
rough and of course more absorbent, so they will take more of 
the paint in but the flecks in the paint should still be fairly 
reflective and of course we’ve got that harder edge on the ridge 
there. It should reflect back more. But it’s our expectation that 
when they are painted this year, the buildup of paint . . . there 
should not be any loss. If there has been, there shouldn’t be any 
loss in reflectivity. 
 
It’s important to note that we’ve also had some very good 
support from some of those groups that look at the province and 
try and see how our roads are, how our safety is. And the 
Canadian Automobile Association of Saskatchewan said that 
they fully support this pilot project to improve motoring and 
travelling conditions on Highway 11. 
 
CAA (Canadian Automobile Association) Saskatchewan 
communications and marketing director, Maureen Murray, has 
said this recently. So we have hopes that this will make it safer 
as we work towards a time when we can possibly twin that 
piece. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’m still not quite sure exactly 
why they’re there but there is a bit of an answer so we will pass 
that on to the individuals that asked the question. 
 
The community of Hepburn which is just off of Highway 12, 
they do have their access which is probably about 2 miles I 
believe, 2 and a half miles that’s a paved access. What is the 
commitment of the Department of Highways to that access road 
from Highway 11 to the community of Hepburn? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think my ears are mumbling a little 
bit. I thought at first you said the community of Heppner and I 
thought you were more famous than you actually were. So we 
checked and the community of Hepburn, the access there is a 
regular TMS road that would receive the regular kind of 
maintenance that a TMS would. Just, the department will look 
at it, when there is need it will be maintained. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I would like to thank the minister’s officials 
for those answers. I don’t have a lot of questions because, as 
most people know, the highways in my constituency are better 
than almost any other constituency has in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s because our population is growing 
and we have good people who take very good care of their 
highways. Someone asked, from the other side, why, and that’s 
the answer. 
 
But we do appreciate that. The dividing that was done on both 
Highway 11 and 12 a couple of years ago was much appreciated 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

by the members of the constituency. In fact they thought 
enough if it that at that particular time I voted in favour of the 
budget because it had in there the dividing of those stretches of 
roadway. 
 
I’m not sure this year if the government could pave enough 
roads in Saskatchewan for me to vote in favour of the budget. 
But at that time it was something that I felt needed to be done 
and I did it and had a lot of support from the community for 
that. So thank you again, Mr. Minister, for the time you gave to 
me. And I’ll turn it back to my colleague from the Southwest. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The previous 
member from Rosthern, as he spoke, suggested to me that he’s 
prepared to accept the credit for the wonderful highways in his 
constituency and . . . 
 
You know I think it’s important, in spite of the partisanship of 
this House and of our system, I think it’s important to give 
credit where credit is due. And I think . . . I want to say that to 
the minister and to his department officials because there have 
been some times when I’ve felt it was fully appropriate to 
criticize and take issue with the way the department was 
operating and how the government was managing that 
department. 
 
But I have been the benefactor of some decisions made by the 
government and the department, and my constituents have been 
the benefactors, and I think we, for the record, would like to 
make that noticed here today. 
 
The member from Rosthern, I think I heard some laughter when 
I referred to him previously as the previous member from 
Rosthern. Is that a . . . was that a little mistake I made . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I retract that statement if I 
could right now. 
 
The member from Rosthern did bring up the issue though, of 
rumble strips, and while there is no doubt increased safety is the 
result of the implications of that addition to the highways in this 
province, I notice that it’s happening at sort of in stages. It’s 
something that’s showing up in areas where we’ve got 
reconstruction or repaving. 
 
But I’m wondering if the minister would be prepared to tell us, 
over and above the benefits of safety, what the costs of 
instituting that particular program are to the department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chairman, just for clarification, 
were you meaning the shoulder or the centre line rumble strips? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well why don’t we have the costs for both. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We don’t have that detail with us at 
this time but we’d be happy to either provide it to you in letter 
form, or if you would like to have that brought forward for . . . 
back for estimates again and do it then. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, that would be fine, to the 
minister. The rumble strips that I’m most specifically interested 
in right now, though, would be the ones on the outside, the ones 
that are perforated in the pavement. I understand that that is a 
whole new approach to rumble strips in this province, that 

we’ve never used those until just recently. But I also assume 
that it comes with some cost because you have to have a 
machine that will put those rumble strips in place. 
 
So what I would like if the minister can provide it either now or 
later, the cost of the equipment that was purchased to put those 
rumble strips in place, the means by which they are propelled 
because I assume that there is a piece of equipment that propels 
those items, and overall the added manpower that those types of 
rumble strip programs would cost or would be necessary for the 
implementation of that program. 
 
So if that would be part of your response in the future, I would 
appreciate that. If you can provide some insight into that now, 
maybe even how many machines you’ve got, I would 
appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — My officials inform me that we’ll 
provide all of that in the same answer. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, I know that 
there is probably some rationale on the part of the department 
for having made the purchase of those machines for the 
department’s use, but I’m also aware of the fact that in other 
jurisdictions those types of machines are purchased by private 
contractors and the program is contracted out. The rumble strips 
are contracted out to private contractors who frankly make that 
part of their operation and would be able to provide that type of 
service in this province. 
 
So would you be prepared to give us some justification for the 
decision to do it in-house as opposed to having contracted that 
particular type of work, especially when there are contractors 
who are on the site often doing the repairs and the construction 
as is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We believe that there is a mix, 
actually, of how this happens. There is a small grinding 
machine that’s mounted on a BobCat, that during the winter 
months when the marking crews would normally be off, they 
are able . . . it’s just part of the good stewardship of trying to 
make sure that people have their jobs, you’re able to keep them 
on through the year. And with this program they’re able to get 
out and do the grinding in the winter months. 
 
When we’re doing new paving, we’re just going to check in 
terms of the process there. But at this point, until we have it 
confirmed, we don’t want to say clearly how much is done by 
contractor or how much is done by our own crews. 
 
But currently . . . And with the limited amount that we’re doing, 
it’s being done in the winter by our crews on the older sections 
of highway. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, through you to the 
minister. Can I take it from your answer then that there are two 
different ways these rumble strips are brought into use in this 
province — like, the department does some itself, but there are 
some private contracts that are let with the use of these rumble 
strips as part of the contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think when we give you the answer 
on, detailed answer on the costing and that, we will give you a 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

 

clear answer in terms of the contracting as well. And the 
officials are just saying that that needs to be clarified and we 
want to make sure you get a clear and accurate answer. So we’ll 
give that to you at the same time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I will look forward to that response, because I 
think that, you know, it’s rather important to know how much 
of that type of work is being done in-house and how much is 
being contracted out, and maybe the relative costs and the 
relative merits of doing it that way. 
 
Let’s return to the more ethereal, the more philosophical. You 
know, that’s really a tough thing to attach to engineering in any 
respect. Having sat through a seminar the other day, everything 
in engineering is ethereal. But it’s supposed to come down to 
numbers and that’s what we will ultimately look at in this 
session of estimates and in future sessions as well. 
 
But in your opening statements, Mr. Minister, you outlined for 
us what you said was sort of the plan, the overall scheme of 
things, the direction in which the department was going. And in 
developing your statement, you talked fairly specifically and 
restrictively, I would say, in terms of the amount of money the 
department has spent, what the department is committed to 
spending, what the government has in terms of a long-term 
expenditure plan. 
 
But would you describe for us more of what you envision for 
the department in terms of philosophy and direction. What do 
you want to see your department be? What do you want to see 
your department accomplish on behalf of the people of this 
province over the next year or two? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. And I 
think . . . I would like to start with acknowledging a statement 
that is attributed to the member opposite, Mr. Chair, when he 
was at a meeting in Moose Jaw where he said, if it were his to 
do, it would be quality not quantity. 
 
And I think that in Saskatchewan, given the nature of our 
province, we have to seek to do both — both quality and 
quantity. And that is because with the far outlying areas, as the 
member will well know, those people also need good, safe 
transportation. 
 
And it’s one of the challenges in this province where we have a 
widely dispersed population that we need to make sure, to the 
best of our ability with the resources we have, that we try and 
keep all the roads up to a standard that will make transportation 
safe. That certainly makes the responsibilities of this 
department very, very complex. 
 
The other piece that we have that we’re really focusing on, 
other than making safe transportation possible, to make sure 
that communities get what they need in terms of access for 
schools, hospitals, the major components of social living. 
 
And to that extent, we have over the history of this province, 
we’ve got the thin membrane surface roads. Those roads have 
been built to provide a dust-free, mud-free surface. But over the 
years, the change in transportation patterns have put more stress 

on those roads, those thin membrane surface roads, than what 
we had ever anticipated they would see. The change from rail to 
road has really taken a lot more out of them and continues to 
take more out of them than what we had anticipated. 
 
But we still seek to make sure that those people from around the 
province, particularly in the outlying areas, have opportunity to 
drive on mud-free, dust-free surfaces. And to that extent, the 
department has worked at maintaining those, patching those 
where possible. You’ll well know the difficulty of doing that 
when the heavy traffic continues over them. 
 
And so part of the philosophy that we have been working on is 
the philosophy I think that is inherent in this province and that 
is that we are able to accomplish much more when we work in 
partnerships, when we work co-operatively. 
 
And so we’ve been working co-operatively with municipalities, 
following guidance of our area transportation planning 
committees who live out there, who are looking at what the 
needs are, who are helping us to set the priorities. 
 
And when we get those priorities set, we’re able to work in 
partnership to set aside roads for heavy haul. That takes some of 
the stress off of the TMS roads. And when we patch them, the 
patches last for longer, and it’s easier to maintain them once 
we’ve been able to have a partnership with the municipalities 
and shift some of the traffic off of those roads. 
 
The other area that I think is very key and essential to our 
government’s overall philosophy is that we are seeking to build 
a thriving economy in this province. As our Premier has noted 
on several occasions, we cannot have good social programs if 
we do not have good, sound economic development. 
 
Basic principles of stewardship — we do not want to build out a 
huge debt and deficit in order to support social programs, and 
therefore we need to do what we can to encourage and enable 
economic development. One of the pieces of that is building the 
highways infrastructure, the transportation infrastructure, to 
meet those economic development needs. 
 
Overall we are seeking to transform our Saskatchewan 
transportation system to make it fit the 21st century, the needs 
and the demands of the 21st century. And I think when we hear 
the report from the Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
we’ll get a better sense of how we will meet those needs. And I 
think one of the pieces of work that they have done, this 
non-partisan body has done, that will be very helpful for all of 
us is their analysis of the economic situation in Saskatchewan 
— how our demography has changed and how we are going to 
meet the needs of the 21st century. 
 
And so in working towards that, working with the 
municipalities, working with the area transportation planning 
committees and special committees, we’re able to begin to 
focus on — and this addresses the question of quality roads — 
we’re able to focus on those roads which are primary corridors, 
economic and social corridors. And we’re able to . . . by putting 
more emphasis on those, we’re able to begin to build and 
strengthen those roads. 
 
One of the pieces which I know the member is familiar with — 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

he even dabbled into all the esoterics of engineering to get a 
good handle on how this process works — is we are engaging 
in a fair bit of research and development. And one of the pieces 
is Pavement Scientific International’s work to try and 
strengthen . . . develop new products so that we can process 
this, so that we can strengthen the base of our roads. And that 
will enable roads that hopefully — and I mean we are still 
doing some testing on this — but hopefully roads that will last 
longer, that will cost less to build, and less to maintain. 
 
And with the work that Pavement Scientific International and 
the department is doing together, we think that we will be able 
to meet some of those future needs. To that end we are going to 
be doing about 350 kilometres of research and development this 
year. 
 
In our budget address, Connecting to the Future, we announced 
that we would spend 900 million in transportation over the next 
three years, doing strategic initiatives to enhance economic 
development. 
 
You’ll see the work that we have done in the North which was 
also emphasized, trying to improve northern roads, develop 
partnerships with companies in the North, to try and make sure 
that those economic opportunities in mining, logging, will be 
developed and that they’ll have the proper infrastructure on 
which to develop. 
 
These corridors are strategic in our province’s development, 
and they’re part of our overall philosophical approach to 
transportation for the 21st century. 
 
Also I’d mentioned earlier the . . . that shift from rail to road 
which has had such an incredible impact on transportation. And 
in that same time, we saw the abandonment of branch lines, we 
saw the closure of elevators — we’re continuing to see this. But 
we’re also hoping that some of the short-line developments, and 
innovative means of grain handling, new logistics for grain 
handling will enable more use of those branch lines; that the 
short-line railroads and the CN (Canadian National) will look at 
this, the CP (Canadian Pacific) will look at this and they’ll say 
there is a future here in these branch lines because of the new 
ways of grain handling. 
 
And if that proves to be the case — and again, it’s still to an 
extent in the research and development stages — but as that 
proves out, and we see some evidence already that it is proving 
out, I think we will see some of that load that has shifted to road 
going back to rail in some of those areas. 
 
To try and draw some numbers out at this point would be 
premature but we are seeing some successful movement. And 
we’re certainly seeing a lot of support. 
 
We held a seminar here in the fall on producer car loading. 
There were over 300 people came out to this seminar. And I 
think there was more excitement around the potential that they 
were seeing there; more excitement around what some of the 
short-line railroads are doing; and I might add, more excitement 
around, and positive comment around, the wheat board and the 
role that the Canadian Wheat Board is playing in this . . . in 
these new developments in grain handling as well. 
 

So to pull that into the overall picture of transportation, we are 
still providing support for short-line rail development. We 
provide through our loans to short lines so that they can 
purchase the rails and we’re also providing advice through our 
short-line branch in the department. 
 
I think one of the pieces that’s very important in this as well is 
that we are continuing to encourage and ask for participation of 
the federal government in these programs. You’ll probably be 
familiar with the prairie grain roads project, a program which 
really was an acknowledgment by the federal government that 
some of their decisions have impacted transportation in 
Saskatchewan very, very heavily. 
 
And so having the $106 million plus over five years that the 
federal government put into the Prairie Grain Roads Program is 
certainly helping somewhat to cover these increased costs and 
help us deal with the grain road corridors. 
 
The problem is that it no way offsets the losses that have 
happened in rural Saskatchewan with the removal of the Crow 
rate and the benefits that were there for producers. But 
nevertheless I appreciate whatever dollars we do get from the 
federal government. It may not be as much as I believe it should 
be or our government or our people believe, but every bit helps. 
 
And we see the same in the strategic highways and 
infrastructure program where the federal government has put I 
believe it’s 600 million across the country and we get a portion 
of that. And we’re able to put about $4.6 million per year into 
our strategic highways. Basically that money goes into our 
twinning projects and I think there’s some into the Battleford 
bridge on Highway 16 as well. 
 
So it’s to really try and strengthen our main corridors for 
economic development. You’ll see work done on No. 6 
Highway south this year and I think that piece is a very 
important acknowledgement that 59 per cent of our trade is 
north-south in this province. That 59 per cent of our trade is 
with the United States and we acknowledge that those corridors 
are very important — again both road and rail. 
 
So our overall . . . to try and put the overall philosophy into a 
nutshell, it is to recognize clearly that we need to strengthen 
economic development and we need to care for the social 
development all throughout the province and make sure that 
even people in far-flung areas of this province have within the 
realm of good stewardship, have the best roads that they can 
possible have. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, thank you to the 
minister for that fairly lengthy response to my question. Having 
listened to the response he’s alerted me to at least six or seven 
additional areas that I need to cover. I don’t think we’re going 
to get time to do that today but there are a number of things 
there that we do want to discuss in greater detail, and I think 
that it’s important that we get to those topics, if not today at 
another time in the future. 
 
I was wondering if having laid out his views today, whether the 
minister could tell us if in some sense his own view of the role 
of transportation is different from any of his predecessors, or is 
he following pretty carefully the same line that the previous two 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

 

or three ministers have followed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think it is important to just comment 
briefly on how this government operates at least from my 
perspective. You’ve noted that I’ve been six months as minister 
in this government, though I am . . . I still consider myself to be 
quite a new member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
But my picture of how our government acts and how it has 
acted is that we really do act as a team and that we are building 
on the successes and the vision that has been there in the past. 
There has been a transition with our new leader, who has helped 
shape and clarify a new vision. But it’s not . . . and I don’t think 
any government, you can have a complete change because the 
people would be in chaos and disarray. 
 
But I do think that there is a new vision that our Premier has 
helped shaped, which I’m very happy to see. But the work that 
we are doing as a department, I think, continues to build on the 
foundations that were laid by the previous government under 
Premier Romanow. 
 
Under our current Premier, we see the needs for economic and 
social development. We see the work that has been done by 
previous ministers as part of that whole building towards that 
goal. 
 
Commitments that we have made as we work towards fulfilling 
the mandate of our department, we had set before us and we 
have adopted the 2.5 billion, 10-year commitment which was 
made in 1997. And I’m happy to say that that goal will be 
exceeded early in the 10th year. The $1 billion, four-year 
commitment which was made to accelerate the spending, we 
will realize that within 3.5 years. And these are picking up on 
the goals that have been made by previous ministers and I 
would also . . . I also think it’s important to note that our 
province is continuing its commitment to accelerate the delivery 
of Highway No. 1 West twinning. 
 
(16:15) 
 
We have managed to move that ahead by four years from 2008 
to 2004. And we are committed to fulfilling that goal and we 
are committed to fulfilling the goal to complete Highway No. 1 
East by 2012. And still even with a somewhat reduced budget 
for this year, we’re still able to see completing of our other 
trans-Canada Highway No. 16 by 2010. So we are building on 
the successes and the plans of our past ministers. 
 
By 2002-3, by the end of this year, the province will have 
invested approximately $78.9 million and opened 35 per cent or 
134 kilometres of the 379 kilometres under the twinning 
initiative with only 40 per cent of the time elapsing. 
 
So I think that gives an indication that though there are some 
changed priorities in our government with a new leader, there is 
still a consistency and a teamwork that says, overall we are 
building a thrive . . . we are building to try and establish a 
thriving province where we build the human capital, where we 
make sure that we have the infrastructure in place to build the 
economy, the industry and the economy of this province, and to 
support the social life that people have grown to love in this 
province — the rural life and the community life there. 

So I think the commitments remain the same. The one thing that 
I can say is I’m happy that we’ve been able to accelerate some 
of those commitments and it is my hope that with good 
stewardship and the kind of work that we’ve had, that we will 
be able to continue to move ahead and hopefully get to some of 
the other projects that will help us to care for the transportation 
system of this province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman. Through you to the minister, 
this is maybe a question that’s beyond the realm of probability, 
but if money wasn’t an issue, if money wasn’t a limiting factor, 
what would you like to see the department achieve? What 
would you like to see accomplished by the department? What 
would be your priority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I think we can answer that one fairly 
briefly. It seems to me, I believe clearly, that we’re doing all the 
right things. We would just do them faster. 
 
And one other small addition. I think in the North we’d 
probably have industrial hovercraft moving a lot of the goods. It 
would help in a lot of those areas, both environmentally, and I 
think particularly when you see the kind of difficulties that we 
run into with some of the all-weather roads — depending on 
what the weather is like — it might enable us to get things like 
gas to those more isolated communities. 
 
So if money weren’t a problem and if we could dream and we 
could see all the possibilities, we’d see what we are doing 
accelerated. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
Chairman, to the minister, you mentioned earlier in your . . . 
one of your previous responses that you’re looking forward to 
the 21st century and the development of the transportation 
system in this province. 
 
You alluded to the recommendations that will be forthcoming 
from the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) 
commission, the implications for rural Saskatchewan and 
revitalization there. Some people would not . . . they’d say the 
engine of economic activity and growth is the Economic 
Development department. 
 
Well I would say that the Highways department might play an 
important role in that scenario. If the Highways and 
Transportation department isn’t the engine of Economic 
Development, it’s certainly the tracks on which that engine is 
going to run. 
 
But I guess I’m a little concerned when I hear you say that some 
of what you want to do in the future will depend precisely on 
what the ACRE report recommends. 
 
Surely the department has a view to the future already in place 
— that you have a 5-year or a 10-year or even a 25-year plan in 
place. And if that’s not so, I would be greatly troubled. If it is 
so, what influences will be brought to bear on that plan by any 
recommendations from the ACRE Committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I appreciate the question 
from the member, Mr. Chairman. And I think it is indicative of 
the kind of government that we are that we seek to listen and 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

consult. I was very fortunate to be a member of the ACRE 
committee and so, of course, have some insight into where the 
committee was going. I also had the privilege of seeing a 
preliminary report at one of our area transportation planning 
committees. 
 
And what I can say is that the work of the department over the 
years must have . . . the department folks and previous ministers 
certainly must have had their eyes and ears opened because 
much of what is being planned dovetails very nicely. 
 
But I would also like to take us back to the member from 
Rosthern’s question earlier on when he was asking about the 
entranceways at Hague and some of the other communities 
along there. And he was asking: well, you’ve had the consultant 
do the work and is it cast in stone? Well I think one of the 
wonderful pieces about doing long-range planning is that you 
can do long-range planning and you can continue to listen. And 
where you need to adjust, you adjust. 
 
And you may put a proposal out to the public and say this is 
where we believe we need to go. And with that proposal out 
there you’re going to get feedback. And it seems to me being 
responsible government, we want to hear that feedback, we 
want to listen to it and respond to it. 
 
And so we not only . . . we’re not passive in this matter, we also 
have structured committees that are out there, both ACRE and 
the Area Transportation Planning committees have been a part 
of that overall planning process to get feedback from the 
communities to understand what it is their goals and objectives 
are in building the economy of this province. 
 
And so, though we have a long-term strategic plan, which I 
have noted — the 10-year, 2.5 billion — and talked about how 
those monies will be used out in the community, while we have 
that piece in place it is very, very important to continue to 
listen. And I think the member will know well from the kind of 
response to the pressures from the Maple Creek area that this 
government does listen and does respond. 
 
And so we were able to accelerate the twinning process there 
because of the safety aspects, and I think the public raised those 
well, and the member helped in raising those. And our 
government I think responded accordingly by moving ahead the 
schedule. 
 
And I think what we’ll see is, though we have a long-range, 
overall plan that we’re working towards that and includes those 
economic development quarters, it includes the safety and the 
social aspects, we certainly are listening for and watching for 
those areas where we need to adjust. 
 
And I have to commend the work of these committees that are 
out there — ACRE and our area transportation planning 
committees — because they do bring that to us. We do get that 
understanding. And we do respond and adjust our plans 
accordingly. 
 
We’re looking at the way that we move ahead in our capital 
investments, our long-range planning process. We have a plan 
that targets maintaining our roads, maintaining our bridges. 
We’re able to put more into maintaining and inspecting the 

bridges this year. We’ve got a three-year capital investment 
program which illustrates the province’s plan for improvements 
which will enable stakeholders such as the road building 
industry to plan ahead. 
 
And I think that was one, again one of those pieces where we 
were listening to what the road builders were saying. And their 
need to be able to plan, not only for equipment purchases, but 
what can they do in terms of maintaining the manpower to do 
their work; what do they need to do in terms of purchasing 
equipment when they look ahead to where we’re going. 
 
And so in consultation with the road builders, we’re also 
looking at the . . . having three-year plans laid out to the best of 
our ability within the resources that we have. And the response 
from the road builders to this point has been very positive that 
we’ve been able to put those plans out for them and help them 
to see what they are. They also do some critiquing. We listened 
to that and we’re able to respond as well. 
 
In April of 2001 the department committed to releasing a 
three-year capital investment program which will provide our 
stakeholders with the information that they need for their 
planning. And it is my belief that the very positive way that that 
has worked out for us will impact on our future planning. And 
we will continue to, over the many years ahead, lay out the 
plans in those . . . in that type of way so that our stakeholders 
can respond accordingly. 
 
The department is now finalizing the three-year capital 
investment program which we will release in May of this year. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And through the 
Chair to the minister: I’m looking at the Highways and 
Transportation budgetary figures as provided by the Minister of 
Finance in the budget brought down earlier this year. And 
having talked at length about transportation policy this 
afternoon and trying to get a feel for where the department is, 
where the government hopes to take the department, I notice 
that as a result of the budget this year that we’re going to spend 
$1,000 . . . I’m sorry, $1 million less in transportation policy, in 
the area of transportation policy. 
 
So could you tell us roughly what was expendable as a result of 
the reduction there of $1 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for your question. Again to 
the member through the Chair, it is always challenging when 
you’re doing a reorganization and trying to cut the 
administrative costs, to figure out where and how to do that 
most effectively. And I think the first thing that I would like to 
say is that we share in common, the member from Cypress Hills 
and myself, the view that quality over quantity is often a very 
important step. 
 
And I have to say, with the quality of our policy and planning 
people in the department, even though we are going to be losing 
seven full-time equivalents and the budget is reduced by 
$32,000, the quality of people there is going to make a 
difference. Now some of those FTEs (full-time equivalents), of 
course, are positions that were not filled and will not be filled. 
 
And I think it’s very important to recognize that there were also 



April 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

 

some net transfers in just over $130,000. 
 
And basically what we see is that we’ll aggressively pursue 
policy development in areas like grain transportation, strategic 
corridor development, regional rail development. 
 
(16:30) 
 
In the coming years we will be able to, with the department 
staff that we have, we will be able to meet the challenges and 
changes. I’m confident of that. I’ve seen the quality of work 
that they bring forward and I don’t have any doubt . . . And I 
think it’s very important, just in terms of the overall 
stewardship of government, that we do need to, where possible, 
reduce administrative costs to enable us to develop the program 
that we need to do for the province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, I know how easy it is to make a slip of the tongue, 
especially in here. And when it gets recorded in Hansard, you 
have to live with it forever. But I think you referred to quality 
over quantity as being the important factor. And I’m sure you 
meant the opposite. Or maybe it was reversed again, who 
knows. Whatever the case — whatever the case. 
 
You know, I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Quality is what we 
need to look at. And I, you know, I don’t think we can make 
that point too strongly because, you know, we hear anecdotally 
complaints about quality. And I think that that’s something the 
department will take seriously — if they haven’t in the past, I’m 
sure they will in the future. And I would encourage that. 
 
You mentioned the fact that there are seven full-time equivalent 
positions that have disappeared as a result of budgetary cuts in 
the area of transportation policy which leads me to believe . . . 
or to request, how many positions are left? What number of 
people are going to be working on an ongoing basis in the area 
of transportation policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The total number of staff that we 
currently have now are 17. Primary losses were clerical and 
special projects — yes, special projects. And so the total 
number now that will be dealing with policy and planning are 
17. 
 
I’d like to just also share with you some of the sense behind the 
administrative reductions. Our stakeholders have been telling us 
that the department’s administrative costs are too high. We’ve 
listened. 
 
The department on its own initiative has taken steps to get a line 
on its administrative costs and to deal with those. We’ve created 
a wall between our administrative expenditures and our 
operational expenditures. And this again has helped us. We will 
not move money from the road to offset administrative 
pressures, but funding will be moved from administration to 
offset pressures in operations. 
 
2002, we delivered $61.6 million budget increase with no 
increases in administrative costs, which I think has been very 
significant over this past year. We actually absorbed over 2.3 
million of administrative pressures and were able to reallocate 
administrative resources to hire five new compliance officers. 

And I think that, too, has been very helpful in our program out 
in the communities. We reduced our administrative costs by 1.2 
million, absorbed another 1.8 for 2000 . . . 2003. 
 
In total, over the last two years we have reduced our potential 
administrative expenditures by $5.3 million. This is a 
significant amount of funding and it’s going to go to the road; 
it’s going to go to the front-line operations every year. And I 
think this is again part of that attempt to give the best possible 
service and stewardship that we can for the people of this 
province. 
 
The department aggressively pursues opportunities to improve 
business processes, review our programs, so that extra money 
can be directed to operational expenses — to get it out there on 
the road, to do the kind of work that we need to do to try and 
build for this, our 21st century. And I think that we’ve got some 
very, very good investments in the developments for this . . . for 
these years ahead. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that type 
of direction you’re taking. Because I would concur that the 
view of the taxpaying public has been that government agencies 
of all types are top-heavy with administrative staff and that 
more effort needs to be made to streamline the numbers of 
people, certainly at the head office, so to speak, and that more 
effort be directed to the front-line services. 
 
But in keeping with this discussion about personnel and the 
changing numbers of personnel, I looked at the full-time 
equivalent staff complement figures for this year that came with 
the budget. And I noticed that overall there’s a reduction of 26 
full-time equivalents for Highways and Transportation this 
year. 
 
And if I remember correctly, last year with the increasing 
number of people hired by the government, as part of the 570 
new people that were brought on board, 78 or 79 of them went 
to the Department of Highways — at least the full-time 
equivalencies were given to the Department of Highways. 
 
And I’m just wondering, with that change that would be in 
excess of 110. The swing would be in excess of 110 FTEs from 
last year to this year. Can you tell us specifically where those 
people have gone, where the jobs have been removed or if it’s 
just a matter of not filling vacant positions. Can you name the 
communities and the types of jobs that were involved and 
affected by this change in personnel numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — There is . . . You know as I may have 
reversed quality and quantity at one point, Mr. Chair, 
sometimes the numbers do get reversed as well. There were 89 
added last year, okay, and 26 taken away here for a net of 63.8, 
roughly, of full-time equivalents. And those folks would be in 
front-line operational programs — surface preservation, 
highways and bridge construction, sign rehabilitation, and 
compliance. 
 
And I think one of the other important pieces to look at is just 
simply how the seasonal employees are managed. Seasonal 
employees could be brought on a week later and come off a 
week earlier and that adds up to a certain percentage of 
full-time employment as well. And it’s through those ways — 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2002 

 

very clear management of the time — that we’ve been able to 
adjust and make the full-time equivalent reductions that you 
have there. 
 
So if you have any further questions for clarity you can go 
ahead. But basically that’s it. It’s been managed this way. 
We’ve had reductions through the decreased budget of 12 
FTEs, government-wide initiatives for administration, 
administrative costs — that’s 14. So we do have those detailed 
and part of it is just simply the seasonal adjustments of staff as 
well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — If the minister would be so considerate, I 
would appreciate if you could break down the actual losses and 
where they were attributed to, on a paper, and make it available 
to me. That would benefit my own understanding of how the 
department personnel were managed in this particular area. 
 
There are a significant number of additional questions I would 
like to approach in terms of the department’s spending plans for 
the coming year. I’ve noted some significant changes in terms 
of amounts of money being spent in preservation of the system 
as opposed to construction of the highway system. And I think 
it’s getting far too late in the afternoon to delve into that area, 
so we’ll leave it for another time. 
 
But in the meantime, I believe my colleague from the wonderful 
city of Swift Current has some questions of the minister and his 
staff and we’ll turn the floor over to him at this point. Thank 
you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees, and to 
my colleague for allowing me to ask a quick question, if I can, 
on a constituency related matter. It’s a question I think I asked 
last session and it follows up on a number of letters that would 
have come to the department and the minister — to be fair, 
perhaps not to the current minister but to your predecessor — 
on the No. 4 Highway immediately north of Swift Current and 
specifically at the Saskatchewan Landing. 
 
There is a long-standing desire for a passing lane on a very 
steep hill just on the south side of the landing bridge, of the 
Saskatchewan Landing bridge. And the department was 
forthcoming last year and indicated that it’s something that they 
have looked at in the past. And I think they even . . . your 
predecessor, Mr. Minister, sent out a letter indicating that, you 
know, they were evaluating this and, at the time, there was no 
current plans for that. 
 
And I’m just wondering if I could get an update on that project 
and on any evaluation the department may have done on that 
particular project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Mr. Chair. In response to 
the question, a couple of pieces. First of all, it’s not on for this 
year. The evaluation is ongoing and if you’d like further detail 
in terms of where the evaluation is, we’d be happy to provide 
that for you in a letter. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would appreciate that, 
at your convenience, if you could provide that evaluation. 
 
And just one quick final question on that same highway, on that 

same No. 4 Highway. There was a request and an evaluation, I 
think, done by the department on the turnoff to Skyline Road. 
It’s a turnoff right off of the No. 4 north of Swift Current. And 
we had some concerns because of quite a bit of traffic actually 
turning off and taking that turn to go west. 
 
There was this request for some sort of . . . an expansion of the 
shoulder, at the very least, to avoid accidents with traffic that 
might want to come around. So . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I would like to thank the member for 
the question and note that we will get an answer to him by letter 
on that question. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I noticed the 
worried look on the Deputy House Leader’s face across the 
way. I just would like to take a minute before we wrap up 
today’s proceedings to thank the minister and his officials for 
coming today. 
 
This has been I think a good start to our ongoing discussions 
through the upcoming weeks and we hope to get much more 
specific, much more direct, and have much more challenging 
material for you in the days to come. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the House 
to introduce a motion related to sitting hours. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. 
member for Regina Wascana Plains: 
 

That on Monday, April 29, 2002, notwithstanding rule 3(1), 
the Assembly shall adjourn at 5 p.m. so that the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture may be permitted to conduct its 
proceedings in the Legislative Chamber later that day. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before moving adjournment 
of the House and recognizing a good number of people who are 
here would like to scurry away to other responsibilities and 
obligations, we should probably bring to the attention of the 
members of the Assembly that today our Sergeant-at-Arms is 
celebrating his 54th birthday, I’m told, and so perhaps we 
would like to end with a rendition of “Happy Birthday.” 
 
(Hon. members sang.) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I note as well, Mr. Speaker, that not a 
single member shouted, speech, after we sang that. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:53. 


