















































Hansard: June 03, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1749 
 June 3, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers. 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of residents of northeast Saskatchewan 
concerned about the condition of Highway No. 23 west from 
Junction 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Weekes and Hudson Bay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
from people who are concerned about the high cost of 
prescription drugs: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Kuroki, 
Wadena, and Hendon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
shortcomings in the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Saskatoon and I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present, to do with overfishing at Lake of the 
Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 

responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Langenburg, Marchwell, and Churchbridge. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable 
condition of Highway 42. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Riverhurst and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
crop insurance premiums. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the prayer is signed by residents of Weyburn, and 
Beaubier, and Benson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
here to improve Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life, to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Eyebrow and Central Butte. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have petitions 
from citizens concerned about unreasonably priced telephone 
service in the Emerald Lake area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins, and provide reliable cellular telephone coverage. 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by the citizens of Warman, Saskatoon, Martensville, 
Shellbrook, and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today with citizens concerned about Highway No. 15. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people from 
Simpson, Watrous, Imperial, Young, and — that’s it. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the Besnard Lake 
situation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Leask, from Shell Lake, Shellbrook, Blaine Lake, Waldheim, 
and Parkside. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise with a petition from citizens concerned about the 
lack of cellular telephone coverage in rural Saskatchewan. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Bracken, 
Frontier, Orkney, and Climax. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7, 11, 18, 23, 24, 59, 132, 134, 146, and 147. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 58 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Ag and Food: can the minister provide 
the listings of hay or straw bales available in the province 
of Saskatchewan; and furthermore, could the minister also 
explain where the feed is and the availability and the cost. 
 
And the second question is also to the Minister of Sask Ag 
and Food: is the wildlife portion of the Saskatchewan crop 
insurance policy still in place; if not, why; and what 
changes have been made regarding the policy? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 58 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: at what rate does SaskPower pay 
contractors for rural residential installations? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 58 ask the following question: 
 

To the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management: in view of the present crisis 
will the government open wildlife habitat lands to 
temporary grazing by local ranchers? 

 
I further give notice that I shall no day no. 58 ask the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: in view of the province being 
sued by tobacco companies for recent legislation, will the 
government follow the lead of British Columbia, 
Minnesota, and Florida, and countersue the tobacco 
companies for the cost of health care resulting from 
tobacco use? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
bring to your attention that amongst our many guests here today 
we have 20 Saskatchewan Olympians from the 2002 Olympics 
in Salt Lake City, Utah, the 2002 Paralympics in Salt Lake City, 
and the 2001 Special Olympics in Anchorage, Alaska, and 
they’re all seated in the gallery. 
 
By leave of the Assembly I will be calling upon the Premier, 
then on the Leader of the Opposition for remarks, and then I 
will be recognizing MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) as they introduce their constituents in given order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to have another little opportunity, with the recess of 
the House, to all be out in the rotunda where I believe myself 
and the Leader of the Opposition will want to make some 
special remarks. 
 
Just let me begin the process of introduction, and I would like to 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

 

close the process of introduction as well if that’s possible, by 
giving a general welcome to all of our very, very special guests 
who are here today. And it’s good that we have a number of 
school groups with us this afternoon too, to meet these very 
special guests who we are now describing as our Saskatchewan 
Olympians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I understand the process, the guests will be 
introduced individually by the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) who represents them in this legislature 
and then I would ask leave of MLAs to stand and introduce four 
or five who cannot be here this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of 
the official opposition we would also like to join with the 
Premier and welcome the Olympic and Paralympic athletes to 
the Assembly. As all members know, we are extremely proud 
of our Saskatchewan born and raised residents who have 
performed so well both provincially, nationally, and 
internationally. 
 
I think it is particularly fitting that we as a province recognize 
the contribution that they make to our lives and to the pride that 
we all share in our province vicariously through their activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are looking forward to the celebration of their 
success in the rotunda later this afternoon, and particularly we 
want to welcome you on behalf of the official opposition to our 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my privilege to introduce to the Assembly Ms. Hayley 
Wickenheiser, member of the Gold Medal women’s hockey 
team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 
Ms. Colleen Sostorics from the great community of Kennedy, a 
member of the Gold Medal women’s hockey team. 
Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to introduce to you and to the Assembly Dana 
Antal, member of the Gold Medal women’s hockey team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce to 
the Assembly Mr. Wally Kozak, assistant coach of the Gold 
Medal women’s hockey team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly Ms. Catriona Le May 
Doan, Gold Medal in women’s speed skating for the 500-metre 
track. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is my privilege to introduce to the Assembly Mark Knoll, 
competitor in men’s long track speed skating. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce Mr. Don Walchuk, member of the Silver Medal 
men’s curling team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Mr. 
Ken Tralnberg, member of the Silver Medal men’s curling 
team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my great privilege to introduce to the Assembly Mr. Gene 
Friesen, coach of the women’s curling team. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly Colette Bourgonje, 
competitor in women’s cross-country skiing. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly Mr. Jeff Whiting, team 
manager for the Nordic team at the 2002 Paralympics in Salt 
Lake City. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege this afternoon to introduce to you Mr. Adam Hyggen, 
cross-country skiing specialist at the Special Olympics in 
Anchorage, Alaska. He won a Gold Medal in the 500 metres 
and a Silver Medal in the 1-kilometre relay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to make a second introduction, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 
like to introduce to the Assembly Ms. Kelly McRuvie who is a 
speed skating athlete who competed at the Special Olympics in 
Anchorage, Alaska. Mr. Speaker, she was awarded the Gold 
Medal in the 1,000-metre race, the Gold Medal in the 777-metre 
race, and the Silver Medal in the 500-metre race. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a great 
pleasure for me to introduce to the Assembly Mr. Al 
Bodnarchuk, member of the health care team at the 2002 Salt 
Lake City Olympics. 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege to introduce to the Assembly Ms. Wendy Epp, 
member of the health care team at the 2002 Salt Lake City 
Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: —Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to you and to the Assembly today Ms. Mavis Wahl, 
member of the health care team at the 2002 Salt Lake City 
Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Mr. Kelly Dearborn, member of the 
mission staff for Team Canada at the 2002 Salt Lake City 
Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
introduce to the Assembly Mr. Benoit Morin, member of the 
mission staff for Team Canada at the 2002 Salt Lake City 
Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege to 
introduce another athlete, to introduce to the Assembly Mr. 
Reid Morrison, member of the mission staff for the Team 
Canada at 2002 Salt Lake City Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege 
indeed to introduce to the Assembly Ms. Shelley Coolidge, 
member of the staging team at the 2002 Salt Lake City Winter 
Olympics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have five who I would 
like to introduce in their absence. And we’ll ask members, I 
think, at the close of the five, to show our appreciation in a loud 
enough fashion that they might hear us wherever they are today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not able to be with us: 
 
Mr. Kaspar Wirz, who was head coach of the Nordic team at the 
2002 Paralympics. 
 
Ms. Deidra Dionne, a Bronze Medal in aerial freestyle skiing at 
the 2002 Salt Lake City Olympics. 
 
Mr. Theoren Fleury, member of the Gold Medal men’s hockey 
team, 2002 Salt Lake City Olympics. 
 
Ms. Kelly Béchard, member of the Gold Medal women’s 
hockey team, 2002 Salt Lake City Olympics. And if I may say, 
Mr. Speaker, Kelly was inducted into the Indian Head, the 

Rural Sports Hall of Fame, on Friday night and told us on 
Friday evening that she was doing some mid-term exams today 
and so we agreed that was likely the place she should be. 
 
And finally, Mr. Murray Linthicum, who won a Gold Medal in 
team roping which was a cultural demonstration sport in Salt 
Lake City. 
 
In their absence, let us congratulate and greet these five. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege today to introduce to you and through you to the rest 
of this Assembly 28 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate in 
the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They are in the 
west gallery. They are accompanied by teacher Tana Mitchell. 
 
And there’s a message from my colleague from Regina 
Elphinstone to the teacher, Tana, and that is that how things 
change; now the students have become the teachers. I gather 
they were classmates together. 
 
I would invite all members to welcome these students. I had a 
wonderful visit with them. Please join me in welcoming them to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly seven grade 5 and 6 students seated in the east 
gallery from the Neville School. 
 
The students are accompanied by their teachers Mrs. Olmsted 
and Mrs. Fraser; chaperones Mrs. Unger, Mrs. Robertson, Mrs. 
McLearn, Mr. Tschetter, and Mrs. Fowke. I hope that they have 
had a good day in the Assembly so far and that they will enjoy 
the rest of their day. 
 
I had the opportunity to meet with them earlier and enjoyed that 
very much. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues here in the 
Assembly a distinguished guest that’s with us here today, 
Father Methodius Kushko, who’s in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Father Kushko has been a priest for 32 years and served the 
great community of Ituna in my constituency since 1996. Father 
Kushko has served all over Saskatchewan and into Manitoba 
and as far away as New Jersey. He has been honoured for many 
achievements throughout his life. 
 
I have always welcomed and appreciated Father Kushko’s 
advice to me and really who among us couldn’t use a little 
divine intervention, Mr. Speaker. I was also from time to time 
told that the Liberals didn’t have a prayer, but I certainly had a 
good source in Father Kushko — who by the way, Mr. Speaker, 
is celebrating a birthday on June 16. Please help me welcome 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

 

Father Kushko to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you . . . or to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, it’s a pleasure to welcome some constituents of 
mine from the town of Duck Lake. 
 
Seated in the east gallery is 10 students from the Dumont 
Technical Institute of Duck Lake Campus. They ventured all 
the way down here today to view the proceedings in the 
Legislative Assembly. And I hope when they go back they take 
some of the rain that has fallen on Regina and take it back home 
to our constituency. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to please help me 
welcome the students from Duck Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the Assembly, 27 grade 5 students from St. Joan 
of Arc School in the heart of Regina Sherwood, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’re in the west gallery and I’m looking very much forward 
to joining them shortly after a tour of the building. And I’d like 
to ask all my colleagues to welcome them here on this special 
day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you I’d like to introduce to this Assembly my cousin 
and his wife, proud parents of Colleen Sostorics — Laney and 
Jean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Laney through the years has been very involved in 
the minor hockey program through coaching and managing. 
And if it wasn’t for volunteers like my cousin and his wife, 
young people like Colleen Sostorics probably wouldn’t have 
had the great privilege of representing our country and being a 
gold medallist this year. 
 
So welcome, Laney and Jean. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, the person who has come here the farthest of all of 
our guests today, and that’s Sol Urcullu from Argentina. And if 
you would please stand — she’s in the west gallery. 
 
She is accompanied today by one of my constituents, Mr. Gary 
Carlson, who is a 25-year member of the Eastview Rotary Club. 
And Sol is one of the Rotarian exchange students who’s in 
Saskatchewan for a year. 
 
And we ask all members to welcome her and Gary here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, Len and Arlene Antal. Len and Arlene own and 
operate Len’s IGA in Esterhazy. And they are, by the way, the 
proud parents of Dana with her gold medal from the 
championship women’s hockey team. Would everyone 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery is a friend of mine, Mr. John Patterson of Qu’Appelle. 
John is a proud member of the Métis community. He was a 
candidate for us in 1999 and he had the member for Regina 
Northeast running scared. In fact I think he’s still quaking in his 
seat. So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Mr. 
Patterson today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge as 
well the students from Gabriel Dumont Institute. As a former 
executive director of Gabriel Dumont Institute it always gives 
me great pride to welcome the people from all over 
Saskatchewan, the First Nations and Métis people who are 
going through our institutions. Of course in Cree as well to say, 
Ta wow. To say . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And also to Ken Tralnberg . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
. . . as well. Both and everybody has done well in the 
educational process and also our athlete, you know, from 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Named One of Canada’s Healthiest Cities 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
according to a recent survey released Wednesday, Saskatoon is 
one of the healthiest places to live in Canada. In its report, the 
Canadian Institute for Health Information indicates that 
Saskatoon matches or exceeds national levels in most of the 
health-related categories it examined. 
 
Not only are Saskatoon’s cancer, circulatory, and respiratory 
death rates lower than the national average, but Saskatoon’s life 
expectancy is 79 years — one year more than the national 
average. And the study looked at 63 health regions across the 
country. 
 
Saskatoon’s CEO (chief executive officer), Jim Fergusson, is 
extremely pleased with the report’s findings, and he says and I 
quote: 
 

Saskatoon can be proud of our excellent record of the past 
few years . . . it is due to the hard work, professionalism 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

and true dedication of all those involved in the delivery of 
health care that we continue to receive such favourable 
national recognition. 

 
Fergusson attributes Saskatoon’s high life expectancy rate to 
our province’s environment and lifestyle as well as the 
availability of very high-quality health services. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a good example of how our province’s commitment to 
quality health care in Saskatchewan translates into positive 
health results for the people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Muriel Sheldon’s Induction into the 
Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to inform our honoured Assembly today that Muriel 
Sheldon of rural Prince Albert has been inducted into the 
Saskatchewan 4-H Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Sheldon’s association with 4-H began as a 
young girl in the Elkhorn 4-H Club and she even attended as a 
young girl the 4-H girls camp in Prince Albert. 
 
In 1972, Mrs. Sheldon became the leader of the Red Deer Hill 
4-H Home Craft Club, encouraging members in knitting, 
personal development, and entertaining. So dedicated to the 
club, Mrs. Sheldon would often pick up members for meetings 
and return them home afterwards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the club later changed its name to the Red Deer 
Hill Multiple 4-H Club under Mrs. Sheldon’s leadership, and it 
was during this time she received her 15-year pin. Mrs. Sheldon 
was a key leader in the Prince Albert district assisting many 
leaders and clubs in the area. 
 
As a member of the 4-H district council, Mrs. Sheldon 
encouraged many 4-H members to become leaders, thus 
ensuring that the 4-H movement will continue to thrive in the 
years to follow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mrs. Sheldon has served with the provincial 4-H council, three 
of those years as secretary. Mrs. Sheldon continues to serve 4-H 
at achievement days, encouraging members with their projects 
and assist with judging at the Prince Albert Exhibition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community involvement by people such as Muriel 
Sheldon help us all to set high standards for community service. 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Muriel Sheldon 
of rural Prince Albert on her remarkable recognition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I want to mention to all of our guests 
that our members really do thrive on applause and they like to 
be applauded. 
 
However, as we get into this sort of competitive part of the 
routine proceedings, I would ask all visitors to do as the 
Speaker does, that is sit and listen but you’re not able to 
participate in any way. 
 

Aberdeen’s New Emergency Services Building 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, I was very pleased to attend, along with the member 
from Humboldt, a large gathering in the town of Aberdeen on 
behalf of the Minister of Government Relations. And that was a 
very happy event. It was to celebrate the official opening of the 
new emergency services building in Aberdeen, which is a joint 
facility between the town of Aberdeen and the rural 
municipality of Aberdeen. 
 
The facility’s construction was paid for by the town, the RM 
(rural municipality), and also the province through the 
Centenary Fund. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And what was very impressive, Mr. Speaker, was not only the 
co-operation between the town and RM and the province, but 
that much of the building was constructed by volunteer labour 
from Aberdeen and area. 
 
And I’m happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that the building itself is 
very impressive, attractive, and functional. But it would only be 
an empty shell without the presence and dedication of all of the 
volunteers in Aberdeen and the RM who are: the local fire 
department, which is volunteer; the first responders, who of 
course are volunteer; emergency services; and crime stoppers. 
 
The new building, Mr. Speaker, will improve the safety and 
well-being of the local community. It is a tribute to the 
co-operative spirit of the town and the RM and to all the 
volunteers in that community who strive to help us in time of 
need and keep our communities safe. 
 
So I know all members, Mr. Speaker, want to join me in 
congratulating the town, the RM, Fire Chief Paul Martens, the 
first responders’ coordinator, Shirley Huffman, EMO 
(Emergency Measures Organization) coordinator Paul Newton, 
and all of the dedicated volunteers in Aberdeen and district on 
their new facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Royal Canadian Air Cadets Parade at Yorkton 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I was extremely pleased to be invited to be the 
reviewing officer and guest speaker at the 61st annual 
ceremonial review parade and mess dinner for No. 17 
Squadron, Royal Canadian Air Cadets at Yorkton. 
 
The parade was excellent, displaying the skills of the cadets, 
and it was highlighted by a drill team presentation including 
silent drill. Many cadets on parade were presented awards 
honouring their contributions to the cadet program and 
recognizing their achievements. 
 
I would like to point out five cadets that were chosen for 
national training scholarships: senior leaders’ course, Jordan 
Craib-Petkau; international exchange to Great Britain is Melissa 
Prokopetz; glider scholarship, Kyle Fisher; flying scholarship, 
Christy Persick and David Killen. I’d like to extend 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

 

congratulations to these fine cadets. And it’s no wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that No. 17 Squadron, Yorkton, was chosen as the 
second best squadron in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly will often hear me 
praise the merits of the cadet program, and once again I would 
like to do that. It really is a tremendous youth program and all 
of the benefits that it offers to our young men and women in 
this province. Where else can one receive scholarships of this 
nature? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the squadron, 
Commanding Officer Terry Eritz, and his staff for the 
outstanding year that they’ve had at 17 Squadron in Yorkton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meadow Lake Co-op Expansion 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
More great news from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Meadow Lake Co-op unveiled an expansion project at its 
annual general meeting that will double its grocery store to 
28,000 square feet and should be completed by February 2003. 
 
Allan Halter, the general manager of the co-op, said that the 
renovations will seriously modernize the co-op’s facility, and I 
quote, “It is a competitive growing market and consumers are 
changing.” 
 
The co-op board realized that it must modernize the grocery 
store in order to retain and attract new customers. The rapidly 
shifting demographics in the Meadow Lake area show — and 
pay attention to this — show 80 per cent of the population is 
under the age of 45. Don’t ask, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The store’s new modern look will incorporate a deli and 
prepared foods counter. Ten to twelve new staff will also be 
hired as part of the expansion. Ron Buck, the president of the 
Meadow Lake Co-op board of directors, said one of the hardest 
decisions to make concerning the renovation project was 
whether to relocate a new grocery store. However, the board 
opted to stay on Centre Street in the downtown area. 
 
The co-op will also be allocating 6.1 per cent of purchases, or 
about $1 million, to its 5,986 members this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Fundraising Events 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Southwest 
Saskatchewan has always been known for its heart. And I 
should like to highlight three recent successful fundraising 
events in my home community to underscore the point. 
 
First is the Ability Bowl which was held at the end of April, Mr. 
Speaker. The annual bowling fundraiser for the Swift Current 
branch of the Saskatchewan Abilities Council attracted over 
300 participants and raised over $61,000, shattering last year’s 

record of $59,000. Congratulations to Irene Enns, the regional 
director of the Swift Current branch of the Abilities Council, 
and the 50-plus volunteers who made Ability Bowl 14 another 
success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were also two fundraisers held outdoors this 
past weekend in Swift Current. On Friday night the southwest 
chapter of the Canadian Cancer Society held its first ever Relay 
for Life at the Riverside Park in Swift Current. The event began 
with 132 cancer survivors taking part in a victory lap at the start 
of the relay. In total, almost $44,000 was raised for cancer 
research. Hats off to Margo Trembath and the organizing 
committee, and to friends and relatives of cancer survivors and 
victims who gathered for the Relay for Life. 
 
Also this weekend, Mr. Speaker, I was proud to take part in the 
fourth annual Mr. Sub Big Brothers/Big Sisters golf 
tournament. It was a beautiful Saturday afternoon at the 
Chinook golf course in Swift Current for the 124 golfers who 
golfed in the event. But more importantly — and most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker — over $10,000 was raised for the 
local Big Brothers/Big Sisters organizations. Congratulations to 
the organizers of all three events and to everyone who donated 
to these worthy causes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses President 
Comments on Tobacco Issues 

 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Rosalee Longmoore, has added 
her voice to the thousands of health care professionals that 
support the leadership of this government in a real commitment 
to ending the promotion of tobacco products to those under 18. 
 
In Friday’s StarPhoenix, Ms. Longmoore pointed out that her 
years as a nurse have exposed her to first-hand accounts of 
people fighting for each breath. 
 
She talked about the amounts of poisonous substances in 
cigarettes such as arsenic, benzene, and hydrogen cyanide. She 
praised the courage that this government has had in standing up 
to the tobacco companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Ms. Longmoore indicated, those most at risk 
are children and youth. Exposure to tobacco ads and promotions 
can turn children into nicotine addicts. 
 
Statistics show that a 15-year-old teenager who smokes is twice 
as likely to die before the age of 70 as a 15-year-old who never 
takes a puff. 
 
The justification for this legislation is forged from the same 
philosophy as universal medicare. A compassionate society 
looks out for its people and promotes a healthy lifestyle. 
 
Further to that, we also thank all health care professionals for 
their support on this issue and their continued vigorous 
participation in helping this government create and implement 
good public policy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Agriculture 
from the Federal Government 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two weeks ago, 
government, opposition, and farm leaders from the three Prairie 
provinces met with a number of federal ministers to discuss 
Ottawa’s response to the new US (United States) farm Bill. 
 
Federal ministers, including Paul Martin, said they were 
committed to finding new financial assistance for Canadian 
farmers. Since that time — as the Premier no doubt knows — 
there have been a couple of changes. Ralph Goodale has a new 
job; Paul Martin lost his job. And now we are concerned that 
the interests of Canadian farmers may be overlooked in all of 
this Liberal kerfuffle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Premier heard anything from Ottawa in the 
last few days? Is the federal government moving forward on a 
trade injury package that will assist Saskatchewan producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have not in the last 24 
hours had any conversations or word from the nation’s capital. 
But I’m sure I would enjoy the support of the Leader of the 
Opposition in saying that from our point of view, from the point 
of view of Western Canadians, from the point of view of 
Canadian producers, and Western Canadian producers, we 
assume that commitments made by the former Minister of 
Finance federally, will be honoured by the current Minister of 
Finance, and commitments made by the federal government in 
their willingness to understand the need of Canadian producers 
and the need to provide support, 100 per cent from Ottawa in 
the case of trade injury. I’m sure that the Leader of the 
Opposition and I share the view that the federal government 
will maintain those commitments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know now 
that the federal government is consumed with some of its own 
internal problems and we are hoping that the Canadian farmers 
do not get lost in the shuffle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the meeting which occurred on May 24, we 
were all very encouraged that Paul Martin, the Finance minister 
of the day, took part and he was committed to finding new 
money for farmers. We hope that the momentum that has been 
building on this issue will not be lost in the change of ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I have written the new Minister of Finance 
asking him to follow through on the commitments made by his 
colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rather than waiting for them to call us, I would ask 
the Premier, has he called the new Finance minister to ensure 
that things are still on track? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, to ensure, as we have from 

this legislature and from my own office, that this issue which is 
a priority not just for Saskatchewan producers, but for Canadian 
producers and for Canadian citizens, to ensure that this agenda 
continues to move forward, I intend, tomorrow, to attend to the 
Western premiers’ gathering where we will gather the premiers 
of all four western provinces and the leaders of the territories. 
 
I take this issue to be my single most important issue in going to 
that meeting, and I am confident that the issue will receive the 
importance it deserves from my colleagues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Last week the Provincial Auditor’s report included an 
indictment of the gross financial management of the WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board). He said basic monthly 
updates on revenues, expenses, and liabilities were not being 
provided to board members. And the Provincial Auditor said 
even the most basic month to month financial monitoring was 
not happening. 
 
The result, Mr. Speaker? The WCB lost a massive $56 million 
last year, and the minister’s response was typical of the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government: no big deal. A $56 
million loss — don’t worry, be happy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific actions have been taken by the 
minister to ensure that WCB won’t be mismanaged to the tune 
of $56 million again this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Workers’ Compensation Board released these details when I 
tabled the report in this House some four weeks ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Provincial Auditor again addressed his concerns when the 
Provincial Auditor’s report was released last week. The board 
has taken steps to improve financial statements at meetings with 
their board members and taken steps to have more current 
information available at those. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, it’s alarming enough that the 
NDP has allowed the WCB to manage with such financial 
incompetence. What’s even more disturbing is that the minister 
isn’t all that worried about taking action to fix the problems. 
 
The minister told reporters last week that no major changes will 
take place at WCB until July at the earliest — no plans to hire a 
full-time actuary to work with the board; no plans to get rid of 
NDP hack John Solomon as the Chair of WCB, even though he 
is clearly incompetent. Mr. Speaker, that means the WCB will 
continue to make decisions affecting thousands of businesses 
and workers without even the most basic understanding of the 
impact of those decisions will have on the WCB’s operations. 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

 

Will the minister assure the legislature that no decisions about 
payment rates or program structure will be made at WCB until 
action is taken to fix the massive financial mess identified by 
the auditors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 
while name calling and making kind of off-base comments 
about the Workers’ Compensation Board, this board has come 
through some very tough times over the last decade. They have 
handled problems and worked through them with the employers 
and injured workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the results across the province 
. . . or across Canada, the BC (British Columbia) WCB had a 
loss of 287 million. The shortfall in Saskatchewan was nowhere 
near that. The board remains funded. It has drawn down reserve 
funds to cover the shortfall of this year with the increase in 
actuarial adjustment. But, Mr. Speaker, our board is still 100 
per cent funded and still maintains the second-lowest rates 
across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Minister of 
Labour, who is the third minister of Labour in three years 
should go . . . take notice, go back to her office, get her staff 
together, and be briefed by her staff, and come back at some 
time with the information that we’ve been asking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the net effect of the minister’s 
apparent lack of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the net effect of the minister’s 
lack of understanding of how WCB operates and the obvious 
incompetence of the NDP’s hand-picked WCB chairman, John 
Solomon, is that the WCB lost $56 million last year. And now 
businesses are bracing for what WCB officials are saying could 
be double-digit rate increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps telling us the WCB fund is 
fully funded. What she seems to forget is that WCB is fully 
funded by the employers, by Saskatchewan businesses. And 
those businesses are being told by senior WCB officials to 
brace for double-digit rate increases. 
 
Will the minister make the commitment today that the 
combination of her own failed political leadership and the 
profound incompetence of the NDP’s hand-picked WCB 
chairman will not result in rate increases for Saskatchewan 
businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now I can 
assure the member across the floor that the WCB has made the 

commitment that there will not be any mid-term increases in the 
year 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a question that 
was recycled from a couple of weeks ago, and it’s the same 
thing. The member opposite criticizes boards but, Mr. Speaker, 
he is in effect criticizing private boards right across this country 
when you look at The Globe and Mail in April which said that 
the top 100 pension plans across this country lost money on 
their investment income for the first time in 22 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not an island unto ourself here in 
Saskatchewan, the outside world does affect us. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite can cry, the sky is falling, as 
often as they like but we will weather it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What should happen 
is the Premier call an election and the fourth Labour minister in 
four years will come from the Saskatchewan Party, and the 
Saskatchewan Party will start regaining the confidence and 
stability in the WCB. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has clearly shown the 
WCB was making . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has 
clearly shown the WCB was making important decisions last 
year about the benefit program payouts without even the most 
basic information about how those changes would impact the 
WCB liabilities in the long term. For example, the WCB 
decision to increase independent allowance payments last year 
would add millions of dollars in new liabilities that would have 
to be bankrolled by employers. To make matters worse, over 
the past two years, WCB’s operating expenses have gone up by 
a whopping 48 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister assure Saskatchewan businesses 
that no further decisions will be made that add costs to the 
WCB and push WCB rates even higher until the board members 
are given full information about the long-term financial impact 
and a full-time actuary has been hired to work with WCB board 
members? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we went over this a 
couple of weeks ago when the report was first released and then 
we went over it again when the Provincial Auditor’s report was 
released. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the member opposite that the 
ratio of administration expense to accessible payroll is lower 
than most WCBs across Canada. Mr. Speaker, and the increase 
is . . . or the . . . the administration expenses represent 14 per 
cent of the total cost of WCB expenses, while 82 per cent goes 
directly to wage/lost benefits, health care, vocational 
rehabilitation expenses for work injuries, Mr. Speaker, that 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

happen here, in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a good board. They have weathered some 
times. 
 
The members can holler the sky’s falling, the sky’s falling, but I 
don’t remember them doing that during the late ’90s when we 
were paying out rebates to employers because of excessive 
revenues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Infant Mortality Rate and Child Poverty 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, the Canadian Institute 
of Health Information issued a report which indicated that 
Saskatchewan has the second highest infant mortality rate in 
this country. This is the second time in one week we heard 
about a national report focusing on this discouraging statistic. 
 
Almost nine out of every 1,000 babies born in this province die 
before they reach their first birthday. And the cities of Regina, 
North Battleford, and Prince Albert post infant mortality rates 
that are almost twice the national average. This is totally 
unacceptable. Doctors attribute the main causes to poor social 
and economic conditions in this province and substance abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government can do a lot to address 
the causes. But under the NDP government, babies are dying at 
an alarming rate. What is the minister and his department doing 
to try and turn this situation around? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Shortly, we’ll be 
releasing the vital statistics information from our province and 
we will show that the statistic that the member is referring to 
from, I think, back in 1998 or ’99 has improved dramatically as 
we have worked together on this particular field. 
 
The other thing I would like to emphasize is that we have 
introduced the Kids First program which deals with many of the 
issues around the newborn and the families and others who are 
caring for young people. And together with the Minister of 
Social Services and the Minister of Education, we have been 
working with communities to identify families at risk to make 
sure that we provide the appropriate care for young people and 
especially for infants, because we know this is a concern and 
we’re going to continue to do that with the people of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the infant mortality 
rates are a reflection on the level of poverty that many babies 
are born into in the province of Saskatchewan. And there’s 
proof that poverty follows these children. 
 
The NDP’s own Role of the School report indicates that poverty 
affects an alarming number of school-aged and preschool-aged 
children in Saskatchewan. The report says that Saskatoon has 
one of the highest rates of children under the age of five living 
in poverty and that fully one-quarter of preschool-aged children 

in the province are poor. 
 
Saskatchewan poverty rate for children seven years of age and 
younger is 4 per cent higher than the national average. It also 
states that this province has the second highest incidence of 
children using food banks in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly the infant mortality numbers are an 
indicator of a much larger problem faced by people living in 
poverty in Saskatchewan. Why are the infant mortality rates and 
the number of children living in poverty rising under the NDP 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in all of Canada since 1993, 
there was only one province that can claim to have the child 
poverty reduced by 30 per cent, the fastest falling poverty rate 
for children in all of the nation, right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has 
taken this issue very seriously. The Kids First program, the 
early childhood development program the Minister of Health 
referred to; the Minister of Learning together with other 
departments talking about the SchoolPLUS program; and, Mr. 
Speaker, in the building independence program, since 
introduced in 1998, there has been a reduction of 6,000 families 
fewer who are on welfare today. And most importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, in Saskatchewan today there are 13,000 fewer kids 
growing up on welfare than just four years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a province that can be claiming to be 
leading the nation in the attack on child poverty and that is our 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter what this 
minister says, we still have the second highest number of 
children dying of infant mortality so it doesn’t . . . maybe we’ve 
improved but only compared to yourself. Look at the rest of the 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, substance abuse is a contributing factor to the 
large number of infant deaths in Saskatchewan. Dr. George 
Carson, in charge of maternal/fetal medicine in Regina, believes 
that between 10 and 15 per cent of infant deaths can be 
attributed to substance abuse by the mother. He says there isn’t 
enough money and enough help in this province for pregnant 
women struggling with drug and alcohol addictions because 
space at the very few detox centres we have is extremely 
limited. If a baby survives his mother’s substance abuse, the 
child himself often ends up to have fetal alcohol syndrome or 
fetal alcohol effect. And then you have two people with 
substance abuse — the mother and the child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the government doing to address substance 
abuse in expectant mothers, which in turn will reduce infant 
mortality rates and the number of children that have fetal 
alcohol syndrome and the fetal alcohol effect? 
 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as part of our Kids First 
program we are working together with Social Services, Health, 
and Education to identify children at risk and families at risk. 
And what we then do is have the various services that are 
available to the people around these at-risk kids have priority 
spots for the ones that are affected. 
 
So for alcohol and drug services, their program guidelines state 
very clearly that there’s priority access for addiction treatment 
for pregnant women and for ones that are at risk. And what we 
then do is make sure that those people do get into the facilities 
where they need to be. 
 
We are working with all of the people in the community, all of 
the professionals to make sure that we provide the kind of care 
that’s needed, and we will continue to work with those people 
because that’s where the good care takes place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality Concerns 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this session we raised concerns on behalf of the 
community of Perdue. Perdue residents are dealing with an 
aging water treatment system, they’re facing capital 
improvement costs to their system of between 3 and $400,000. 
 
The community has applied to the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program three times and they’ve been rejected 
each and every time. Their application was reviewed again this 
spring after their water system totally collapsed. But again they 
were denied, Mr. Speaker. Now the community has been forced 
to issue a restriction notice to its residents because only one 
green sand filter is operational in its water treatment plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this community’s water situation is desperate. To 
the minister: what are SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) and Sask Water doing to assist Perdue 
with their water difficulties? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, very quickly we will be 
unveiling a lot of our plans that we have in reference to meeting 
some of the water challenges in this province. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that we have very clearly 
defined the role of Sask Water, Mr. Speaker. We’ve moving 
forward on the Watershed Authority, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
moving forward without question, Mr. Speaker, on a five-year, 
$170 million federal, provincial, and local CSIP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) program to help 
communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said time and time again that if a 
community has challenges, it has problems, approach Sask 
Water, approach the province. We will stand with them, we will 
work with them. It’s going to take us some time; this problem 
did not occur overnight, Mr. Speaker. It’ll certainly take us 
many more times of the effort to make sure that we’re able to 

provide some solutions. 
 
So the problem wasn’t created overnight, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
going to be solved overnight. Now I’d ask that member once 
again to co-operate. We will fix these problems, we will work 
our way through. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well isn’t it 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the minister refers the citizens of 
Perdue to a program that doesn’t even exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Perdue’s notice says, and I quote: 
 

If necessary we may have to shut off the water supply 
nightly from midnight to 6 a.m. to allow our reservoir to 
catch up. We are required to have a certain amount of water 
on reserve in case of fire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the last letter Sask Water sent to the town of 
Perdue is dated April 8, and it says, quote: 
 

Both the water supply infrastructure and the water 
treatment facilities are in need of maintenance, 
refurbishment, and capital upgrades. 

 
It goes on to say, and I quote again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Given that Perdue does in fact have a health risk associated 
with its water supply, Perdue may be a candidate for 
infrastructure grants. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Sask Water acknowledges the severe problems 
with Perdue’s water and the health risks. Is recommending 
Perdue apply to a non-existent program the best the minister 
can do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we have pointed out time 
and time again there are a number of communities that we have 
worked with over the past number of months and past number 
of years to try and resolve some of the long-standing water 
challenge issues that we have talked about for the last number 
of months. 
 
Now what I would point out, Mr. Speaker, is that Perdue, like 
many of the other communities, they certainly have to come 
forward and they certainly have to work with Sask Water and 
certainly work with SERM and also work with government 
affairs to make sure that they are able to pursue any option 
available to them to assist in many of the challenges that they 
face. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, let me say this, is that if they 
have any challenges . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — If they have any challenges, Mr. 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

Speaker, if they have any problems with their water quality, 
what we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, is going to advise the 
public. We’re not going to take any chance of putting public 
health at risk. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why we have the boil-water 
advisories. That’s one of the reasons why we have the 
increasing number of rules and regulations we have. That is 
why we have the awareness campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Perdue in fact was offered another option, and that 
was to enter into a water supply contract with Sask Water at a 
cost much greater than if Perdue was able to fix their water 
system problems with the help of an infrastructure program. Mr. 
Speaker, what kind of help is that? 
 
Towns and villages facing water concerns have been calling on 
the NDP government to establish an emergency fund to access 
when water quality problems become extreme, such as the case 
in Perdue. In April SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) called for a new water specific infrastructure 
program to help Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what have the NDP or what has the minister done 
about establishing that program and what have they done about 
establishing an emergency reserve fund that communities can 
access in extreme situations such as this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of 
communities in Saskatchewan that have taken the lead in 
solving some of their problems and as a government we 
commend those communities. We have said good for the 
communities that have not waited, that have taken the initiative. 
They have provided many solutions on their own, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in reference to Perdue we have said time and time again 
there are three very clear options for financing. The Municipal 
Financing Corporation has said they would assist, Mr. Speaker. 
I announced a $170 million, five-year program that the federal 
government, local governments, and the province have set up to 
assist the communities like Perdue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, don’t forget, we have said many 
communities out there have come up with their own solutions. 
Now we ask Perdue . . . they also have some avenues of 
support, Mr. Speaker: they can bill their clients for water, Mr. 
Speaker; they have a tax base, and they may have some savings. 
So every community in the province has to do their part, as we 
will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the most important thing is: we have a plan, we have a 
strategy, we’re going to work with every community, a lot of 
communities. And Perdue is one of the many communities that 
have challenges and we will work with absolutely every one of 
those communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, either borrow the 
money or if you can’t borrow the money we’ll come in, we’ll 
take it over and charge you an exorbitant fee to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in April a boil-water order was issued in Maple 
Creek after some residents were infected with E. coli. After 
several weeks, that order was reduced to a boil-water advisory. 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, Maple Creek residents are still 
advised to boil their water. There has been no public indication 
from SERM as to the source of the original E. coli infection. 
There have also been no indications as to how long Maple 
Creek residents shall remain under the boil-water advisory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister update this Assembly of the 
status of the Maple Creek water supply, whether or not the 
source of the E. coli has been determined and how long 
residents will remain under the advisory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, as I’ve stated 
in this Assembly time and time again, is that we will not take a 
chance with public health. Paramount to us is the safety of the 
public health and the people that are affected by the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
important that once we issue a boil-water advisory or a 
boil-water order, SERM has to be totally satisfied that a number 
of tests come back that are negative and that they are clean and 
they’re given a safe bill of health to operate. Until such time 
that we get that assurance, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to lift 
any boil-water orders or advisories. 
 
Now what I’ll tell that member is very clear — there’s no 
shortcuts in this game. We have to make sure we make every 
effort, and every team player has a process to undertake and we 
have to make sure that these systems are safe. And we’ll not 
take a chance and any shortcut, Mr. Speaker, to lift any 
advisory until we’re absolutely sure that the public health is not 
being threatened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And shame on that member for suggesting any kind of 
shortcuts. This is a serious business, Mr. Speaker. There are 
some serious challenges to be met. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion to honour 
Saskatchewan’s Olympians. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Recognition of Saskatchewan Olympians 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That this Assembly recognize the achievement of 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

 

Saskatchewan’s 2001 Special Winter Olympians, the 2002 
Paralympians, and the 2002 Winter Olympians and the 
contributions they have made to Canada’s greatest success 
ever in these Olympic events. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the 
Assembly to move a motion to recess. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Recess of Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly do now recess until 4 o’clock to honour 
the Saskatchewan Olympians, and that this Assembly 
reconvene at the call of the Speaker ringing the bell five 
minutes in advance of reconvening. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 65, The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 66 — The Municipal Employees’ Pension 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 66, The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(16:00) 
 

Bill No. 69 — The Saskatchewan Applied Science 
Technologists and Technicians Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 69, The Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists 
and Technicians Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and 

read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand on behalf of the government today and table written 
responses to questions no. 254 and 255. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 254 and 255 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, before we do that, I’d like 
to ask leave of the Assembly to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
my hon. colleagues. I’d like to introduce to you a member that’s 
sitting in the Speaker’s gallery who is the Speaker from 
Nunavut, a long-time friend of mine; and I very much 
appreciate seeing Speaker Kevin O’Brien come here to the 
Legislative Assembly to visit. He does have other business; he 
has some family in Moose Jaw and has been good enough to 
pop in and just to say hello. 
 
I would ask all members to please give him a good 
Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d now like to 
introduce the officials that are here to assist me this afternoon. 
To my right is deputy minister, Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs, Mr. Brent Cotter; Mr. Larry Steeves is on 
my left, associate deputy minister of municipal relations; John 
Edwards, who is the executive director of policy development; 
Russ Krywulak, who is the director of grants administration, 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

provincial municipal relations. 
 
Also with us here this afternoon is Mr. Doug Morcom, who is a 
director of grants administration; Mr. Ralph Leibel, who is the 
manager of community planning; Ms. Wanda Lamberti, 
executive director of finance, administration, and information 
technology; and last but certainly not least, Mr. Chairman, Marj 
Abel, who is the director of finance and administration. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and before I start 
I too would like to join with the minister on behalf of the 
official opposition and welcome the Speaker from Nunavut to 
the House today. And I hope he finds his time in Saskatchewan 
both enjoyable and educational so welcome. And good 
afternoon to you, Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, given the forest fire . . . extreme forest fire hazard 
that we’re facing in the province today, I think that everyone’s 
very well aware that as many measures as possible are going to 
have to be taken in order to try and alleviate the risk as much as 
we possibly can. 
 
And I actually asked this question of your colleague, the 
minister for Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management the other day and he indicated that perhaps your 
department was in a better position to be able to answer it. And 
the question is, Mr. Minister, what guidelines or regulations 
exist within your department with respect to the amount of 
water reserves that must be maintained by an urban community, 
by an urban municipality, in order to fight fires? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not really certain 
whether there might be any provisions to insist that 
municipalities ensure that they have certain water that’s 
available to put into reserves. But I do recognize the importance 
and the seriousness of the question that the member is asking. 
And again, this is not taken lightly and this is not a frivolous 
matter, I want to assure the House. 
 
And I know the member knows that local firefighting is in fact 
a local responsibility. But however given some of the 
exceptional circumstances that do exist in our province in this 
given spring of the year and then going into summer, there will 
be a need . . . and there are some discussions with respect to 
some decision items and considerations that will definitely need 
to be discussed with cabinet and with other available resources. 
So we can address this issue, serious issue that we’re faced with 
during this time of the year, and then perhaps look at some 
options for the future that may help alleviate some of the 
serious problems we’re facing now. 
 
And it’s unfortunate, but again as we all know and have 
experienced in our life I’m sure, that necessity is always the 
mother of invention. And those resources and plans, emergency 
plans that have been in existence, will now perhaps need to be 
redesigned, revised, revisited, and expanded upon. 
 
So once again, to engage the larger community in order to 
ensure that whatever the serious situation may arise — whether 
it be in the northern part of the province or the southern part of 
the province — that there’s some ability to engage everybody 
that’s involved in the province; not just sit back and say, well, 
I’m sure glad they’re having those problems in the North and 

I’m glad we’re not having them and we don’t have to worry 
about them. I think that we need to look beyond that to say that 
well, it’s unfortunate, we’ll do the best we can and contribute to 
assisting people that are in trouble at this point because down 
the road there may need to be some reciprocity in the event that, 
I think, mother nature turns around and challenges another part 
of our province. 
 
So I’m not sure if I’ve specifically answered what I believe 
your question was with respect to maintaining a reserve water 
supply, but if — and I know I’ve probably given you some 
information in a global sense — but if it was in fact dealing 
with having a water supply in reserve, that perhaps may be 
something that we’ll have to certainly, certainly look at as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
One of the concerns that a lot of the communities that are 
having difficulty with their water supplies is that they may not 
have adequate supplies in case of a fire. And I know in the 
situation in Perdue right now, for example, right in their notice 
of restriction they actually indicated that they were going to be 
cutting off the water supply from midnight till 6 a.m. in the 
morning because there was a requirement that they have a 
certain amount of water in reserve for firefighting purposes. 
 
Now when I asked the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management the other day, Mr. Minister, he 
indicated that perhaps those guidelines, as he described them, 
were the jurisdiction of your department or perhaps were 
coming from the Fire Commissioner’s office. 
 
But for all intents and purpose, the understanding is, is that 
there are guidelines in place for urban municipalities that detail 
the amount of water that they must have in reserve at any one 
time for firefighting purposes. And, Mr. Minister, it would be 
most helpful if you could describe what those guidelines are, 
within whose jurisdiction it is that they fall, and what the 
specific requirements are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The answers 
and the guidelines would be more likely to be under the control 
of the Fire Commissioner’s office. And if the member is aware 
that with the change in our configuration, that would come 
under Public Safety and Corrections. 
 
And I’d be happy to obtain those guidelines for the member, 
dealing specifically with the type of emergent situations that 
have been raised with respect to Perdue. And I do believe — I 
can’t say specifically — but I know that we can have access to 
that information and I’d be happy to get it for you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And perhaps 
just to follow up a bit with the situation in Perdue itself, can you 
give us an update as to where the negotiations with the 
community stand at this point in terms of future funding for the 
required upgrades? 
 
I understand they’re looking, possibly in the neighbourhood of 
$400,000 or better for their upgrades, that their request for 
funding was once again declined — the current request. 
 
But now once again we see that they’re in a situation where 
they’re down to one green sand filter. Their output has been so 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

 

drastically reduced that they are having to limit the amount of 
time that water is available in the community. They’re shutting 
the . . . basically shutting the system down between midnight 
and 6 a.m. in the morning. And they do have as well this 
overriding concern about needing to maintain a certain amount 
of reserve for firefighting purposes should they need it. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, where is the community at? I think you’ve 
had an opportunity to meet with them personally on a number 
of occasions and I think certainly should understand some of 
the difficulties that they have faced over the course of the last 6 
months to a year. And I can assure you, Mr. Minister, that they 
do not feel at this point that their needs are being adequately 
met. 
 
So perhaps if you could just give us a bit of an update as to the 
status of any requests, funding requests that Perdue may have 
forwarded to your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The issue that 
the member raises with respect to Perdue, I’m pleased to 
address that. And first and foremost what I’d like to point out, 
that I am advised that Perdue does not at this point have a 
precautionary drinking water advisory or boil-water issue. So 
that’s good news. 
 
From the other side of the coin with respect to their applications 
under the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, once 
again we’ve discussed the fact that there’s so much money, that 
the tri-part agreement allows for projects that communities, 
municipalities apply for. Perdue’s initial application was 
reviewed and rated by the project review committee. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And I believe it’s important that we understand the project 
review committee that’s made up of SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), members from SARM 
and SUMA, the federal and provincial governments. 
 
On their application for 2002-2003, similarly to other smaller 
communities that perhaps may have been bordering on similar 
problems with their water supplies and/or infrastructure, their 
application did not rate high enough to be approved for the 
2002-2003 season. And if you’ll . . . fiscal year. And if you’ll 
recall, the applications had to be in well in advance of the end 
of 2002. I believe it was by mid-October if I remember 
correctly. 
 
So then you could appreciate that there are hundreds of 
applications that are received and there needs to be a process 
followed, which the project review committee follows and 
awards a point system to determine where the most urgent 
needs are. 
 
And at that time Perdue, and as I mention, other communities in 
similar situations, were not also eligible because of their rating, 
their emergency rating not being high enough. However, at the 
request of the village of Perdue the project review committee 
once again met on March 13 and I believe what had happened, 
if I recall correctly, the situation in Perdue had further 
deteriorated into the spring of the year. However that was well 
after monies had been committed to all the other projects that 

had in fact been approved. 
 
The project review committee having met with Perdue, still did 
not feel that there was any basis for changing the decision that 
had been made on the request for their project. So there was no 
recommendation for approval of that funding for 2002-2003. 
 
Perdue was made aware of this by the project review committee 
and the committee still acknowledged that while Perdue has 
problems with their water systems, the problems are not as great 
as some other communities that required immediate funding to 
go after their projects. 
 
So the management committee has again encouraged Perdue to 
apply once again for this program that’s in existence for another 
three years. 
 
We had a successful program in 2001-2002 . . . 2002-2003, 
there will be in the vicinity of some $35 million that will go into 
these types of projects. And the applications for 2003-2004 will 
be in the mail probably by the end of July and communities 
such as Perdue will require those applications to be resubmitted. 
 
And again with the problems that we’re facing — and I’m sure 
the members will agree that you need to address the most 
critical, and ensure that people are given the utmost of 
consideration — that has nothing to do with members on the 
government side; it has to do with SARM, SUMA, two 
members of the federal and provincial departments that make 
up the project review committee. And it’s a federal/provincial 
program and the federal government has in fact laid down some 
fairly serious criteria that needs . . . the project review 
committee needs to follow. 
 
And they need as well to make sure that they’re being fair in the 
assessment and treatment of all the applications that they 
receive — and there are hundreds of them —and unfortunately 
only a small portion of them can in fact be approved because of 
the availability of the funds. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
think the thing that the community finds most puzzling is that 
they have made application on a number of occasions to the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program and their 
proposals have been declined. 
 
But yet at the same time, Sask Water is prepared to go into 
Perdue, they’re prepared to take over the water treatment 
facilities, basically everything from source to treatment. The 
town, however, would still be responsible for everything after 
the treatment plant right through to the tap. 
 
Now in talking to various councillors in the community, they’re 
suggesting that, at the end of the day, that will be a by far more 
costly solution because the amount of money that Sask Water is 
suggesting that they would require in order to assume 
responsibility for their part of the operation, in addition to what 
it would continue to cost the town for everything that is their 
responsibility between the water treatment plant and the tap 
would, at the end of the day, be far more expensive than if they 
were simply allowed to proceed and do the work that needs to 
be done and continue to maintain and operate the facility 
themselves. 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

So I guess a couple of questions as a result of that, Mr. 
Minister. First of all, does the project review committee consult 
with Sask Water? Are they aware of what Sask Water is 
proposing in these communities while at the same time they 
may be making proposals to the infrastructure program? Is there 
any attempt whatsoever at coordinating the activities of your 
program and the activities of Sask Water? And does anyone 
look at, ultimately, the bottom line and what would be the more 
responsible approach for both parties — for both the 
government and for the community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the question 
with respect to Sask Water’s being contacted and discussions 
between the project review committee, yes they do have . . . the 
project review committee does in fact discuss the various 
projects with Sask Water. 
 
I don’t want to . . . I hope the issue is not confused. Because it 
is important here to understand as well that the . . . Sask Water 
has recognized that part of Perdue’s problem is the inadequate 
water supply. And if in fact they do go in to consult and offer 
their services, it will . . . it would in fact be on a cost-recovery 
basis, not unlike it would be if the community went ahead on 
their own and hired their own engineers and technicians to fix 
their problem, to overcome their problem. 
 
And the communities, not unlike some of the communities that 
did in fact of their own volition even prior to this 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, recognizing that 
perhaps there was a need to fix their water problems, or the 
infrastructure, and to ensure a good quality drinking water, went 
ahead without any opportunity for assistance under any grant 
programs. 
 
They took that initiative, recognizing that yes, it is the 
municipality’s responsibilities to ensure good quality drinking 
water. And now it . . . now that we have this program, 
communities are saying, well we can’t get any money and yet 
these other folks do have access to money. But that’s the way 
the grant programs unfortunately work. 
 
There’s no retroactivity for those communities that did in fact 
go to the Municipal Financing Corporation or dipped into their 
own reserves or some kind of long-term debt to fix their 
problems immediately, on an immediate basis, and addressed 
. . . met those challenges head-on. 
 
And that’s not unlike what the opportunities continue to exist 
for these other communities — and I know that’s not the kind 
of answers that the member wants to hear and that the 
communities don’t like to hear — but those are the options. 
Either the long-term debt financing, Municipal Financing 
Corporation, or using reserves from the municipality to meet 
head-on immediately any challenges with respect to ensuring 
good quality drinking water for their communities. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, one 
of the observations that I might make is, is that I think there is a 
bit of a difference in terms of if the community was provided 
with the resources in order to be able to go ahead and do their 
own work versus Sask Water coming in; the community at the 
end of the day would have control over their costs. When 
somebody else, a third party, comes in and, I mean, is basically 

going to assume responsibility for the entire operation, then 
they have no control over those costs, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I want to follow up with something else that you and I 
spoke about a number of months ago and that was that we are 
going to be running into these situations where we’re going to 
have — across the province — we’re going to have a well go 
down somewhere, we’re going to have breakdowns, we’re 
going to have plants that for whatever reason overnight literally 
could become inoperable. And in those situations those 
communities may not have anticipated those difficulties; it may 
have been something that was completely unforeseen. And yet 
by the same token, they’re not in a position to be able to delay 
the necessary repairs in order to continue providing water to 
their community. 
 
So one of the things that we had discussed was perhaps setting 
aside a small amount of the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program funding in order to meet those kinds of 
needs where there were basically emergency situations 
developing. 
 
Have you been able to develop that kind of a fund? Have you 
been able to set aside a certain amount of resources that could 
be utilized in an emergency situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the member 
for the question. And I also want to thank the member because I 
do believe as a result of some of our discussions that that type 
of initiative, the seed was planted. So I want to say thank you 
for that. 
 
I just want to underline that that again going back to Sask Water 
and the communities that avail themselves of Sask Water’s 
knowledge and technical availabilities, that communities are not 
compelled to go to Sask Water. They can make whatever 
choices they want for whomever they wish to come in and 
review their problems, and get estimates or get advice. 
 
Sask Water is there to assist, but if Sask Water is engaged — 
and I’m sure the member will agree — that it needs to be done 
on a cost recovery basis, no different than other communities 
that do go to private enterprise to have the similar types of 
assessments or evaluations of their situations. 
 
Now to the good part, what we discussed about perhaps 
reserves. Yes, that is being considered now by the project 
review committee for 2003-2004 where in fact there will be — 
and whatever the portion is and perhaps it wouldn’t even be fair 
to consider what it might be at this point — but that this has 
been taken into consideration, that there will be a contingency 
amount to address a real serious problem that may occur in the 
spring of the year after the money has been committed. 
 
And once again, that’s going to make it . . . it’s going to be 
imperative that the criteria that’s set for what’s an emergency 
. . . and then sometimes is difficult to determine what do you 
plan and how do you plan for an emergency. You can be 
prepared, but how prepared do you need to be particularly from 
the financial aspect; like how much money do you hold back 
from projects that could get underway in the event that — July, 
August, or March, or whatever — we have a real break in 
something that needs immediate attention. 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

 

But I guess the . . . I’m happy to give you the answer that we 
talked about and there will be some contingency monies, fund, 
whatever you want to call it, considered by the project review 
committee for the future Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
now at the other end of the spectrum, in my constituency, I have 
had a number of communities approach me because they have 
been approved through the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program, but for whatever reason were unable to come up with 
their contribution, the local municipal portion that’s required in 
order to proceed with the project. And that may have been for 
any number of reasons. There may have been other pressing 
matters where they had to spend larger sums of money than 
what were anticipated. 
 
Now if a community is approved for a project but they can’t 
come up with their portion prior to the end of that fiscal year, 
do they then lose the funding? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, under those situations, if a 
community finds they can’t complete their project and are 
financially strapped, they can in fact ask the review committee 
to roll it over into the subsequent year. But at the end of the 
day, I guess if the member’s asking if they can skirt paying their 
portion, I guess the straight answer is no. They would be 
expected to live up to their commitment for their portion of that 
funding for that project. 
 
It can be delayed into another year with permission from the 
committee — from the project committee. So there’s needs to 
be . . . we need to talk to one another and make sure that 
nothing is jeopardized or lost for the community and to 
maintain the integrity of the program and the process. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just very 
quickly, I would like to ask you about the declaration of a state 
of emergency. Could you explain what the requirements are for 
a declaration of a state of emergency by an urban municipality? 
And are you aware of the situation in Nipawin where a state of 
emergency was declared? Are you aware of the Premier’s 
commitment that was made as a result of that declaration of a 
state of emergency? And what are the criteria that communities 
would follow in terms of declaring a state of emergency and 
what types of benefits or what types of access to resources 
should they expect as a result of that declaration of a state of 
emergency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the . . . we are aware and 
the member will be aware, there is the provincial disaster 
assistance program that has certain criteria required to . . . for 
communities to qualify for assistance under that program 
which, I want to say, that is currently now being administered 
by Corrections and Public Safety department. 
 
In response to what is considered a disaster, I’m not sure there 
is anything that’s spelled out specifically — if you meet this 
criteria you’re a disaster. I’m referring to what the member is as 
far as communities getting into trouble. So I don’t . . . I do not 
believe there are any specific definitions of what constitutes a 

disaster. The provincial disaster assistance program provides 
help for people that have lost property that’s not insurable, or 
that’s not been insured, or not insurable as a result of a loss 
through an act of God. 
 
But for more specific — and with all due respect I would defer 
to Public Safety and Corrections for the specific criteria for the 
provincial disaster assistance program. But globally, I’m not 
aware of any specific, any specific definition. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I want to 
follow up with the minister in regards to . . . Sask Water 
actually, in their discussion with communities and certainly 
municipal government in their revenue sharing and how they 
provide the revenue for communities and especially in regards 
to water, water services. 
 
And I know the community of Wawota . . . And, Mr. Minister, 
you’ll be aware of this, last year we talked about it a fair bit. 
Wawota was a community that a number of years ago realized 
that they might be facing some difficulties — and this was even 
before Walkerton and before the North Battleford situation — 
and started to look at their infrastructure and their water 
treatment facilities and whether or not it would meet the needs 
of their community, and felt that it was imperative that they 
actually expand their water treatment plant. Actually that they 
rebuild their water treatment plant is what they ended up doing. 
And I think it was to the tune of over $1 million, in that 
neighbourhood anyway or just give or take a few dollars. 
 
And so they put together a proposal, and I believe they came to 
the government at that time; they went to the federal 
government, they went and looked at every avenue that was 
suggested. They talked about the disaster program and to some 
of the other avenues. I don’t think there was a stone left 
unturned when they tried to put their project together and get 
some assistance as they built their water treatment plant. 
 
Needless to say, the community of Wawota felt it was very 
imperative that they take into consideration the safety and their 
responsibility as town councillors, and they moved ahead and 
built their water treatment facility. And they did it on their own. 
They had to actually go to their ratepayers and seek their 
assistance in building and refurbishing their water treatment 
plant. 
 
On the other hand, the community of Kipling did the same 
thing. They did a number of . . . they did some studying and 
originally they brought a proposal forward to the department 
and at that time it was, I either believe ’99 or 2000, and there 
was something like $200,000 that they had applied for. There 
was a mini-grant to do a study, I believe, of their project to 
determine whether or not it was something that they should 
actually begin to move on. 
 
And at that time they had applied for and they had received 
notification that yes, their project would qualify, and then the 
new federal infrastructure program came into place. And when 
they realized the magnitude of their water treatment project and 
upgrading their water treatment plant, they put in place their 
application and qualified for a substantial amount of funds. 
 
And I believe when they applied for the new infrastructure 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

money they were . . . first of all, the community had come to me 
because they had run out of time. There was a time period for 
that initial funding to be allocated and given and for them to 
follow up and put in place their project proposal. And they were 
asking me if — came to me as their MLA — and asking if I 
could go to talk to the department at that time whether that 
could be extended. In the meantime, this infrastructure money 
came available and so they made applications to that and just let 
what was left fall by the wayside from the original project and 
are currently moving ahead with their new water treatment 
facility. 
 
So I guess the problem that we have, Mr. Minister, is because of 
the fact that programs come and go and communities can’t 
always guess when there might be a program to help with a 
current upgrading project at the municipal level. And if they 
feel it’s necessary to move ahead like in Wawota’s case, rather 
than putting it off and putting it off and trying to make do with 
what they had, went ahead on their own. 
 
And then Kipling comes along and Kipling gets some funding 
and actually has a major portion of federal/provincial funding 
for their water treatment facility. 
 
So there’s two concerns here. And the one is that Wawota felt 
that the load was placed, the burden was placed on them. 
 
And then we come . . . Another point was raised by my 
colleague, the member from Carrot River Valley. One of the 
councillors just said to me recently at a trade fair, he said, is it 
true that Sask Water has been asking communities if, when 
communities have been — and I’m not sure if it was municipal 
government or how they get . . . the Sask Water component 
came into being — but Sask Water was offering to take over 
facilities like the lagoons and then lease them back, provide the 
service. 
 
Or even the talk was providing the water treatment facility — 
they would own it, the community would rent or buy water 
from the facility. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, we’ve got a number of concerns here in 
that regard as to how one community is treated versus the other 
community, how one community is in regards to their facilities 
and they get . . . one community gets funding and the other 
community doesn’t get any funding. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that what we’re going 
to have to do as government is start thinking in the long term 
rather than ad hoc programs. Because the government changes 
on the national level or a government changes at the provincial 
level and we add and put in place a program and a format, one 
community may qualify, the other community doesn’t qualify. 
 
And I think the question needs to be asked, Mr. Minister, what 
the department is doing. When we look at this overall complex 
problem with regards to water project, water treatment, safe 
water, drinking water in our communities, what is the 
department doing to address this major concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, I want to start 
. . . I’ve seen the Wawota plant, and if I may I’d like to really 
commend the leaders of that community for taking the initiative 

and determining that, yes, they had to take the bull by the horns, 
if you wish, and proceed with a project based on the availability 
of funding that they had either through long-term debt, 
restructuring their finances, their financing, going to Municipal 
Financing Corporation, or dipping into their reserves. But they 
did take the initiative, recognizing that there was a need to 
ensure good quality water for their community — for their 
citizens and their community. They went ahead and did it. And 
it was prior to the multi-year program that’s now been 
announced — the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program. 
 
And I very much respect, Mr. Chairman, what the member is 
suggesting and this . . . Yes, we need to have these long-term 
programs available that people, communities, that find 
themselves in difficulty can apply for and have available to 
them. 
 
And what we’ve been asking the federal government, again, is 
to continue. That we perhaps either need more participation or 
very definitely longer participation by the federal government 
in order to address the concerns that the member has raised — 
that people do not get left out. 
 
Unfortunately, and once again, nobody likes to meet with folks 
and say, well I’m sorry but because you spent your money and 
when you did it, it was prior to this program coming in place, 
we can’t retroactively write you into the program. Otherwise 
there would be an insurmountable amount of communities that 
would be saying, what about us. So I know that’s small 
consolation and I do recognize the concerns that the 
communities have. 
 
And yes, like the community of Kipling — and I’ve seen that 
project as well — and they happened to apply for assistance 
when the program was in place for 2001-2002. 
 
For those that had gone ahead and had expended the resources, 
the reserves, or borrowed money, I commend them. I still 
commend them for taking that initiative and recognizing and 
saying, hey look we better do something in the best interests of 
our community. And those leaders need to be commended. 
 
Those are not easy decisions to make and I know it doesn’t 
make you very popular when you need to . . . when you apply a 
program or you do something that you believe is for the 
betterment of your community, but ultimately it needs to be 
paid for and it’s paid for through local taxation and utility bills 
and so on. 
 
The one comment with respect to Sask Water, they will be there 
and are there to . . . And I know that we — the Wawota plant, 
as I say I saw that — and Sask Water has gone back and talked 
to them and talked about how they might be able to assist them 
in advancing the state-of-the-art facility that they have. 
 
And perhaps looking at it from a regional perspective or in 
some way, shape, or form to alleviate in some way the costs 
that that community has incurred. Those are difficult to address 
as well. But I know that Sask Water has been very interested 
and visited that community to see if there was some way they 
could assist. And if it was by way, by means, of having to do 
some more construction or either buy something and lease it 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

 

back, we have to remember that it would be on a cost-recovery 
basis. 
 
But I hope that answers the question. I know it’s kind of global, 
but the most important thing is that those communities . . . and 
there have been others, there are other communities that did the 
same thing that Wawota did. And unfortunately, there is no 
retroactivity to any of these tripartite programs. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, when we 
look at water, and certainly water is just one of the many 
concerns that we have at the municipal level, especially, Mr. 
Minister, since the government that you’re now a part of, 
through the last number of years has actually reduced funding 
to municipalities. 
 
And I think there was a period of time, Mr. Minister, when you 
were actually on this side of the House prepared to take the 
government on, on some of their funding policies when it came 
to municipalities because of how it affected the communities 
that you serve as well. 
 
Well it’s been an ongoing debate. And no doubt SARM has 
been there. SUMA has been there, Mr. Minister. And we’ve 
heard for the past number of years . . . and I would think the 
member for Moose Jaw North as well is quite well aware of the 
problems we have with water and with water treatment 
facilities. And he should be aware of this, Mr. Minister. In fact, 
he should have been, he should have been . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member may 
want to start from about 30 seconds ago because that wasn’t 
covered. I would ask hon. members to . . . Would the member 
for Moose Jaw North please come to order. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And just to go back to 
this for a minute, just acknowledging the fact that Moose Jaw, 
probably like residents all across this province, are concerned 
about water quality and water safety. 
 
And we just — as my colleagues have indicated — we just 
want the minister and his department to know that it’s not just 
municipal government, but it’s Sask Water. And one of the 
problems that has arisen over the past number of years, as I 
indicated earlier, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that the government 
reduced funding to the municipal level for a good number of 
years resulting in municipalities — actually, as they’re trying to 
grapple with the problems they have in providing quality water 
to their communities, as they try to grapple with an aging 
infrastructure and in sewage systems — of trying to understand 
and trying to come to a conclusion and an idea of how they 
could manage because of the off-load that this provincial 
government has actually placed on the back of the local 
taxpayer. 
 
And I know the minister, when he gets an opportunity, is going 
to stand up and he’s going to brag about the $10 million 
increase in rural and municipal sharing. And while that increase 
is certainly welcome — and we did mention that the other day, 
it is certainly welcome — and I believe both Mr. Badham from 
SUMA, and Mr. Harrison, prior to Mr. Hardy taking over from 

SARM, have indicated that that increase of $10 million, it is 
welcome and they’ll accept that. 
 
They realize that through the past number of years the hands of 
government has been tied and we can argue all we want about 
the way provincial governments have handicapped and 
handcuffed local governments. The provincial government has 
argued that the federal government has offloaded their share of 
responsibility and they haven’t funded our programs and we 
haven’t had transfer payments where they were before, and as a 
result we’ve all had to make the sacrifice. 
 
The unfortunate part, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is while 
we can blame the federal government, we can blame the 
provincial government, at the end of the day we can blame 
school boards, it comes down to the local ratepayer who ends 
up having to pay for those services. 
 
And we look at the $10 million increase this past spring, prior 
to the budget. And I believe the municipal governments — and 
I’m not sure if they went as one individual body, I just don’t 
recall, but I believe individually anyway — they all made 
presentations to the cabinet, to your colleagues as they did to 
my colleagues, calling for at least a $20 million increase just to 
get them back on some level footing realizing that that was just 
a portion of what they’ve lost over the past number of years and 
allowing them to start . . . begin to address the infrastructure . . . 
the problems that they’re facing in their communities. Whether 
it’s, as I indicated, whether it’s water, whether it’s sewage 
treatment facilities, whether it’s the system that moves the 
sewage through our communities, or even street work in many 
of our communities. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what I see in, what I see in Regina — 
certainly where I’ve got an apartment rented right now, Mr. 
Minister — the number of potholes that are popping up even 
just driving on the streets of Regina, you would have to . . . I’m 
sure that Mayor Fiacco as he’s sitting down with his council 
and trying to balance their budget and trying to look at, and 
trying to look at how, at how they’re going to meet the needs of 
the services in addressing the potholes. 
 
And I think I heard the member from Moose Jaw North again 
talking about, talking about vehicles. And I can appreciate the 
problems that the member from Moose Jaw North has driving 
in this city because I think we all face that fact. And that a lot of 
it, I think, comes back again to the provincial government’s 
commitment to local government and commitment to looking at 
a long-term strategy and a long-term plan as to how we’re going 
to meet the problems that we’re facing on an ongoing basis, 
whether it’s water quality, whether it’s infrastructure involving 
lagoons, or whether it’s, whether it’s street upgrading and the 
like, Mr. Minister. The list goes on. 
 
And that list doesn’t just stop at urban government. It just 
doesn’t stop in the . . . on the outskirts of Regina when people 
drive into Regina and they have, Mr. Chair . . . and drive on the 
streets of Regina, or driving into Saskatoon. I’m sure the city of 
Saskatoon is facing the same, the same problem as they look at 
their, at their city streets and their main thoroughfares. 
 
And we’re all talking about building Saskatchewan. We’re 
talking about building a province, we’re talking about building 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

a province that people want to come back to. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, just we all, we all had the privilege this 
afternoon of meeting with 25 individuals in this province that 
made our province proud — the Olympians, and a few 
Olympians that weren’t able to join us this afternoon. We were 
talking about how proud we were of each of the abilities of 
these Olympians and the gold medals, the different medals, that 
were certainly brought to our province by these Olympians. 
 
But the interesting thing, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, is the 
fact that as I was talking to the Olympians — and maybe the 
government members found that out as well — many of these 
Olympians don’t live in our province any more. And we ask 
ourselves why did they leave the province? And in some cases, 
they left the province because the training experience that was 
needed to achieve the goals and their aspirations just wasn’t 
available in this province. But I talked to some of the 
Olympians who would love to, at some day, look at moving 
back to Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I think if individuals of 
this nature even are going to consider moving back to 
Saskatchewan, we’re going to have to build an infrastructure for 
. . . that would give them a reason why they should move back 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
Unfortunately they had to drive down Albert Street in the city 
of Regina, and as soon as they got . . . started driving down 
Albert Street they thought, do I want to come back to Regina? 
 
I’m not exactly sure that Mayor Fiacco would want to hear that. 
Mayor Fiacco would want them bragging about the city of 
Regina, as he’s attempting to do right now, and telling people 
why we need to look at Regina as a place to come to, as a place 
to invest in — or the mayor of Saskatoon or even the town of 
Kipling. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, one of the conversations we had earlier this 
afternoon when we were having the tea was the veterinary clinic 
in the community of Kipling. We talk about building 
communities. And, Mr. Minister, you made the comment about, 
I believe it was somebody from the federal level, who almost 
mocked the community and the veterinary clinic in Kipling for 
the fact that they would build this nice, new facility to serve 
their community; as if, here’s a small town, why would you 
invest in a small town like Kipling? Well why not? Why 
wouldn’t we do that? 
 
And one of the reasons for the water treatment facility in 
Kipling, Mr. Minister, is the council of the community of 
Kipling, they’re looking at their community — they want 
people to come to their community. And that’s why they got on 
the bandwagon and they began to look seriously at the problems 
they were having with their water treatment facility. They 
realized, Mr. Minister, that they needed to upgrade that facility 
and to . . . in order to encourage people to look at Kipling as a 
community to invest in. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you will agree with me that that veterinary 
clinic was an . . . is an excellent facility. And what the 
veterinary clinic has done and what the community has done by 
building this new veterinary clinic is they’ve given Dr. Smyth 

just a terrific facility and a clinic that all the residents of the 
area of Kipling and surrounding area — and I believe we’re 
looking at about a 50-mile radius at least that that community 
serves — and we’re providing . . . an excellent service is being 
provided to the community as a result of the veterinary clinic. 
 
And that’s just one of the numerous expansions that have taken 
place and that are coming as a result of town council realizing 
that water treatment facilities and the quality of water in their 
community is a real asset when you look at trying to lure people 
back to your community or, Mr. Chairman, to our province. 
And we have to find ways in which we can build our province. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Minister, I think your department, and I 
believe your department like all government departments, needs 
to look beyond the box a lot of times. We need to start to 
looking in a broad perspective. And we need to start building 
and looking to the future as to how we can address a number of 
these issues over the long term rather than . . . And I say this as 
a politician to a politician — for too long we have looked at 
services, we have looked at problems on the basis of, Mr. 
Minister, what we can do to get elected. And unfortunately that 
doesn’t necessarily meet the needs of our local communities. 
 
Local communities need to know that even if governments are 
defeated, that the services they are providing and the funding 
for those services are going to be there. And it doesn’t . . . 
because a government is defeated that they are going to lose out 
on that funding. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, that’s why it’s important that we actually, 
Mr. Chairman, we do take the time to plan for the future. And I 
know when I’m talking about intergovernment relations and 
intergovernmental affairs, and we talk about municipal 
government and revenue sharing, Mr. Chairman, I think you’ll 
agree with me this covers a wide area. There are a lot of 
questions to be asked and I know the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. It now being 5 o’clock this 
committee will stand recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


