















































Hansard: June 03, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1769 
 June 3, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 

Subvote (GR01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I move that we rise and 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again or move on to the 
next . . . report progress. 
 
The Chair: — Just to double-check, is the minister moving that 
we report progress on the Department of Government Relations 
and then move to Labour? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
The Chair: — Okay. I’ll take that as a motion. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To my 
right is Cheryl Hanson, assistant deputy minister. Directly 
behind myself is John Boyd, executive director of planning and 
policy branch; and Dawn McKibben, director, human resources 
and administration branch, right behind Cheryl. And behind the 
bench we have Glen McRorie, acting director, labour services 
division; and then Gail Kruger, vice-president, finance and 
information technology, WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board); Peter Federko, chief executive officer, WCB; and then 
we have Cheryl Senecal, acting director, Status of Women 
office; and Allan Walker, director, health and safety services, 
and occupational health and safety division. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister and all of her officials here this evening. 
 
I’d like to start off by asking the minister: the government has 
given notice Bill No. 70, labour standards amendment Act, is 
going to be introduced. Could the minister tell us this evening 
what that Bill is about. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There is a process 
that’s followed in this House. Notice has been given that a Bill 
will be tabled tomorrow, and that will be done. So the member 
will see tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Minister. I will be looking forward 
till tomorrow to see what’s in Bill No. 70. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister concerning the striking support staff 
in the Biggar public school. They have been on strike for over 
100 days now. And I was wondering if either side, the striking 

workers or the board, have they been in contact with the 
minister or her department. If they have, what were their 
discussions with you? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the Department of Labour has 
been involved on a number of occasions at the Biggar school 
unit. Most recently we appointed a special mediator that has 
been working to facilitate discussions and the resumption of 
negotiations between the parties. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Is the 
government contemplating back-to-work legislation in that 
labour dispute or has that been discussed at all with the parties? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, back-to-work legislation 
doesn’t really apply in this situation. Back-to-work legislation 
would be used in the rare instance where there was a threat or 
significant concern over public safety — health and safety. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In the last year’s 
Throne Speech, your government introduced in the speech 
information concerning a round-table process, and I’ve asked 
you questions concerning that in the past. 
 
And I was just wondering. This seems to be the ideal 
circumstance to implement a round-table process to get labour 
and management back to the table and negotiate a fair and 
reasonable agreement between the two partners. And there’s 
also a third . . . well partner or a group that’s being affected by 
this and that’s the students that are being affected by this labour 
impasse, and also the parents. And I’m just wondering if there’s 
been any thought put to trying to get the round-table process 
involved and get this dispute looked after. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, it’s kind of odd when you talk 
about the business/labour round table and the way it was 
announced in the Throne Speech, and this is one of the 
difficulties that we have had in structuring this round table, is 
that everyone that has talked about it or had some interest in it 
has envisioned it doing different things. We are still working on 
that process and we think we have some possible solutions for 
it, to have this up and running. 
 
But the business/labour round table was envisioned to look at 
broader issues and not to get involved in specific issues such as 
the Biggar school district. It was never intended to interfere in 
the collective bargaining process, and that’s really something 
that has to be settled between the parties involved. To help 
facilitate that though a special mediator, which is an unusual 
circumstance to have a special mediator appointed, will help 
facilitate to have a neutral party in to help facilitate a type of 
solution through the collective bargaining process within the 
school district. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Could you explain maybe in more depth what 
the special mediator is empowered to do and what rules are . . . 
has the parties agreed to as far as a mediator, and just explain 
that process a bit more fully. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Learning on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave, to introduce guests. 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker’s gallery 
we have some visitors this evening that are fairly close and 
personal to me. I have my son, David, and his girlfriend, Randi. 
David just completed his first year of university in arts and 
science at the University of Saskatchewan, and he’s got a job 
here in Regina, so I expect he’ll be hanging around the 
legislature while I’m down here for a bit of the time anyway. 
And Randi is also working here in Regina. And I would ask all 
members to welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I apologize for the length of time. We 
were talking about the difference between a mediator and a 
special mediator, and really the main difference is, is that the 
special mediator reports directly to the Minister of Labour. And 
on the request of either of the parties involved in the dispute to 
the minister, I will appoint a special mediator that will go in and 
work the same as a normal mediator would. It’s just they have a 
little more ability, a little more leeway in the functions that they 
do, but they report directly to the minister. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If the special 
mediator is reporting to you directly, what . . . I guess it 
depends on what result the mediator has, but I just wonder what 
will your decision be given the information the mediator . . . 
given the information the mediator will give you, depending on 
the outcome of the discussions with the two parties. What 
latitude do you have as far as making decisions as far as that 
particular labour dispute? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I appoint people to help 
facilitate and come to a conclusion, hopefully, and . . . mutual 
conclusion with disputes, but I don’t personally get involved. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to ask the 
minister: what were the qualifications of Mr. Solomon when he 
was appointed chairman of the Workers’ Compensation Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the Saskatchewan WCB 
chairperson was chosen . . . there was a public competition, 
which I might add that no other Canadian province or American 
state selects a WCB chairperson through an open, advertised 
competition, which we did here. Several outstanding applicants 
were interviewed by a panel of deputy ministers. 
 
Mr. Solomon brings a distinguished career as a legislator, 
combined with business and unionized workplace experience, 
to his role as WCB chair. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So really Mr. Solomon 
did not have any expertise in Workers’ Comp or administration 
at all. Would you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Solomon brings to the 
board a very well-rounded experience, both in business and in 
workplaces. We believe that that experience adds greatly to his 
role as chairperson of the board. The more technical aspects of 
the Workers’ Compensation Board are handled by the CEO 
(chief executive officer). 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, given 
the fact that the WCB lost a massive $56 million in the last year 
and they’ve had to make an actuary adjustment of $69 million, 
this is putting considerable strain on the WCB, and it raises 
many questions with the employers and employees of 
Saskatchewan about the future of WCB. 
 
Would the minister not agree with me that Mr. Solomon was 
not a professional administrator? I heard the answer. And even 
though there seems to be a process that was taking place to 
come up with the selection of the chairperson, but it’s obvious 
that Mr. Solomon is not qualified, is not a professional 
administrator, and the results speak for themselves, that he is 
basically . . . has been a disaster for Workers’ Compensation. 
And will the minister and the government be dismissing him 
and replacing him with someone that is a professional 
administrator? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The role of the chairperson of the WCB 
is not administration. It is more in the role of policy. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well the result, Mr. Chair . . . I would like to 
just again say to the minister that the results speak for 
themselves. Something has gone terribly wrong in Workers’ 
Compensation, and the person at the head is responsible. And I 
believe that if this person is not up to the job, that someone else 
should be found to take up the job and get Workers’ 
Compensation Board back on its feet. 
 
The previous minister of Labour said that, I quote . . . I’ll quote 
from the paper, Mr. Chair: 
 

During this spring session of the legislature, Trew 
described himself as the minister nominally responsible for 
the board. 

 
Does the minister only consider herself nominally in charge of 
the board as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I guess I’d ask, nominally 
responsible or nominally in charge? You mixed your question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I believe I was quite clear. I said, nominally 
responsible for the board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, as the minister responsible for 
the Workers’ Compensation Board, I have a responsibility to 
make sure that the Act that defines the WCB is followed by the 
board and the people responsible. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Through the 
Chair, I would like to ask the minister, how many client service 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

 

reps are employed by Workers’ Compensation Board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, there is between 40 and 50 
case managers currently employed at the board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. And how many files are currently 
being looked after by the caseworkers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The board receives probably about 
38,000 claims per year, and at any ongoing time, case managers 
may have an active file of approximately 100 cases each. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Of those cases, how many are 
appealed to the board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, out of the approximate 38,000 
cases that are brought to the board every year, there is an 
average of about 250 cases that are appealed to the board but 
they may not be current files or currently from this year. They 
could be previous claims from back any number of years that 
may have changed and may be appealed at any time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. What percentage of 
appeals are successful? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I assume the member opposite is talking 
about appeals at the board level, and about one-third are 
successful. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. What are the . . . would 
there be a main reason why appeals are successful, or could you 
give a list of possibly the top five reasons why appeals are 
successful? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, we’re talking about appeals 
that in many cases are very complicated. It can be very lengthy 
claims, also very complicated medically. Each case is looked at 
individually and depends on its own merits and justice as to 
how it’s dealt with. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s come to our 
attention that many of the people that have cases before the 
WCB find that their caseworker . . . well they are switched from 
one caseworker to another and they find that very difficult 
because they seem to have to get up to speed every time with a 
new caseworker. Could you explain why that is going on and 
what is going to be done to remedy that situation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, over the last 18 months, 
during some reorganization within the board and the way cases 
are dealt with, we’ve initiated a new program of team-based 
case management, where a team is given a geographical area 
with which they service the caseload within that area. The final 
training is . . . well the final teams are currently in training right 
now and should be in place by September. So we should see a 
real drop-off on this concern of cases being . . . or changing 
hands during a time. These teams will be in place by 
September, so that problem should be solved. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s also come to my 
attention from many workers who are applying . . . who have 
claims or appeals before the WCB that the client service reps 
seem to be under a great amount of stress. And I’m wondering, 

is that a fact? Is there a lot more stress in that particular area 
because of their relationship with people that are applying for 
WCB, or appealing, and especially with people that have 
disabilities that may be short-tempered themselves, under a lot 
of stress themselves? 
 
Is your department finding that there is a problem with the 
client service reps, as far as the stress level of their 
employment; and if so, what steps are taken to alleviate that 
stress level? 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, in any job when there has 
been changes in the workplace, I would believe that there is 
stress in the workplace at WCB. But those changes are coming 
to an end as the new system and team-based case management 
system falls into place. 
 
But when you look at any job where you deal with people it can 
be stressful, especially when you are dealing with clients who 
are injured at work and looking for either medical treatment, 
rehabilitation, wage replacement, a variety of other needs that 
are out there that come along with being injured on the 
workplace. It is a stressful job and without a doubt there are 
difficult cases that have be dealt with. 
 
But also when you look at just the numbers I gave you a little 
while ago of 250 that may come to the board under appeal — 
38,000 . . . 37 to 38,000 cases that are dealt with yearly — that 
is a very high percentage of very satisfied clients and those 
cases can be very rewarding. 
 
So it is a stressful workplace. Just dealing with human beings 
and human lives can be very demanding. But the people are 
trained well and there are rewarding cases as well to go along 
with that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to ask the minister, how 
many people were awarded permanent functional impairment in 
the year 2001? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There was 407 in 2001. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. People with permanent 
functional impairment are eligible for an independence 
allowance. How many people are currently receiving the 
independence allowance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Currently there is about . . . 
approximately 1,200 individuals receiving the independence 
allowance. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Are people being told 
during the adjudication of their claim that they are eligible for 
the independence allowance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, during the normal course of 
case management, if there’s a PFI (permanent functional 
impairment) rating of over 10 per cent during the normal 
management of the case, clients would be informed that there is 
an independence allowance. 
 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If a person’s status 
changes during their claim that would make them eligible for an 
independence allowance, does their client service representative 
notify them of the eligibility? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, what steps are taken to ensure that 
people know of the eligibility for independence allowance since 
it changes in 1999? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, when the policy was changed 
in . . . I believe it was 1999, there was a review of the most 
current files and the clients were notified going back I think it 
was a couple years span. The policy was published, the new 
policy, plus it was also available on the Internet. Also it was 
added to benefit booklets that were sent out to new clients. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I guess the answer is that anyone 
within two years was notified. What about the people that are 
over two years? Has there ever been a mail-out done or 
considered to notify claimants that are eligible for the 
independence allowance that are over two years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the PFI files are reviewed 
annually, and as they come up for review, claimants were 
noticed . . . or clients then were notified whether or not they 
were available for the independence allowance. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. How many people does the 
minister estimate are eligible for the independence allowance 
but are not currently receiving it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, as medical conditions and 
diagnoses change, there is no way of giving you an accurate 
number. Medical conditions change on a continual basis in 
some of these cases, so it’s an ongoing effort. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I believe the concern 
and the problem is the $69 million mistake or . . . on the board 
concerning the actuary. I understand that a large portion of that 
error was concerning independence allowance, and I just 
wonder if the minister has a handle on how many more people 
will be receiving independence allowance and what the dollar 
figure will be to the board in the future. Is this $69 million 
adjustment now looking after all the possible independence 
allowance that may be out there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’d just like to correct the member 
opposite that the independence allowance is not a large portion 
of the $69 million actuarial adjustment. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Could the minister elaborate on 
what did cause the $69 million adjustment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The $69 million actuarial adjustment . . . 
really we can look at a number of causes that made that 
adjustment required. What the actuarial adjustment does, it 
takes into account the amount required to pay the future costs of 
all injuries that have occurred before December 31, 2001 and 
what it will take to maintain those costs into the future. When 
we look at costs, what we talk about is medical costs, increased 
. . . or the frequency and the costs of other therapies such as 

physical and occupational therapy. 
 
One of the contributing factors to this is an aging workforce 
where you get claims of greater severity and complexity which 
also makes for longer claim times. And also there were some 
temporary delays in internal service delivery — restructuring 
and increased duration and some other minor costs. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I understand the WCB 
uses a business, S.T.A.R. Rehab, in Saskatoon and The 
Canadian Back Institute in Regina to help claimants get back 
. . . get rehabilitation and get back to work. What are the 
qualifications for the people that are working at these institutes? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, there are accreditation 
standards for all rehab facilities in the province and the two that 
you mentioned by name meet the standards of credentialing 
required by the WCB and by their professional associations. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Are there other institutions that 
WCB uses, and are there any in other provinces that WCB 
would use for rehabilitation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Yes, there are other rehab facilities that 
are used within the province. And also if a worker that was 
injured while working in Saskatchewan lives in another 
province, instead of requiring that worker to stay in the 
province WCB will contract in their home province to have 
rehab done there. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Could the minister tell 
the House what WCB pays every year for out-of-province 
services concerning rehabilitation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, we don’t have those figures 
on us right now, about workers that access rehabilitation outside 
of the province — the number would be small — but we can get 
that information to you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I appreciate that. When WCB . . . 
does WCB pay these institutions per client or by the hour? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — It would be according to the fee schedule 
that is established in that province. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Could the minister supply us with a copy of a 
fee schedule at a later date? And I’d like to ask the minister, 
have there been any complaints about the quality of the 
assessments and the rehab at these various institutions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Could I just ask for some clarification 
from the member opposite? You asked for a fee schedule from 
all provinces, or any province in particular that you were 
looking more at? And also were you talking about complaints in 
out-of-province rehabilitation? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I was asking . . . Thank you, Mr. Chair. The 
fee schedule in Saskatchewan and in particular Alberta that the 
. . . that WCB would be paying fees. And I was asking about 
complaints about any institutions and the care that they are 
receiving in Saskatchewan or is . . . or any complaints that 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

 

workers have had in other provinces as well. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, besides I guess going through 
every single case that’s at the board, I’m sure there are concerns 
that come forward at one time or another. When there is, they 
are dealt with through the health care accreditation area of the 
WCB when it deals with individual rehabilitation centres. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a concern that 
many workers have brought to me and to the official opposition 
is the quality of assessments more specifically. And I was 
wondering, has your department received a number of 
complaints about the assessments from these institutions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, for the member opposite, we 
don’t get complaints such as this in the department. WCB 
receives some complaints directly and each one is investigated 
as they come in. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to ask the 
minister some questions about maximum wage rate. What 
methodology was used to set the $48,000 gross capitation on 
loss of earnings in 1985? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, that would have been a 
recommendation that had of come out of the 1982 committee of 
review. What methodology they used at that point in time to 
come to the $48,000 cap is not within our immediate memory, 
so that’s something we’ll have to get back to you, if we will 
even be able to answer. Quite often the committee of review, as 
with this one, puts forward their recommendation, but with 
some background but not a great deal. So I don’t know how 
in-depth of an answer I’ll be able to give you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister, what 
percentage of workers in the province does the $48,000 cap 
cover? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, could I ask the member 
opposite for a bit of clarification? There is approximately about 
300 injured workers that are frozen or at the income 
replacement level at the cap of the $48,000. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I was asking for the percentage, 
but that will be fine. 
 
The methodology that was used back in ’82 seemed to leave a 
higher than average . . . account for higher than average income 
earners in the province; and I was wondering, is the board 
considering increasing the cap, and if so, by how much? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the committee of review, in 
its report that was released in January, made that 
recommendation and we will see what happens with the 
recommendations from the committee of review. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. How many of the 
recommendations of the committee of review have been 
implemented and what is the timetable of implementation of the 
balance of the recommendations? 
 
(20:00) 
 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, of the 48 recommendations, 
over half were policy and are currently, either have been or are 
in the process of being implemented. Ten were sent for further 
consultations with stakeholders and the rest fell into the 
category of housekeeping changes to the Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have your . . . the 
embargoed file. It’s a news release as of March 25 and it’s 
basically, I think, the information that you gave me is the same 
information that I have in front of me on March 25. I guess I 
would like to ask the minister to clarify, has there been any 
improvement since March 25 as far as implementation and is 
the minister going to be introducing any amendments to The 
Workers’ Compensation Act this sitting? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, yes we do feel that there has 
been improvements. We have moved along quite well and made 
fair progress on a number of the recommendations. 
 
The amendments to the Act, I think that was the final part of 
your question. Final consultations just ended not that long ago 
on the last 10 recommendations that we received feedback from 
the stakeholders, and decisions will be made on what changes 
we decide to make. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — To the minister, in this sitting? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, we’re still in the process of 
making final decisions. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister, has the 
minister and her department put in any system to measure the 
results of recommendations that the board is implementing? 
 
It seems to me that there’s been a number of studies in the last 
few years, and finally now there’s some recommendations are 
being implemented. I would just like to know how the 
department and the WCB are going to measure the results of the 
recommendations, and how long will that take in the future. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, there are any number of 
measures that are in place at the board: your annual service 
reports; there’s a balanced scorecard; the annual report comes 
out. WCB appears regularly before the Public Accounts 
Committee, at estimates and also at Crown Corp. We believe 
that there are improvements. I’m not sure specifically what 
measures you were looking at or inquiring about, but there is a 
number of them in place. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to go on to 
another report, the recommendations of the Dorsey report that 
was released back in November. Mr. Dorsey had twelve 
recommendations, two that needed legislative change: create an 
independent avenue of appeal for claimants who disagree with 
decisions of the board, and the second one, begin the transition 
to a part-time, independent representative board of directors or 
governors, the composition of which should reflect the 
historical role of organized labour and employers in the 
workers’ compensation system. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister how many of Mr. Dorsey’s 
recommendations have been implemented, and will there be 
legislative changes to introduce that are required for the two I 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

just mentioned? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, there was actually 13 
recommendations in the Dorsey report that was tabled in the 
House in May 2001. Eleven of those recommendations were 
policy and have since been implemented. The two 
recommendations that were left, for the independent tribunal 
and the part-time board, were referred on to the committee of 
review, being that committee was reviewing the Workers’ 
Compensation at that time. And since then the committee of 
review has come to a different decision and put forward the 
recommendation of an appeals commissioner instead of the 
independent appeals tribunal. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to ask the minister: if there 
continues to be losses in WCB, what are the contingency plans 
to cover any deficits that may arise in a future year? Assuming 
all funds have been exhausted and there is no money, what is 
the plan to cover the losses of WCB? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, when the member opposite 
talks about the losses at WCB, I’d just like to remind him that 
the shortfall that occurred this year from a variety of factors and 
one of those being the drop in revenues. 
 
And I’d just like to point out to the member that the Alberta 
WCB budgeted for an operating surplus in 1999 and they 
actually posted a $130.1 million operating loss. In 2002, the 
Alberta WCB budgeted for $11.25 million operating surplus; 
they actually posted a $52.3 million operating loss. And in 
2001, they budgeted for a 17 million operating loss and actually 
posted a $149.8 million operating loss, which brings their 
three-year total to an operating loss for the Alberta WCB of 332 
million. 
 
(20:15) 
 
So when you look at a $55 million shortfall during what has 
been a very difficult time in the markets, increased stress on 
caseload, longer, more complex cases, the WCB here in 
Saskatchewan has done a very good job. They are working on a 
plan to recover the reserve funds. That plan is in progress. 
 
But when you look at the Saskatchewan WCB as compared to 
others, we have come through this difficult time not sitting 
good, but not sitting too badly either. The board is still 100 per 
cent funded and still retains a $50 million reserve fund. 
 
When you look at the difficult times during the mid-’90s, the 
board worked through some difficult times with employers and 
injured workers in this province, and I foresee that we will do 
this again. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If we have another $56 
million loss in this coming year like we had in the last year, 
we’ll be $6 million short. Where would that $6 million come 
from? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, all indications in the markets 
and with the experts that advise the board, we are not 
anticipating losses this year. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I’ve asked the minister repeatedly 

if the board is considering raising the premium rates to the 
employers of this province. I believe the minister has . . . the 
question has always been will the government or the WCB 
increase the premiums to the employers this coming year, not 
19 . . . not 2002, but 2003? Could the minister again please try 
to answer that question. Will there be rates increased in 2003? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker . . . or, Mr. Chair, sorry, last 
year . . . Well actually it was in July 2001 when the board held 
meetings with stakeholders. They informed them then that there 
may be a possible increase this year and that ended up with a 
2.4 per cent average increase across the board. 
 
Looking at this year, it’s really too early to tell what increases 
may be implemented next year or at what rates. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It seems that part of the 
concern about the operation or administration of WCB is that 
the board is not receiving monthly statements. Is the board now 
receiving monthly statements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the WCB board members do 
receive detailed financial information at each monthly board 
meeting. The information includes a monthly statement of 
operations displaying budgeted and actual costs for 
expenditures. The Provincial Auditor has expressed that he felt 
that there may be a need for more information. 
 
Now before the Provincial Auditor’s report came out, the WCB 
has taken steps to address the concern. Monthly statements for 
. . . a monthly statement of operations prepared for the board 
members now highlights an actuarial adjustment line comparing 
the budgeted adjustment to ongoing future liability cost changes 
over the fiscal year. So the information does give a more 
ongoing update of the current financial status of the board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move 
the committee report the Department of Labour and move to 
Corrections and Public Safety. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Tonight I’m joined by Don Head, who’s executive 
director of corrections division, seated next to me; behind me is 
Tom Young, the executive director of protection and emergency 
services; seated next to him is Mae Boa, who is the executive 
director of management services. 
 
Behind the bar tonight we have with us Maureen Lloyd, who is 
the acting director of youth justice services; and Nick Surtees, 
who is the executive director of licensing and inspections. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and to his officials. I need to just make an explanation 
of the last statement I made the last time we met. I said 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

 

something to the effect that I hoped the next time, something 
about them being better prepared. It was not that his officials 
didn’t know all the answers. It was, as you know, that at that 
particular juncture in what was going on around the House, no 
one knew who was going to be here when, and so your officials 
had no idea when they were going to be called to be here. And 
so that’s what that reference was about, not that I didn’t think 
that they knew what they were doing. But we’ll get into more of 
that at this present time. 
 
There’s been a very recent break-in, I believe, or breakout I 
should say, not break-in but breakout. I wonder if the minister 
could comment on exactly how that occurred. 
 
Like we think, the public — and part of this is public safety — 
is hoping that when someone’s incarcerated, they’re 
incarcerated there in a fairly firm and a secure manner and it’s 
. . . There’s two parts to this because one is . . . these people 
break out. How dangerous are they? They’re obviously in a 
state of mental stress at that particular point because things 
aren’t going that well in their life. I’d like a comment on why 
that break-in occurred and whether the individual’s been found 
and if any crimes were committed in that interim. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to thank the 
member for his question. Yes indeed, we have had recently 
three individuals escape from the correctional camp. I don’t 
want to comment tonight on how that happened as it’s still 
under investigation. The three members, the three inmates, do at 
this point remain at large although we have no known crimes 
associated with their escape other than obviously the escape 
itself. But the investigation . . . I’m still waiting for the report 
on the actual occurrence. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. So at this particular point no one 
knows whether they cut a hole in the fence, jumped over the 
fence, climbed under a truck and slipped out, or how this 
happened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I think at this point it’s preferable just 
to say that the matter is under investigation and at some point, 
once that is done, I’ll be in a position to make a fuller 
declaration as to what occurred. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I hope we get a full and 
complete answer to that because as I said earlier on, it is a little 
frightening when people break out. We have had numerous 
incidences in this province where people who had done a break 
or been out on parole have committed some fairly horrendous 
crimes while they were in those situations of either on parole or 
had broken out, and I’m sure, as the minister’s aware, there’s a 
fairly strong public outcry about some of those things. 
 
We discussed part of that last time when we discussed the fact 
that an early parole is no longer going to be just mandated as a 
sure thing. Those things will have to be earned and then, 
hopefully, those people who earn some time off will be the ones 
who are deserving and are somewhat trustworthy. 
 
(20:30) 
 
From other situations as far as individuals that have done a 
breakout of a facility, I’d like the minister to comment on the 

percentage of the individuals that commit some crime while 
they’re out — not the breakout itself, which is as we know, I 
believe, is a crime itself, but commit crimes while they’re out 
until they’re brought back into custody — because I think that’s 
a very important factor when we make some decisions as to 
how secure we need to make our corrections and so that 
break-ins aren’t, you know, just a thing that occurs on a daily 
basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I can report to the 
member that of the four who have been apprehended for this 
year, one had an additional charge laid, other than obviously the 
escape. In this particular case, it was resisting arrest. But in the 
previous year of the some 16 that were escaped and 
apprehended, there were no additional charges other than the 
escape. 
 
If I might just add, I want to say that the corrections officials 
have been talking with Justice prosecutors about having the 
escape recognized as a much more serious offence. In most of 
these cases — I think, if not all of them — these are very 
low-security or low-risk offenders. But I mean obviously 
they’re in jail for a reason, and they’re expected to serve their 
sentence, and we are encouraged by the response by Justice to 
take a stiffer response to people escaping from even these very 
low-security facilities. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I think it’s probably partially 
a response to public opinion where when they hear that there’s 
been a breakout and there’s been an apprehension, it goes 
before the courts and then a certain amount of time added on. 
And I think the public has very often looked at that and said, 
well that really isn’t significant, and then the matter becomes 
whether it’s served concurrently or consecutively and all those 
sorts of things. 
 
So this . . . in the present year, we had one out of four commit 
another crime on the side. In the previous year, none of them 
aside from possibly the resisting of arrest, and I think we could 
see that. 
 
What are the numbers on individuals on parole? And I’m not 
sure how you keep track of that, whether you say you have so 
many man-days of parole time in a year or whether you work 
them in man-years or whatever. But what’s the breakdown in 
whatever way you have it for crimes committed during parole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chair, as part of the 
efficiency in terms of managing the system between the federal 
and provincial branches, the actual parole aspect is dealt with 
by the Correctional Service of Canada. And as such, we don’t 
track this per se, but as such, I just don’t have that information 
available. I am told, however, that it is a very small number that 
would commit additional crimes while out on parole. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. It seems a little unique that that 
information, you wouldn’t have that, Mr. Minister, because 
obviously that’s a key thing in deciding how you’re going to 
deal with the issues that are there and what actions you’re going 
to take. If you don’t have that information there, you then do 
not know how serious the activity is, how often it is, and the 
things that happen. So it makes you take action in a vacuum and 
I think that’s unfortunate. And I’d like for the minister to 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

comment on what his actions are going to be to remedy that so 
that he actually is making some decisions with some 
background information. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — With leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and thank you 
to the members for granting me leave. I’d like to introduce a 
former hon. member of this House who served this House with 
great distinction, former member for Redberry Lake, Mr. 
Walter Jess. And I’d ask all hon. members to welcome Walter 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Perhaps the easiest way to explain this is to explain that 
the question of granting the parole is actually one where the 
prisoner will make the application to the federal parole board. 
The parole is then granted by the federal board. They then fall 
under the jurisdiction and supervision of the Correctional 
Service of Canada. The actual question about the parole aspect 
is not one which would be provincially driven, and as such is 
not provincially tracked. That’s perhaps the easiest way to 
explain this. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I’d also like to take the 
opportunity to welcome past MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) Walter Jess, to this House. I’ve spent some time 
here together with him and we all make our own marks of 
distinction and I know that he’s definitely made his in our 
minds. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Minister, that that’s adequate. I mean the 
people of the province look to this government for some of that 
kind of support. If you have no information . . . So maybe part 
of this is not your responsibility; it happens to be a federal 
responsibility. But we very well know that there’s a fair bit of 
communication between provinces. There’s communication 
between the provincial government people and the federal 
system. For you to get into any of those kinds of discussions, 
debates, conferences, whatever you have, with the federal 
people and with other provincial people and not to know this 
kind of information, I find it very hard to understand what 
significance Saskatchewan’s attendance at those would be if we 
don’t have that information. 
 
So is the minister planning on getting some of that so that when 
he’s involved in those kinds of decision-making and 

policy-setting situations that he actually knows what’s going 
on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I think what might be 
helpful in this is to understand the number of inmates that we’re 
talking about who are paroled. In any given year we’re talking 
about somewhere between 15 and 30 who would be out on 
parole. 
 
Of those I’m told that we may see one or two remanded back 
for a parole violation in a given year. But because the sentences 
by nature in the provincial system are generally shorter, the 
amount of parole time is generally shortened. So the 
opportunity to reoffend while on parole is reduced largely out 
of time. 
 
That’s not to say that the federal correctional service and parole 
board doesn’t maintain these stats. They obviously would. And 
as we deal with it on a policy matter we would view it 
compared to how they are presenting it in terms of other 
jurisdictions. But from our perspective this is a very small 
number of inmates that we deal with in a given year that would 
be on parole. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would hope — 
and I know that the minister is fairly new to this portfolio and 
he’ll probably hang on to it longer than the other one that they 
took away from him — but I would hope that in time he has 
that kind of information much more at hand, because it is a very 
sensitive thing I think as far as the public is concerned and 
needs some fairly close scrutiny. 
 
In getting to something fairly general, the title of this 
department is a new one — it’s Corrections and Public Safety. 
And when I checked through my notes I didn’t see that we had 
gone into this particular last time. And I would like for the 
minister to sort of explain what is all involved in that category 
of public safety because I believe that moves us out of 
corrections into some other area. And what aspects are all 
involved in that category? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, there’s a rather varied 
list of different items which fall under the Public Safety 
purview. Those include items such as the province-wide 911 
system, the provincial disaster assistance program. We have 
responsibility for fire commissioner’s office, building code 
standards, the inspection of boilers, pressure vessels, elevators, 
amusement rides. These types of items would fall under there at 
this point. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. I guess that means we will now, when 
we go on an elevator, we’ll see the minister’s name on the sign 
over there. I guess it’s one of the high points of the position. 
 
On amusement rides . . . and I guess we’re getting into the 
summer session where the exhibitions are in action and the 
various fairs and rides come in from out of provinces. And 
some of those rides, if there was a difficulty with them, could 
be quite dangerous if something went wrong with them. 
 
And I’m wondering if . . . would the minister please describe 
exactly how the safety checks are done on rides coming in from 
out of the province? The ones that are in the province, you 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

 

obviously have lots of time to go ahead and say, we’ll do our 
checks at this and this time. But these groups come in, set up on 
a particular venue, and may only do one venue in the province 
for a day or two, maybe a week, and then they’re gone. Now 
safety is a key thing. How do you, you know, check those 
things and ensure the public safety in those kinds of rides? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know that 
all members will rest easier as they take the elevators in this 
building, knowing now that it is my signature on there and not 
the member for Melville, and certainly much more secure than 
when the member for North Battleford was licensing them. 
 
In terms of amusement rides, I have not had a chance yet to go 
out and do any personal inspections of them; it’s still a little 
early in the season. But I am told that our officials do a periodic 
inspection and that as . . . usually at first set-up they’ll have a 
chance to inspect the operation. 
 
So for instance, if a particular company comes in and sets up a 
set of rides at Moose Jaw, they will go and do the inspection at 
that point. They will not necessarily re-inspect them if they set 
up again, say in Prince Albert. In this way the inspection is 
done. They try to do this once every 12 to 15 months. 
 
I’m also told that there is an increasing degree of co-operation 
between jurisdictions, to make sure rides that are coming in 
from other provinces have been inspected also. 
 
But I am assured that once every 12 to 15 months every ride 
would be inspected. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Having had some experience 
with rides — and we won’t go into detail exactly what those 
were — for example, if let’s say that the double Ferris wheel 
comes to . . . probably only Saskatoon and Regina. What kinds 
of inspections would be done on that? Exactly what is being 
inspected on that particular ride for you to sort of put your name 
on a tag and say it’s okay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s probably best 
described as a climb and ride inspection. They’ll do a visual 
inspection and then they will indeed climb the equipment to 
make sure that the various pieces are working. As well, as they 
will take it on a ride. The additional inspection which is done is 
to make sure that documentation is intact; where it’s been 
ordered for repair, that the repairs have in fact been undertaken. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I said I had some experience 
with some of those. And I remember in days gone by it used to 
be the situation that the people who set up the ride had to be the 
ones who took the first ride in it, so that if there was a tendency 
to collapse, you were very careful how you set it up. It did help. 
Possibly we could put some joy into the minister’s job and he 
could be the one that takes the first ride on these things. It 
would be the plus side of the rest of it. 
 
I do have one question that sounds a little strange, but it came 
from one of my colleagues so I won’t take credit for it. But the 
question was why specifically is the minister’s name on the 
little certificates in the rides . . . not the rides . . . in the 

elevators? I think it’s probably one of the few places where we 
see that happening and I think everyone has noticed it. Is there a 
specific, legal reason for it or is it just part of protocol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I asked this very same question 
actually when I was appointed and realized that I’d be the 
minister guaranteeing this. I guess that it is simply the process 
that’s used to certify that the inspection has been done. The 
stamp is applied once it is the case. 
 
I will tell members of the Assembly that I have actually asked 
whether or not we would be better served switching that system 
over so that it is actually signed by the inspector and dated as in 
terms of when the inspection is. That report hasn’t come back 
yet so we’ll probably have one full season with my name 
stamped on it. 
 
But I know different provinces do it different ways. I don’t 
know that there’s any one which has more merit than the other. 
I personally suspect it would be preferable to look at a system 
where the actual inspector, either in conjunction or separately, 
does sign or initial that the inspection has been done. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, 
Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, 
could you explain to me the process that’s followed when a 
municipality declares a state of emergency. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 
thank the member for the question. When a municipality 
decides that there is a state of local emergency, the appropriate 
process would be to pass a bylaw advising of such. This would 
then kick into place a provincial response, a coordinating 
response in terms of emergency planning. And that is really the 
first set of steps. After that obviously the type of emergency 
may dictate other measures, but that is the most common 
response. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Are 
there specific resources that become available to a community 
other than the planning and coordination responses? Are there 
specific fiscal resources that become available to a community 
upon the declaration of a state of emergency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, when the Premier 
accompanied me to Nipawin, he suggested to the community 
that they might be eligible for some cost-share assistance on the 
cost of the water bombers and some of the firefighting 
equipment that was utilized in the fire that I know you are very 
familiar with that occurred in Nipawin. 
 
And given that, I was wondering if there was a policy that 
spoke directly to that kind of assistance potentially being linked 
to the declaration of a state of emergency, because the Premier 
did in fact say that he felt that given that the state of emergency 
had been declared, and that there was threat to life and property, 
that the cost share on that equipment and on those resources that 
were brought to bear would be appropriate. 
 
So was that predicated on any existing policy within your 
department, Mr. Minister? 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the area that we are 
starting to enter into the discussion on may in fact be better 
addressed to the minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management). But I’m told that the minister of 
SERM told you to ask the question to me, so I will do my best 
to answer. 
 
In the particular case with Nipawin, and indeed what we are 
going to I think see across the forest fringe this year because of 
the unique circumstances we’re running into with the dryness, I 
know there is some thought being given as to how we handle 
the firefighting costs in there. There are certain costs that would 
normally be borne entirely by the province in terms of sending 
out the water bombers in particular, which is what we’re 
dealing with here, and the other heavy equipment. For the most 
part, this is run on a cost recovery basis. 
 
Now the question is in terms of Nipawin, should the bill be sent 
on to the municipality for having called out the water bombers, 
or should it be cost shared? This is a good question and one that 
we’re still looking at. Indeed I assume that we’ll be into this 
question more as we look at additional fires across the forest 
fringe. Certainly the province bears more responsibility on 
Crown land where there’s been a fire; that’s a provincial 
responsibility. Where we end up in other municipalities, this 
tends to be more of an ad hoc basis. It is unusual that we are 
into this so early into the season, and it appears that we’ll be 
into it in a fair number of fires this year. So this is something 
that we are certainly trying to work out with the Department of 
Environment as well. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to take this opportunity actually to compliment your 
department. I know that the community very, very much 
appreciated your assistance and your department’s assistance. It 
was very timely, and it was most helpful at a time when they 
were faced with a great challenge, to say the least. And I know 
that the personnel that you had out there did an absolutely 
wonderful job, and the community very, very much appreciated 
their help. 
 
But with respect to Nipawin specifically, Mr. Minister, have 
you been involved with the negotiations in terms of how that 
cost-sharing arrangement, what it may ultimately look like? 
Have you been able to sort the numbers out at all to this point? 
Do you have any idea as to what the overall cost may 
potentially be and what the cost share on the part of your 
department may possibly be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chair, I’ve only been involved in a 
preliminary set of discussions. I want to say a couple of things, 
though. At this point, to my knowledge, we have not received 
an application from the community for any kind of disaster 
assistance, formally. There are a set of complicating issues, 
particularly related to Nipawin, given where the fire started and 
how the insurance issues may work that are . . . will make this a 
unique issue. And I think rather than go into much detail tonight 
on the floor, I’d certainly welcome the opportunity to talk to the 
member directly about some of the issues that are there. 
 
It’s my understanding, at this point, no bill has been sent to the 
community for the cost of the water bombers, but there are 
certainly some issues that will need to be sorted out in terms of 

liability and responsibility. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as 
you aware, I think subsequent to the Premier’s announcement in 
Nipawin, other communities facing similar types of challenges 
with the great number of fires that we’ve had this spring are 
hoping that they may receive some assistance as well, possibly 
in the form of a cost share on some of the resources that are 
being brought to bear to fight the fires — the bombers and other 
equipment. 
 
What will your response be to those communities when they 
approach you for similar types of assistance? 
 
(21:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this . . . Let me start by 
saying that the discussion really is one outside of the provincial 
disaster assistance program. PDAP (provincial disaster 
assistance program) is not designed to assist in terms of fire and 
so this is a separate set of questions from that. PDAP of course 
is aimed at provincial natural disasters, and while fire is 
certainly a significant problem for us, it is not normally 
classified as a natural disaster. 
 
What we do have however this year is particular dryness, as we 
all know, both in the grasslands and in the forests. The 
Department of Environment — and my colleague can speak to 
this again when he is up next — has been taking a very 
aggressive approach in terms of fighting these fires even where 
they extend beyond provincial land. And so they have been 
making the resources available to the rural municipalities and 
the towns and villages to try and beat back the fire as quickly as 
they can, and part of this is because of the tinder-dry conditions 
we’re facing. 
 
My understanding is at this point we have not made a decision 
about how to deal with the cost sharing of this — what 
percentage should be borne by the rural municipality, what 
percentage should be borne provincially. At this point I think 
it’s fair to say that we are addressing this as primarily a first 
response, and that’s simply wanting to tackle the fire and sort 
out the cost and the billing after the fact. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. So 
what would your advice to communities be then, Mr. Minister? 
They at this point, if they’re facing a challenge similar to that of 
Nipawin and Archerwill, obviously all resources are going to 
have to be mobilized as quickly as possible in order to deal with 
the threat. 
 
But at what point would you suggest that these communities 
contact your department in terms of trying to get a handle on 
some of these costs? How would you suggest that they go about 
doing that? And then the other question, Mr. Minister, as well is 
— I think you are as well aware as I am — that there are some 
communities out there who are thinking well all we have to do 
is declare a state of emergency and we’re in. 
 
So perhaps you could provide a word of advice to those 
communities in terms of how they may approach the business 
of the expense that they’re going to be incurring, and what steps 
that they may follow with respect to state of emergency. 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I think the first and 
foremost, what we want to do is to encourage municipalities to 
take preventative action. Now we have certainly ordered a fire 
ban across a very wide part of the province at this point. This is 
a very significant issue, although it is a little better now in the 
southern part with the rains we’ve had in the last two days. This 
is still very, very dry and what we need to understand is that 
maintaining a very strict requirement over everything from 
burning barrels to stubble burning is absolutely essential at this 
point in terms of making sure we reduce the fire risk. 
 
Now most of the municipalities will have some form of a 
mutual aid agreement signed among themselves or within other 
towns to make sure that when initial responses are required that 
they are able to meet that through municipal resources. In the 
forest areas . . . And this year in particular, as we’ve seen the 
fire move more into the forest fringe, this has caused us to take 
more of a provincial response with the heavier equipment. 
 
For the most part this is a unique situation. I think my colleague 
from . . . the minister of SERM would . . . Minister of 
Environment would certainly say that we are highly taxed now 
in terms of our own resources that we’re committing. In fact 
this weekend a special team came in from Ontario to assist us in 
dealing with it. 
 
The fact is that if the fires expand, we will need to be making 
sure that provincial resources go where there is the greatest 
threat. Municipalities should work to make sure their mutual aid 
agreements are in place, should work to make sure the 
municipal bylaws are working and that they’re being proactive 
in terms of making sure that individuals who often are the 
cause, either . . . mostly inadvertently for starting these fires, 
that in fact we are taking appropriate preventative action. 
 
Once the fire has escaped and has become a problem, certainly 
they should go through the process in terms of declaring a state 
of emergency to bring in provincial coordination and we’ll 
work with each situation as it moves on from there. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, given the 
situation that the province is facing with respect to all of the 
fires that are burning at this point, I know that your department 
has had to mobilize a number of resources, probably more 
resources than what were anticipated at the time that the budget 
was brought down. 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, could you inform us as to are you on 
target and will the three- twelfths appropriation, will you be 
able to fulfill all your obligations with that appropriation? Or 
does it look like, at this point, you will be exceeding that based 
on the increased demand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — On this point, Mr. Chairman, I am 
advised that we should be fine in terms of our budgeted 
resources on the emergency planning piece. There are no . . . 
I’m not expecting a big drawdown on PDAP so we should be 
fine there. The question in terms of firefighting costs would be 
better addressed through the Department of Environment that 
does in fact bear the line item for the firefighting budget. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, could you just 
provide a brief description of that overall coordination role that 

you suggested your department plays. Does that mean then that 
your department will keep track of all the various resources that 
are available in the province, be they municipal, be they 
provincial? Are you sort of the one-stop clearing house for all 
the resources that are utilized in situations of public safety? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, in terms of the 
coordination role performed by the department, it is very much 
that, one of coordination. It may mean everything from 
coordinating the, for example, in the situation with Nipawin that 
we were in, there was some social services involvement because 
of the seniors needed to be relocated. There may be some 
activity in terms of that. 
 
For the most part it is a case of making sure that provincial 
emergency plans are being followed, that we are coordinating 
provincial resources where we can. SERM certainly has a very 
significant role to play where they come in into the forest fringe 
and where they involve the heavier equipment. 
 
One of the areas that we are going to need to do some work in 
provincially, to be very upfront about this, is the level of 
regional coordination. This is an area where municipalities have 
maintained a lot of autonomy and the province has largely 
stepped back. I think as a result of incidents in the last year, 
there is certainly a heightened interest in better coordination, 
and this is something which under the auspices of the new 
department that we’re interested in. 
 
That’s not to say that we are interested in taking over municipal 
responsibility. Municipalities still have the first response and 
what we need to do is to make sure there is a coordination there. 
Again this may fall under such things as the 911, that we need 
to make sure that there’s appropriate response in terms of 
policing and ambulance in that kind of a situation. In the fire 
response it’s somewhat more complicated, depending on the 
location and what kind of mutual aid agreements are in place 
and how SERM fits into it. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, as I 
understand it, one of the resources that communities can access 
in order to be able to do exactly that kind of thing that you’re 
talking about — and that is develop that regionally coordinated 
response system — one of the programs that they could go to 
was the joint emergency preparedness program. And when I 
look at the budget this year, Mr. Minister, it’s been reduced 
from 400,000 to $280,000. 
 
Firstly, I think you’ve very eloquently illustrated that that is 
something that is absolutely necessary. We do need to go to a 
more regional type of approach and there has to be a larger 
degree of co-operation, but how is it that these communities are 
going to be able to do that when that budget has been reduced 
so drastically? And secondly, Mr. Minister, is the joint 
emergency preparedness program still being used by 
communities to purchase and upgrade 911 equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I am told that the 
reason for the budget reduction was to better reflect the actual 
spending within this line item. The previous budget of about 
400,000 was based on the total of submitted project 
applications. And in terms of approved ones, we are generally 
in the range, or normally in the range, of about 280,000 a year. 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

So the reduction is to simply bring it back into line with what 
our actual expenditures are. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The second 
part of that question was, are communities still using the JEP 
(joint emergency preparedness) program to purchase and 
upgrade 911 equipment or is all of that funding when it’s made 
available to communities coming from the emergency services 
telecommunications program? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, for the most part it is 
the ESTP (emergency services telecommunications program) 
program which is being used for the improved communications 
and the linkage into the Sask911. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Back some time 
ago you listed the numbers of items that were under Public 
Safety. And I think quite a few of the questions that were just 
directed to you went under the disaster assistance thing. So 
we’re still under the same topic. We covered amusement rides 
and something on the elevators. 
 
Building codes. Does this apply to all types of buildings or just 
certain classification of buildings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, it does include virtually 
all buildings in the province. 
 
I should add that I did omit obviously to mention that we have 
responsibility for the emergency planning program under the 
department as well, which I guess is self-evident given the last 
set of questions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I would like for the minister to go into some 
detail on how building codes are created and under what 
situations. What sort of precipitates a change in a building 
code? Like when they are changed, why are they changed, what 
brings that about, and who’s all involved in the creating of a 
building code. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, in Saskatchewan’s 
particular circumstance, we have adopted the National Building 
Code standards, so these are laid out by Ottawa. In our case, we 
have adopted those as the provincial basis. 
 
Now municipalities may adopt higher standard codes in terms 
of the requirements for building and other structures should 
they so desire. And I guess the most common ones we’d be 
familiar with in municipalities are standards for outbuildings or 
fences or decks. These would be fairly common ones where 
municipalities may opt for a different standard. 
 
However, in our particular case here in Saskatchewan, we 
simply adopt the National Building Code. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — So a municipality can opt for a more 
stringent code. Can they also opt not to pay any attention to the 
building codes at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — No. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Highly interesting answer because I was just 
involved in doing some building of a particular structure in an 
RM (rural municipality) within the last year. And when we 
checked with the RM, they just basically said the structure that 
you’re doing has to be a certain distance away from the road 
and after that we don’t care what you do. So either this RM is 
not following the regulations they’re supposed to follow or 
there’s some miscommunication between the department and 
the RMs and towns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not in a position to 
address the specific of the RM. I suspect the issue is really 
related to one of enforcement, that the RM is indicating that 
they are not inclined to enforce the building code on these 
buildings. Municipal . . . we do count on municipal enforcement 
but certainly the National Building Code would apply and there 
would obviously be liability issues involved if it’s not built to 
code. 
 
So this is a case where if the member’s constituents are in 
doubt, they should very much consult the National Building 
Code to ensure that it’s up to standard. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This creates a rather interesting situation 
because I believe the minister has talked about liability. So 
we’ll probably need to take one step back. Then what is the 
purpose of a building code because once we know what the 
purpose is then we can get into things such as liabilities and 
what the significance is. So the province obviously has adopted 
a building code. So then I guess I would like the answer; what’s 
the purpose of having a building code? Who does it protect, and 
how is it ensured that it is put in place and those sorts of things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this is indeed an 
interesting question. The building codes are there of course to 
protect the people who are having the buildings built and who 
are going to be occupying them. They also provide a standard 
for those who are constructing them to follow to ensure that 
liability issues are met. 
 
The question of enforcement is a municipal one. This is a 
situation where clearly before permits are issued for the 
construction, they should be ensuring that the codes are 
followed. In the case that they aren’t, the responsibility falls 
back to the individual who constructed the structure and did not 
follow the code. It is the onus of the builder to follow the code. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, I would like some explanation on the 
liability concept that’s been mentioned. Also, who keeps the 
records then — let’s say — 15 or 20 years down the road, if I 
want to buy a particular site? How do I know that the building 
codes on all aspects of that have been kept? Is that kept by your 
department? Who keeps it? And also the other question — as I 
asked already — is what liabilities are out there for people who 
don’t follow the code? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — In the case, Mr. Chairman, of this 
particular situation that we’re discussing tonight, where an 
individual is looking at purchasing a structure that may have 
been built 15 or 20 years ago, they should ask to see the permit. 
In the case permits are not available in inspection, they should 
ensure an inspection is done to make sure the building’s up to 
code. 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

 

The other thing of course is that code changes. And so there 
may well be a case where they need to bring a building up to 
code, and this would be in the best interests of the person 
purchasing it to ensure that that’s dealt with. 
 
The liability issue is one which has a potential insurance 
impact. It may be a situation where, if there is an issue related 
to it, that legal action may be needing to be initiated or taken 
between the buyers and sellers, the builder and the purchaser. 
 
This is really an area that again is best governed by the old, 
buyer beware. And this is very much the case that we’re in. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And as I mentioned, I hope the 
minister doesn’t follow me around the province now to see 
where I did my hammer and saw work. 
 
But is there any liability to the municipal body that has chosen 
not to inspect it and now has new buildings in their jurisdiction 
that haven’t been passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well I’m reluctant to do the member’s 
legal work. We could certainly seek an opinion on this. It’s our 
belief that the municipality, because it has an enforcement 
responsibility, would bear some burden in terms of liability if 
there were an issue. But again, most of the contractors that are 
involved in construction would follow the code. 
 
This is just a case where if you’ve got a handyman special you 
would want to make sure that you are following the process, 
asking the municipality for the permits to make sure that’s 
covered, and then certainly consulting with the code or a 
contractor to make sure it’s up to standard. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The member from Saltcoats just 
pointed out that maybe we could have these people thrown in 
jail then, these mayors and councillors along with the ones who 
aren’t treating their water properly, so we could have, you 
know, a particular facility for elected individuals. 
 
I think we’ve covered most of those, most of those areas, Mr. 
Minister, that you outlined under Public Safety. And I think 
there was some good discussion that we had there, everything 
from amusement rides to elevators. I would like to spend some 
time on the financial document, and on page 33, I believe . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I’m having difficulty concentrating on 
the speaker because of the loud noise, so I’d ask hon. members 
to come to order and maintain order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I’d like to thank the Chairman for the help. I 
know it’s been very distracting to myself as well. 
 
Under the administration section, you have a particular estimate 
for 2002-2003. How would that compare with other provinces? 
And if you did a comparison to see whether your administration 
costs were higher or lower than other provinces, you would 
have to compare them with something other than square miles 
in the province or something of that sort. 
 
So if you do a comparison to see how efficient you are in that 
particular area, what factors would you use? And then how do 
we compare with other provinces? 

(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, one of the things I’ve 
learned since becoming a minister is that there is no such thing 
as an easy answer. Part of the difficultly that we have here is 
that we are sharing services with the Department of Justice on 
many, many issues, communications, administration, and these 
items. And so there is some difficulty in terms of finding a 
direct comparison. 
 
I am told however that for a department of this nature that we 
are running at about 2 per cent for administration costs. The 
national across the country would be around three, three and a 
half. So we’re a little lower. Once you factor in the shared 
services, we may be up a little above the 2 per cent if we were 
to bear the full costs of that. 
 
So this is a difficulty . . . I want to also say, one of the other 
issues that makes it a little more difficult to compare this 
particular department with others is every province, as they’re 
establishing their public safety departments, is putting different 
things into them. And so we end up with a different focus. 
Some may have policing in them. Ours, for instance, doesn’t. 
And this has some impact on it. 
 
Indeed tonight the deputy is at a deputy’s meeting with his 
colleagues across the country to talk very much about how we 
do look at some national standard in terms of these public safety 
branches. So this is a very good question and unfortunately a bit 
of a difficult one to answer. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you and I appreciate the part of the 
answer that says every province does something a little different 
and therefore it makes it somewhat difficult to go ahead and 
make a direct comparison with any other jurisdiction as far as 
efficiency is concerned. 
 
But that still keeps the question out front and centre, how do 
you as a minister then look at that particular component and 
make a judgment call on whether or not you’re being efficient? 
So what criteria are you going to use in your new department to 
look at this particular number and make a decision as to 
whether or not it is efficient or isn’t, because you obviously 
have to create your own criteria? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, one of the most 
important benchmarks obviously is how we compare with other 
provinces. And while there are general similarities and there are 
some differences, we understand that. The fact that we are 
looking at our costs being about 2 per cent of the departmental 
budget, as opposed to three, three and a half in other 
jurisdictions, would be one of the indicators we would look at. 
 
One of the things that we will have to evaluate over the next 
year or so is how the shared services arrangement with the 
Department of Justice will work. This is certainly a measure 
we’ve put in place for efficiency. There are nevertheless some 
differences between the departments that we’ll need to work out 
to make sure appropriate service levels are maintained in both 
departments. I think for the time being, as short as time as 
we’ve been in it, it appears that we are on track for this to work 
relatively well and it should help to keep the cost of 
administration down. 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 2002 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you and I think we’ll be taking a close 
look at that. If the thing, if it actually does, you know, show that 
you have some savings, then it’s obviously a good program. But 
with the fact that you have to create your own criteria, it’ll 
mean that our questions probably are going to continue. 
 
On the next line you have accommodation. I take it that’s for 
staff and services; it’s not inmates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the member is correct. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Under the Young Offenders 
Program you have some 35 million, I believe, there. Could you 
list the programs that you have under that Young Offenders 
Program so we know exactly what’s all covered. I think we are 
aware of a few of them, but what programs are all underneath 
that particular department? It’s a substantial size that covers 
about a third of that budget so I think we need to know what’s 
all there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I take it 
that the member is asking me specifically about Subvote (CP07) 
under the young offenders program, and certainly there it’s 
detailed on page 35 of the document — both the general areas 
for the program expenditure plus the expenditure by type, 
including salaries. 
 
Just to elaborate on that in terms of the programs that would be 
operated, obviously open and secure custody are a very large 
part of the budget. We have intensive case management. We 
have judicial interim release. We have community youth 
probation and alternative measures which includes 
community-based organizational support. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The last item you mentioned referred to 
alternative measures, community support. I would like for the 
minister to elaborate exactly what’s involved in that particular 
program and how new it is and what’s happening with that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want 
to thank the member for the question. 
 
What these particular alternative measures are in youth. This is 
a series of programs that have been in place and built upon 
obviously since 1984. What we’re dealing with here are 
post-charge — I’ve got it scribbled here — post-charge 
dispersals. And what we are dealing with is approximately 
2,800 cases that were reported closed in the 2001 year. 
 
This is a case where after a youth has been charged, rather than 
sending him to a facility, there may be some other decision 
reached with the community and the prosecutor and the victim 
in terms of how to deal with it. And it could involve any 
number of different things. This may also include such things as 
community service options. 
 
So there are a large number of different options. This is a case 
where we try to keep youth out of our facilities and that is 
primarily what this program is in place to deal with. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And because of the 
open-endedness of the programs — you mentioned you have a 
number of different programs — how do you budget for that? 

Do you have a certain amount of funds in place and when those 
are used up it ends or how do you deal with that? 
 
Because it’s obviously quite different from having a given staff 
in a facility where you have a fairly structured way of knowing 
what the funds are that you are going to need to operate that 
over a yearly basis. When you have these kinds of programs, 
you’re never sure which youth are going to come into there and 
how many of what . . . are going to need what particular type of 
programs. So how do you budget for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the budget is based on a 
rough estimate of the number of youth that may be referred into 
these alternative measures. We then will move the money to the 
appropriate agencies based on previous experience. We are 
fortunate that there is — well I guess fortunate it’s not 
increasing and fortunate it’s not decreasing —but it is a 
relatively stable size of population that are dealing with these 
alternative measures. The number is under 3,000 a year. 
 
And so this is the basis that we use. Certainly if we saw a spike 
we would need to deal with that. But these numbers are 
relatively stable. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And in the discussion of this, I 
believe the minister mentioned something about community 
service kinds of things. And I’m thinking of a specific case that 
I think is developing in my community. If an individual chooses 
not to do community service, do they end up in lock-up? Or 
what happens if they just sort of thumb their nose at the concept 
and say I’m not going to do that work? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly custody is one 
of the options which may be the result of a youth refusing to 
undertake the appropriate alternate measures. If the youth fails 
to undertake this, the offender fails to undertake it, they would 
be returned to court and at that point the court would decide 
what to do; but custody would be an option. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I want to spend whatever time we 
have left on a basically quite a different topic. There’s basically 
a justice review being done in the province at this particular 
time. And I know there’s been I believe an interim report that 
was presented within the last week or so. And the results of that 
particular bit of research, when it’s completed, I think is going 
to be very significant in where we go and how we deal with 
corrections. 
 
I do have a question that relates to that and it came out in some 
of the discussion by some of the individuals commenting on 
where that research had gone to date. And one of the things that 
always comes up when this is discussed is the racial breakdown 
that exists in correctional facilities. 
 
And I guess a question that’s fairly simple, but I think it’s an 
important one. There tend to be worded just two basic groups. 
Now how many different groupings does the department look at 
when they do their racial breakdowns of people in custody? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, this primarily falls into 
two areas, Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal. Within Aboriginal, 



June 3, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

 

we will take into account First Nation — so status, non-status, 
and Métis as subcategories under Aboriginal. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — There’s a question on that particular topic 
that has sort of been running through my mind for quite a long 
time. Because essentially when we draw those conclusions — 
and I have no problem with the department making those kinds 
of surveys — we then immediately move into what is the cause 
for one group’s overrepresentation. 
 
Now I do have another question, and it does sort of go down 
that same road in a minute or two. Why is there not a similar 
breakdown done of other racial groups as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, really the reason we 
don’t track other groups in terms of numbers is simply one of 
statistical significance. This is a . . . for the most part in 
Saskatchewan, it is . . . those two categories — Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal — deal with most of the inmate population, the 
vast majority of it. 
 
I think it is important to note two things on this. Number one is 
that we do not notice a particular differentiation in terms of race 
as a determining factor other than in terms of its 
socio-economic impact. The socio-economic issues are relevant 
regardless of race and obviously — at least we believe — have 
some causal significance. 
 
The second issue I want to emphasize — and I don’t think that 
we emphasize it enough in terms of our discussions on these 
issues — is that particularly where we are dealing with 
Aboriginal offenders, that often and in most cases there are also 
Aboriginal victims. And so this is I think a very important issue 
for us to take into account. In considering this, that there is I 
think often an over-dominance, particularly in media reporting, 
to focus on interracial crime. But certainly the vast majority of 
what the system deals with is not that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I appreciate the last part of 
that particular answer. And as I mentioned earlier on, I had a 
purpose for where that question was going which you’ve 
probably never been asked . . . is why don’t you extend that 
kind of information into other groupings because there is a 
conclusion that we draw and it may be partially correct where 
you said this is socio-economic and therefore this is as far as we 
need to go. 
 
Now I think when we look at crime statistics such as the ones 
we’re just discussing, we need to look at two aspects: this 
discussion, and as your answer indicated, deals to a large extent 
with why are some groups in prison. Now if we . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Would the committee please come 
to order. I am having difficulty listening to the member while 
he’s attempting to ask the question. So I’d ask all hon. members 
to please come to order and stay in order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your renewed 
help. So as I said the question that was there is that this one 
aspect could be a cause, and we’re going to discuss that in a 
minute of two. The other thing you might find though if you 
went in the other direction and drew some of those more 
groupings, we also need to look at why are some people not 

there. 
 
And you can’t just automatically assume that if it’s 
socio-economic that seems to push one group in that direction 
that is what necessarily what keeps other groups out. I think you 
have to look at a lot of other variables to see what some of the 
value systems and family structures and all sorts of things that 
are put into that mix need to be looked at, and you might find 
certain groupings that are way under-represented. 
 
And I think that would be a good place to look and see what is 
unique about that grouping that they’re under-represented there. 
Because there maybe some positives there that could be used in 
dealing with these issues as well, not just for socio-economic 
even though that is definitely a factor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s . . . I 
appreciate the comments from the member opposite. I think 
though that we need to understand when we’re talking about 
socio-economic factors that there is what I would describe as an 
over-representation of Aboriginal people in some of these lower 
socio-economic brackets. 
 
So as a result we may well see within that socio-economic 
grouping more . . . my deputy calls them criminogenic traits. A 
greater propensity for crime, I think is what he means. But we 
pay him the big bucks to come up with the big words. 
 
And this is, I think, what we’re talking about and so what we 
may see well reflected is in fact a socio-economic phenomenon. 
But that’s not to say that there’s not, because of the 
overrepresentation within that group of one particular racial 
class that we may not also see that play in. 
 
Now certainly when we talk with folks in the FSIN (Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and other Aboriginal groups, 
they do believe that there are specific biases within the system 
which also lead to their overrepresentation, the 
overrepresentation of their people within the system. And this is 
part of what we are endeavouring to come to grips with as we 
deal with the justice reform initiative. This is a very 
complicated matter, as certainly the member knows having been 
the spokesman for the opposition for some time in this area. 
The field of thought around this does change and evolve as it 
moves on and I think this is one of the areas that we’ll certainly 
take into account. 
 
But it is our belief that for the most part this is a 
socio-economic issue. That’s not to say that family doesn’t play 
an important role. Clearly it does. We know that it’s . . . 
certainly as we’re dealing with even the auto theft strategy that 
places where children have, young offenders have strong family 
groupings, that there is less likelihood to re-offend. So these 
matters are all needed to be taken into account. Whether that’s 
addressed by the justice reform commission or whether we 
address that through broader policy prospectives certainly the 
member opposite is correct that these do come into play. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:59. 
 


