















































Hansard: May 06, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1173 
 May 6, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Clerk: — It is my duty to advise the House that Mr. Speaker 
will not be present to open today’s sitting. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
to present a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan still 
concerned about the government’s intentions with respect to 
long-term care fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by residents of Mistatim, Prairie River, 
Hudson Bay, and Tisdale. 
 
I so present, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I too rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan who would like to see all 49 
recommendations of the committee’s report dealing with the 
child sex trade implemented by government. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through 
the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signators on this petition are from the communities of 
Wadena, Kuroki, Lintlaw, and Rama. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning 
a halting of crop insurance premium hikes and coverage 
reductions. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to this petition are from Eston and 

Rosetown, and I’m pleased to present the petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition to present today on behalf of people who are concerned 
about the cost of drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Margo. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon on behalf 
of citizens in my constituency who continue to be concerned 
about long-term care rates. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from my home 
community of Melfort and I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition to do with the net fishing at the Lake of the Prairies. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from the community 
of Esterhazy. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed 
fee increases for long-term care services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Margo. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens concerned with the 
long-term care fees. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Estevan, Saskatoon, and 
Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
petition to present on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the tobacco legislation. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Griffin, Weyburn, 
Midale, and Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the state of tobacco control 
legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. And the prayer of 
their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the petitioners today are from the 
communities of Delisle, Kincaid, Gull Lake, and the cities of 
Swift Current and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
afternoon I have a petition in regards to citizens who are 
concerned about the changes to the deductible amount of 
prescription drugs so that the government can ease its pressures 
on its deficit budget. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 

Prince Albert, rural Prince Albert, and Tisdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present from residents who are concerned about 
long-term care home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Yorkton and area. Thank you. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a petition today 
with citizens concerned about the deplorable state of Highway 
No. 15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from Holdfast, 
Imperial, Liberty, Penzance, and Etter’s Beach. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I too have a petition to 
present on behalf of constituents. It deals with the changes to 
the prescription drug plan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come from the 
communities of Wynyard and Mozart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth 
a petition regarding citizens that are concerned with the Besnard 
Lake situation. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that the natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people of the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from 
Candle Lake, Besnard Lake, Prince Albert, and La Ronge. 
 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 
petitions signed by citizens of the province that are concerned 
about their long-term care homes and the petition reads as 
follows . . . the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the petition is signed by people from 
Battleford and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
again today with a petition from citizens who are concerned 
about the future cost of prescription drugs, and the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed in total by the 
good folks of Meyronne. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby . . . and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 8, 11, 18, 23, 24, 31, and 59. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of this Assembly, 47 grade 5 and grade 8 students from 
Walker School, which is located in the fine riding of Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
They’re here with their teachers, Cheryl Ball and John Stark, 
along with chaperones Alison Vancha and Danielle Switzer. 
Hopefully we’ll have a longer chat than we did last year. I 
know it’s certainly my intention. 
 
And I’d also like to draw special attention to one Kyle 
Carson, who’s a grade 8 student at Walker. I’ve known Kyle’s 
family for many, many a year now. And I first met Kyle in . . . 
a couple of years ago. 
 
Kyle’s uncle Cameron is the volunteer site electrician for the 
Regina Folk Fest. And for the past two years Kyle and I have 
been carrying his uncle Cameron’s tool box, and we’ve yet to 
electrocute anyone. So it’s quite a record, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 
 
Anyway, please give them a warm welcome, and I look 
forward to meeting with you very soon. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour today to introduce to you and through other members 
of the Assembly my niece, who is a U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) student in Saskatoon, Ms. Ashley Metz. 
 
Can you please join me in welcoming her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly some relatives of mine, Peter and 
Margaret Cline who farm at Zelma, Saskatchewan. 
 
Peter ran for the Liberal Party on two occasions trying to get 
elected to this place, and I can say to the members, Mr. 
Speaker, I have since then developed a whole new appreciation 
for the Liberal Party. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would also like to introduce some relatives of mine. Seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, is my family with the most 
recent addition. 
 
I want to tell colleagues that this is the extent of the family now. 
This is . . . all you see . . . what you see here is what you’re 
going to get. I assure you of that. 
 
Joining us today, Mr. Speaker, first of all, my wife, Virginia 
Wilkinson, and with her is my son, Mayson, and the most 
recent addition, Meika; and also is my mother-in-law, Nancy 
Wilkinson. Please join me in welcoming them to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just noticed 
in the west gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a guest has come 
in, and he’s actually from Cumberland House. His name is Earl 
Cook. 
 
He’s done . . . he’s had an outstanding record in regards to 
education and northern development. He’s worked in teaching 
in schools as well as working in NORTEP (Northern Teacher 
Education Program) teacher education program. He has worked 
in post-secondary education for many years, helping the linkage 
between training, education, and also employment. And he 
continues to do work in career development in government. 
 
So I’d ask all members to please welcome Earl Cook to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Nurses Week 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise in the House today to ask all members to join 
with me in recognizing May 6 to 12 as National Nurses Week. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of all members in the House, we 
want to say a heartfelt thank you to the nurses that practise here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re truly grateful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the dedication 
and commitment these men and women bring to this 
time-honoured profession. We recognize the extreme important 
role they play in ensuring the quality of health care that’s 
delivered 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. We also recognize, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the long hours that many of them work. 
 
(13:45) 
 
National Nursing Week is also an ideal time to also remind 
everyone that this profession is currently facing a serious 
shortage of workers — a shortage that the profession itself 
predicted would occur. 
 
For years nurses have been saying that more training spaces 
must be opened up across the country. They warned that the 
health care system would suffer if this issue wasn’t addressed 
quickly. Sadly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know now how 
accurate these words have proven to be. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, we know that there are simply not 
enough of these important health care professionals working in 
the health care system. Working conditions have changed little 
over the past few years and, as a result, we now hear of how 
many have left the jurisdiction and how many are working 
severe overtime hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much more needs to be done to recruit and train 
these professionals, but today it’s a pleasure to rise on behalf of 
everyone and thank them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is Women 
Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan and across Canada. 
Today, more than 30 per cent of our province’s entrepreneurs 
are women. 
 
They are leading by example in every sector of our economy, 
providing positive role models for young women and men to 
follow. They are models in a province of opportunity for 
women who want to start their own business. 
 
Just a few examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Women like Deb Thorn, of Temple Gardens Mineral Spa, a 
woman who is credited with much of Moose Jaw’s tourist 
boom; like Jane Fletcher of Jane’s Skin Care and Day Spa, 
whose Regina business has grown significantly since she began 
in 1980; or LuAn Mitchell, Chair of Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods 

in Saskatoon, a woman recognized in today’s National Post as 
one of the 50 most influential businesswomen in Canada. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these and other women entrepreneurs 
employ 90,000 people in Saskatchewan. 
 
The organization, Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan, has 
played an important role in this remarkable growth. Since its 
inception it has lent over 4.6 million to women starting their 
own businesses and leveraged another 3.7 million — more good 
news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members will join with me this week in 
celebrating the many accomplishments now and in the future of 
this province’s talented, bright, and ambitious businesswomen. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Speech and Hearing Awareness Month 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May is 
Speech and Hearing Awareness Month across Canada, a time 
when we recognize the hard-working men and women who 
identify and assist individuals with speech and hearing 
disorders. 
 
Statistics show that 1 in 10 Canadians has a speech-language or 
hearing disorder. This disorder directly impacts on the ability to 
communicate, and we know how important the ability to 
communicate is in today’s global economy. 
 
Speech-language pathologists and audiologists identify and 
provide rehabilitation for individuals to prevent communication 
difficulties from occurring in school, on the job, and in many 
social situations. You’ll find speech-language pathologists and 
audiologists hard at work in hospitals, rehabilitation centres, 
schools, and the private sector — all of them working to help 
improve the quality of life for people with communication 
disorders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members recognize the important work being 
done by these professionals. We also know that there are simply 
not enough of them to go around, that more of them are 
urgently needed. And we know, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
speech and hearing disorders among young children and their 
families, early intervention is key to helping them identify and 
address those disorders. 
 
During Speech and Hearing Month I ask all members of the 
House to recognize the important work being done by 
speech-language pathologists and audiologists across the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New President for Saskatchewan 
Prairieland Park Corporation 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Here’s a good announcement to make on the first day of 
Women Entrepreneurs Week. Every year at the annual general 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

 

meeting of the Saskatchewan Prairieland Park Corporation, the 
board of directors is selected, and the board then chooses a 
president. 
 
Last month at the annual general meeting, for the first time in 
its 118-year history, the board has selected a woman president. 
Sometimes it takes a while for a good thing to happen, and this 
is a good thing. 
 
Lynn Evans is the 67th president of the SPPC (Saskatoon 
Prairieland Park Corporation). She has been volunteer for the 
corporation for 20 years, a member of the board for 7, 
vice-president for the last 2. She has earned her spurs. She has 
been on several SPPC committees and as is always the case for 
the volunteers, she’s very active in other community activities, 
including the CNIB (Canadian National Institute for the Blind) 
Companion program, the city’s Advisory Committee on Animal 
Control, 4-H, and other organizations. 
 
In her other life, Lynn is executive secretary for the SPI 
Marketing Group, and with her husband operates a mixed farm 
in the Dundurn area. 
 
So on behalf of all members, I offer my congratulations to this 
truly outstanding woman business-person. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatoon Pays Tribute to New York 
Emergency Responders 

 
Ms. Julé: — . . . Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, last 
Friday, May 3, I was very pleased to attend the Rotary Club of 
Saskatoon’s 2002 Badge and Shield Recognition Dinner, held at 
the Centennial Auditorium. 
 
The proceeds from this annual dinner go to the Rotary 
community youth projects. Each year’s awards are presented to 
men and women in Saskatoon police and fire service who have 
demonstrated exceptional and outstanding service to their 
community. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was an exceptional year because 
the Rotary Club of Saskatoon, Saskatoon Fire and Protective 
Services, and Saskatoon Police Service paid tribute to 
emergency responders from New York City who on September 
11 and every day since have shown us the true meaning of 
heroism. 
 
Award recipient Sgt. Anne Marie Verbil of the New York City 
Police Department and Bobby Beddia of the New York City 
Fire Department shared their stories of the terrorist attack on 
America and the subsequent nightmare they went through. They 
recounted their personal experiences of surviving this tragedy 
and working at Ground Zero in a very moving, emotional, and 
unforgettable way. And they presented a graphic video of the 
events of September 11 throughout which Sgt. Verbil gave a 
commentary of the horrific experience police and emergency 
responders dealt with on that day. She also spoke of the many 
brave emergency responders who have worked so hard to bring 
a semblance of normalcy back to the people of New York. 
 
Bobby Beddia and Sgt. Anne Marie Verbil have seen first-hand 

what evil can do and have also seen the goodness and strength 
of people helping recover from the unthinkable events at 
Ground Zero and they commended the many Canadians who 
sent messages of support and hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was truly a memorable event and I feel very 
privileged to have been able to attend. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Women of Distinction 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. May 4, 
this past Saturday, marked the sixth Women of Distinction 
Award celebration in Moose Jaw. As a woman and as a member 
of government, it was an honour, along with my colleague from 
Moose Jaw North, to attend this luncheon to acknowledge and 
celebrate the achievements women are making in Moose Jaw 
and throughout our province. 
 
Women’s rights activist Mary Wollstonecraft once said, “I do 
not wish women to have power over men, but over themselves.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year the celebration honoured a very 
worthy group of recipients: Megan Reid in the youth category; 
Lea Meili and Judy Boyle, leadership in the workplace; Marion 
Tolley, community enhancement; Irene Sather, community 
mentor; and Dr. Ann Vander Hooft in science and technology. 
 
This event continues with its tradition of honouring women who 
keep the pioneering spirit of the prairies alive through their 
leadership and commitment to their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with that pioneering spirit that we should all 
remember. Their perseverance and commitment speaks to the 
heart of this province and some of the greatest changes that we 
have seen over the years, such as the co-operative movement 
and universal health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the nominees and 
recipients. I know their efforts are appreciated by all. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Community Volunteers Receive Awards 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, today I rise to 
recognize the accomplishments of Eleanor Zurba Morin who is 
one of two volunteers to receive an award at the recent North 
East Recreation and Parks Association annual meeting. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, NERPA (North East Recreation and Parks 
Association) created two community volunteer awards as a 
tribute to volunteerism by recognizing the tremendous work of 
volunteers throughout the Northeast. From nominations 
submitted by organizations and individuals throughout this 
large area, Ms. Morin and Beatrice Furber of Sylvania were 
selected to receive the inaugural NERPA Volunteer Awards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in presenting the awards, NERPA 
director, Shelby Rushton of Melfort, read the citation of Ms. 
Morin’s extensive contributions to the community. 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

Mr. Rushton said, “Eleanor has been involved with the 
Hudson Bay Museum for six years. She has been 
instrumental in the landscaping and caring for the various 
plants, trees, shrubs, and lawns on the museum grounds. 
Over the years, she has, almost single-handedly, maintained 
and cared for all aspects of the grounds. In the summer she 
instructs and assists the summer (students) . . . in the care 
and maintenance of the lawns and gardens. For the last four 
years, Eleanor has co-ordinated the annual flower show and 
tea at the Museum.” 

 
Moreover, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she also helps plan and 
decorate the museum’s float in the Heritage Day parade. In the 
words of the NERPA director, “The Hudson Bay Museum and 
its patrons benefit from Eleanor’s hard work.” 
 
I would like all members to recognize the important 
contributions of Eleanor Morin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Response to United States Trade Sanctions 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. 
 
On Friday the Saskatchewan Party called for an unprecedented 
conference of government and opposition leaders from the 
Western provinces to deal and agree on a unified strategy to 
deal with the unfair US (United States) trade attacks on our 
agriculture and softwood lumber industries. 
 
The government was not able to accept this idea on Friday but, 
on a more positive note, the Premier is now saying that he 
believes it has merit. Mr. Speaker, immediately following 
question period I will once again ask to move an emergency 
motion calling for this conference to take place as soon as 
possible. 
 
My question to the Premier is: will he support this proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the 
House today that I have been in conversation with the Premier 
of the Yukon, who currently Chairs the Western premiers, and 
as members of the legislature may be aware, the Western 
premiers will be meeting within three to four weeks time at the 
scheduled annual conference this year in Dawson City. 
 
I have, in discussion with the Chair of the Western premiers, 
been able to secure on the number one placement on the agenda 
of premiers, the discussion of the US farm Bill and a 
coordinated strategy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, again I repeat, there 
is in my view merit in presenting a unified position from this 
province, from this legislature, and from the provinces of 
Canada. 

In regard to an earlier gathering of premiers, I think I need to 
respect the timetables of others and I need to be, and I have 
committed to do, to be in contact with the other premiers to 
discuss this further. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the 
Premier is aware of the urgency of this matter. In fact the duty 
on softwood lumber comes into effect on May 23, prior to any 
Western premiers’ conference. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would again ask the Premier to 
discuss matters with all four Western premiers and with the 
leaders of the opposition to see if such a conference could be 
. . . could take place prior to the regular meeting, specifically 
focussed on the US farm Bill, the softwood labour . . . the 
softwood panel ruling, and, Mr. Speaker, a unified response. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is: has he contacted 
other premiers, other leaders in Western Canada, and has he 
offered Saskatchewan as the host province for a special 
emergency meeting on these issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to my 
conversations with Premier Duncan around the Western 
premiers’ conference, I think, as the Leader of the Opposition 
will know, I took the opportunity this very day while in 
Bismarck, North Dakota, to sit down across the table from the 
current Governor of North Dakota where we in fact talked about 
softwood and spent a good bit of time talking about the US 
farm Bill. 
 
I have had my office begin to make contact with other of our 
colleagues in the country. I intend to be following that up later 
this day and over the course of the week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is clear to us is that the position that we’ve advanced and 
the position, if I may say, advanced by this legislature, has 
brought the entire issue of the farm Bill, in adjacent to the 
softwood lumber dispute, to national and international attention. 
I can report, Mr. Speaker, that on Bismarck radio this morning 
they were reporting the work being conducted today by the 
Minister of Agriculture from Saskatchewan, in Ottawa today 
meeting with his counterparts and with the federal minister. 
 
It’s not that often, Mr. Speaker, that travels of the Minister of 
Agriculture in Saskatchewan are being reported in American 
radio. So we have caught the attention; we’re looking forward 
to moving this file forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I still haven’t 
got a specific answer to my question, albeit I would urge the 
Premier to agree to the emergency debate. The invitation being 
put forward unanimously by the legislature obviously would be 
an important step in allowing such a meeting to convene. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moving on, though, both the federal and 
provincial governments are talking a lot about the options that 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

 

are being considered, but there is no clear indication yet what 
those options are. 
 
(14:00) 
 
So I would ask the Premier, based on the province’s talks with 
the federal government, is Ottawa considering an increase in 
farm support payments? Are they also considering paying the 
softwood lumber tariffs until there is a ruling by the WTO 
(World Trade Organization)? And finally, are they considering 
any form of retaliatory trade action against the United States? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not possible for me to 
report at this moment the thinking of the federal government 
and what they may be in fact planning to do. As late as just 
moments before the resumption of the House this afternoon, I 
was in touch with our delegation who’s in Ottawa today. They 
tell us that particularly the farm Bill is under discussion. 
Discussions will continue today and, I’m told, well into 
tomorrow. We will report any results from those discussions as 
soon as we know them. 
 
Now let me say, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to have 
reported to me that the House Leader of the federal government, 
Mr. Goodale, was here in this Chamber on Friday. I take that as 
a positive response to the resolution that was debated and 
passed in this legislature. We continue to encourage and we’ll 
work for the presence of those federal ministers in our province 
to discuss this issue. We want to be diligent on a daily basis, but 
at the same time we want to give fair opportunity for other 
colleagues to adjust and make their plans as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is 
correct in that we have seen a few positive signs from the 
federal government. Mr. Goodale being in the Legislative 
Assembly last Friday certainly makes it look like the federal 
government is paying a bit more attention than they have in the 
past. Mr. Vanclief, the federal Agriculture minister, has also 
indicated his support for further assistance for farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that our own Minister of Agriculture 
went to Ottawa last night. Therefore I think it’s very fitting that 
the Premier would inform this Legislative Assembly of what 
progress he has made, how much money is Ottawa willing to 
provide, has the government and has the Premier received any 
clear indication as to what Ottawa’s plans are, how much 
money are they willing to put into both Canadian agriculture 
and into the softwood lumber industry, and quite frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, could the Premier tell us how soon we might expect to 
see support from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, unless I’m mistaken, I 
think I just addressed that very question. I’m surprised the 
Leader of the Opposition asking it again. Let me repeat 
therefore. As he has indicated, the minister of Saskatchewan . . . 
the Minister of Agriculture from Saskatchewan is today in 
Ottawa meeting with his colleagues and the federal minister. 
 
Moments before question period I made some inquiry to see if 

there have been any developments yet today. I am told, no; that 
in fact the meetings continue, that the US farm Bill is the 
uppermost item on that agenda and the federal response to it. I 
cannot report further to that. 
 
But again I commit to the Leader of the Opposition, as soon as 
information is available we will be very, very happy to make it 
known to our friends in the media and to all members of the 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Shortage 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
In the 1999 election campaign, the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) promised to hire another 500 health care providers 
including doctors, nurses, and specialized professionals. But 
since 1999, almost 1,200 nurses have actually left the 
Saskatchewan health system. 
 
And now we hear that because of this severe nursing shortage, 
health districts are paying tens of thousands of dollars more in 
overtime costs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the concern is not only 
how much all of this is costing the system, it is also the 
long-term mental and physical effect on nurses who are 
working extensive overtime. 
 
We haven’t heard anything lately from the NDP government 
about recruiting more nurses to the system. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will the minister explain what steps, if any, his 
department is taking to address the severe nursing shortage in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government set forth in its action plan a province-wide human 
resource strategy which includes quite a number of initiatives. 
They include initiatives like resolving issues at the bargaining 
table with the nursing people, which we have done. 
 
We are now working together with the people there, with the 
people in the College of Nursing and other places, to make sure 
that we, over the long term, provide the kind of nursing 
education that we need. 
 
We’re working around workplace issues to make sure that the 
work setting can provide a positive place for people to go to 
work. We’re addressing all of the kinds of concerns that people 
raise. But we are doing this together with the workers, together 
with the management, because that’s the way that you solve 
these problems, is working together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the nursing shortage is 
so severe in this province that many nurses actually are 
deciding not to take overtime shifts. Whether it’s because their 
regular shifts are enough for them to handle or whether it’s 
because they don’t want to contribute more to holding this 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

shaky health care system together, we don’t know, but more 
and more nurses are declining to take overtime shifts. So the 
work falls on a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of the health care system still has to be 
done. And the health district has to either close beds or pay 
overtime. And nurses who are working these shifts are facing 
severe stress and tiredness issues from day to day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since this government put all these plans together 
since ’99, we’ve actually lost 1,200 nurses in this province. 
When will the government live up to its commitment to hire 
500 health care professionals more than what they had in ’99? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the whole area of providing 
the appropriate professional people throughout the system is a 
complex task that has to be dealt with with many different 
people working together. And we are working together with the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association), with 
the union of nurses, the other professional groups within the 
nursing field; we’re working together with the College of 
Nursing, with SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology); we’re working together with the 
hospital and health board administrations across the province to 
continue to address the issues that are of concern to the people 
working in the system. 
 
And as we go ahead working with these particular issues, then 
we are in a position where we can recruit new people and we 
can also have people come back for retraining to fill some of 
these positions. And we also can say to people across the 
province that this system will continue, it will be sustainable, 
and we will provide good care for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister says that 
this is a very complicated issue. Well it’s obviously too 
complicated for this government to understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1999 we’ve lost 
1,200 nurses. I was at the SRNA convention last week in 
Saskatoon. And you know what? When they’re doing their 
budgeting in the next two years, they said that their budgeting 
on the basis of losing 150 to 200 more nurses each year in this 
next two years. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously the SRNA and the nurses 
themselves don’t have any faith at all in this government’s plan, 
in this government’s attempt to study and co-opt everybody into 
taking their responsibility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government doesn’t understand until 
we solve this problem, they are not going to solve the issue of 
waiting times; they are not going to solve the issue of 
workplace stress. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when will this government wake up to the 
fact that their plans, while they are studying them to death, are 

failing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in our instance here in 
Saskatchewan we have been working. We’ve set out our plan in 
December of where we’re going, and we’re working together 
with the people to develop the actions that we need to make 
sure that we have a good, long-term health care system. 
 
For example, we have developed a nursing re-entry bursary 
program and to date we’ve had 126 nurses who have come back 
to retrain so that they can come back into the nursing 
profession. 
 
Now one point I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, is that it is 
very nice to see that the member opposite who’s asking these 
questions maybe has changed his perspective since last year 
when he said: 
 

. . . doesn’t the minister understand that what we’re 
concerned about is health care professionals, not about 
administrators and janitors. 

 
We care about all the people in the health system and we do not 
go with the kind of perspective that the people across the way 
go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Error in Government Contact Telephone Number 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
Over this past weekend I received a number of calls from 
fishing licence vendors. They’d received a notice from SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) about 
this year’s angling and game licence fees and about the new 
three-day angling licences available in the southern and central 
zones. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the bottom of this notice there’s a 
1-800 number that these vendors are expected to call in order to 
order these licences or to get more information. However, when 
you call that number, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you get a little more 
than you bargain for. In fact the phone number actually 
connects licence vendors with a sex line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what steps has the Department of 
Environment taken to rectify this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
point out . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The error was 
found out on the morning of Wednesday, April 24 and by the 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we got in contact with all the vendors. 
There’s 336 vendors that were involved. We couldn’t make 
direct contact with 10 of those vendors, Mr. Speaker. 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

 

But all the 336 vendors that have been impacted by this have 
been contacted. The corrective measures have been taken, Mr. 
Speaker. It was human error. And, Mr. Speaker, in all the issues 
of contact to make sure that this thing was corrected have been 
done. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
some of the vendors that were calling me with their concerns 
this weekend, Mr. Deputy Speaker, still had not been contacted. 
Some of those that had been weren’t actually contacted until 
later Friday afternoon. 
 
But I guess it begs the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
could this mistake have occurred in the first place? The original 
number doesn’t resemble the correct number at all. 
 
I guess the question as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is how much 
has this mistake cost Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management? Since they found out about the error, what’s been 
the cost associated with rectifying it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we will give that 
information to that member as soon as that information is 
available. I will point out though this was a human error. It was 
a mistake made, and as soon as the error was found out, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we took immediate corrective steps. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we could not 
get a hold of all of the vendors, so we left messages. There’s 
been letters that have been sent, Mr. Speaker. There’s been 
repeated efforts by many staff members to contact each and 
every one of the vendors, Mr. Speaker. So this problem, as soon 
as it was found out, was corrected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I can’t guess as to how much the money . . . what 
money may have been spent to correct the problem, I can 
almost assure that member that that amount was certainly a 
small amount. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

SaskPower International 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, last fall the Saskatchewan rate review panel 
commissioned an independent report on SaskPower in 
conjunction with a request by SaskPower for a rate increase. 
The report found that SaskPower International will continue to 
lose money over the next five years — that’s the international 
division, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, it found that investments by SaskPower 
International will add close to $500 million of debt to 
SaskPower over the next five years. And who is going to pay 
for those losses and that increased debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Well the report indicated that SaskPower customers here in the 
province of Saskatchewan can look forward to paying for those 
SaskPower International losses and the increased debt to 
SaskPower. 
 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question to the minister is pretty 
simple. Why should SaskPower customers here in the province 
of Saskatchewan foot the bill for losses by SaskPower 
International and increases in debt due to the activities of 
SaskPower International? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. First of all, the member will know, as I’ve said many 
times in this House, that our Saskatchewan Crown corporations 
have done very well and have operated very well, and overall, 
their revenues have exceeded their expenses by a considerable 
amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With specific reference to that member’s question, SaskPower 
continues to review the Dillon report, and we on the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) board and 
within government will also continue to review the 
recommendations made by . . . in that consultant’s report, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the minister has indicated that the government will be 
reviewing the Dillon report. That report was available to the 
government in December, and several media outlets and 
certainly the opposition — and we’ll find out about some other 
people — frankly are interested in at least an indication of the 
government’s response. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, the independent’s 
consultant report said, and I quote: 
 

SaskPower should seriously examine its future business 
relationship with SaskPower International, with a view to 
moving SaskPower International’s financial consequences 
from the responsibility of the SaskPower ratepayer. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, day after day we hear the NDP tell us how 
the international activities of our Crown corporations benefit 
the province of Saskatchewan, benefit the Crowns’ activities 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here is a clear example of an independent consultant indicating 
that’s not the case. We need more than a review, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. What is the minister specifically doing about this 
recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I think the member is aware — although maybe we’ve 
not said it specifically inside the House here — but the point 
that the member makes I think is valid. SaskPower has 
indicated publicly through the press and in other venues that 
they think it’s a point that is worthy of consideration. 
 
I’ve indicated that we ourselves would be willing to look at this 
very issue and study it to see whether or not it makes, whether 
or not it makes sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

I would also say though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that some of the 
recommendations in the Dillon . . . in the consultant’s and 
Dillon’s report, suggest some changes that will have some 
serious impact here in the province around employment for 
Saskatchewan people. And those are some of the points that we 
would want to take into consideration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
add a little impetus to the minister’s activities in this regard, we 
should review very closely what the independent consultant’s 
report had to say with respect to SaskPower International, that 
they do expect — SaskPower International — expects to lose 1 
to $2 million a year for the next three or four years. 
 
The report says, and I quote: 
 

As a result, SaskPower’s net income will be reduced by 
approximately 4 to $5 million a year, SPI losses plus 
financing costs . . . These costs form part of SaskPower’s 
revenue requirements to be covered by the . . . (rate payer). 

 
Will the minister at least give the Assembly a deadline by 
which the government will have made a final decision on this 
important recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member knows 
as in many of the other external investments from some of the 
. . . by the other Crowns, I should say, that many of the costs 
that SaskPower have incurred are start-up costs in some of 
those investments, Mr. Speaker. It’s nothing that would have 
been unexpected. It’s things that we reported in our annual 
reports, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We indicated that in the starting years, like any private sector 
utility, in the beginning of an investment, in the first number of 
years, you would have losses. So there’s nothing unusual about 
this at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker — nothing at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
government can do something very basic and very fundamental 
that doesn’t violate anything in their manifesto. They can 
simply separate SaskPower International from SaskPower — 
that’s what the consultants have recommended — to protect the 
ratepayers, SaskPower customers, from exposure to these 
out-of-province activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the Sask Party raising these concerns. 
It’s also been raised by the NDP’s own members, Mr. Speaker, 
members they have on the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corps. 
 
The NDP member for Saskatoon Nutana moved a motion in the 
Crown Corporations Committee calling on the government to 
look at separating SaskPower International from SaskPower in 
order to do, and I’m quoting her motion now: 
 

. . . in order to minimize risks to SaskPower ratepayers and 

remove the potential for investment losses by SPI therefore 
putting upward pressure on rates of SaskPower customers. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Nutana’s motion, the 
motion that was supported unanimously by NDP members and 
by Sask Party members, is bang on. 
 
Will the minister at least give us — at the very least — give us 
a deadline by which a final decision will be made by this NDP 
government on the recommendation by Dillon, not just for 
SaskPower, but for the major Crown corporations of the 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Well first of all let me commend the Crown 
Corporations Committee members for doing what I think is 
good work on this very issue. The recommendation that the 
member makes I think is a good recommendation and the 
motion makes sense — we should review that very point Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think this confirms the answer that I gave just a few 
minutes ago that said SaskPower said that we should review 
this. We agree that we should review this. 
 
But I think the more important point for the public to recognize 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the very point that the opposition 
continues to try to discredit our Crowns, Mr. Speaker, with one 
single agenda, Mr. Speaker. I said it before and I’ll keep saying 
it, and I think the people of Saskatchewan are starting to 
understand that their agenda is to discredit the Crowns to sell 
the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Full stop, period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Growth of Saskatchewan’s Forestry Industry 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to, if I could, make a few words to the 
House as it relates to the forestry policy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday marked the start of National Forestry 
Week here — a week dedicated to raising awareness about our 
important contributions our forest makes to our environment 
and to our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to provide 
members with an update on a significant and the rapid growth 
that Saskatchewan’s forestry sector has had in the last three 
years. Many members, I’m sure, will recall back to April 1999 
when government and industry teamed up to make the single 
biggest private sector job creation announcement in the history 
of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan was to more than double the forest 
industry through private sector investment of more than $850 
million and to create as many as 10,000 direct and indirect jobs 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, much work — and I know they hate good 
news, but if they can bear with me as I go through this — much 
work has been done over the — and they should turn their ears 
away from this if it’s too much good news for them to bear, sir 
— much good work has been done over the past three years and 
many successes and milestones have been achieved, and many 
more developments for the industry are on the horizon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that we have met or 
exceeded all of our goals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, over $900 million has 
been committed to new and expanded facilities, and we expect 
that figure will easily surpass the billion dollar mark once a 
number of current projects are completed. That is well above 
the goal of $850 million that we set back in 1999. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to share with members opposite and 
the people of Saskatchewan what some of those completed 
projects are: a $315 million upgrade to the Prince Albert Pulp 
and Paper Mill; a $220 million oriented strand board mill in 
Hudson Bay which, by the way, is the largest mill of its kind in 
the world; a $100 million saw mill redevelopment in Big River; 
a $27 million saw mill in Prince Albert developed by a 
partnership between Weyerhaeuser and three First Nations; a $2 
million saw mill upgrade and wood treatment plant in Glaslyn; 
a $2 million saw mill in Dillon, a $2 million saw mill in La 
Loche; and more than $10 million in saw mill expansions by 
independent operators, Mr. Speaker. 
 
All of these completed projects add up to more than 2,200 
direct and more than 4,500 indirect jobs for Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And, Mr. Speaker, those numbers 
will climb to well over 10,000 once the current projects in those 
works . . . that are in the works are completed. 
 
Among the projects currently under develop . . . under 
development are a new $220 million OSB (oriented strand 
board) plant and a $5 million planer mill, both in Meadow 
Lake. And, Mr. Speaker, the $5 million redevelopment of the 
Green Lake saw mill. We have also marked another major 
milestone . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the member so if the order of House could please come 
to order and have attention to the minister. I recognize the 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — We have also marked another 
major milestone with the opening of the Saskatchewan Forestry 
Centre. Established last year, the centre is the cornerstone of 
our efforts in forestry. It will ensure our growing forest industry 
has access to the best training, market research, technologies 
and new methods to help it realize its full potential. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of these accomplishments are certainly a 
reason to celebrate. They’re a shining example of what can 

happen when government and industry work in partnership to 
achieve common goals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are moving forward to a new phase of 
forest industry growth. This phase will see more focus on using 
smaller logs and our abundant wood supply residue. We are 
also launching a new thrust in creating a major secondary wood 
products manufacturing centre in Saskatchewan. 
 
Right now, there are numerous projects being considered with 
investment potential of over $1 billion. These projects include 
new saw mills, hardwood lumber production, expanded OSB, 
post plants, finger jointing, a door skin plant, a bio oils plant 
and a new newsprint facility, Mr. Speaker. As we continue to 
expand our secondary manufacturing, there will be many more 
opportunities, opportunities that will lead to either . . . even 
further investments and more jobs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members to support our efforts 
as we continue to grow and expand our vibrant forestry sector. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members to show their 
support of our forest industry during National Forest Week, 
May 5 to May 11. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to be able to stand and respond to the ministerial 
statement, and . . . that I just got a copy of it not that long ago. 
 
I know that this week, starting Saturday, May 5, was National 
Forestry Week, and I’d like to comment on some of the 
comments the minister made in regards to forestry week starting 
then. The minister went on to say about some of the issues that 
are facing our forestry industry and some of the 
accomplishments him and his government has done. And there 
are a few, there are a few . . . (inaudible) . . . are a few. 
 
But I would like to go back a little bit, Mr. Speaker, a couple 
weeks ago when I was here in estimates asking questions of the 
minister regarding forestry and forestry issues, regarding the 
North and . . . (inaudible) . . . more in my constituency. And the 
minister said, that’s not my jurisdiction. And then he gets up 
today and talks about the forestry incentives and the issues 
that’s in this province. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the forestry industry in 
Saskatchewan could be — and I say with emphasis, could be — 
thriving. There is a number of things that’s causing it — not the 
embargo between Canada and the United States that’s causing a 
great deal of problems which the opposition leader raised 
questions regarding it and asked for the members opposite to 
have a debate later on, which I know very well he will not let 
that debate go on. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our forestry industry is something that the 
northern people need desperately. And when I look at some of 
the things that the government presently is looking at to do, 
they are going to be fortunate . . . or going to be positive things 
for the fortunate people of the North. 
 
But talking about it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and actually doing it 
are two different things. 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

And I don’t know how this government plans to do the things 
they want to do in the forestry industry, basically because of the 
deficit budget they put forth here this spring. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, regarding National Forestry Week, 
forestry could be a very positive issue in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but under the government that we have today 
that come up with promises and incentives that things will 
change . . . until we see some changes and some positives, 
nothing’s going to happen. 
 
The minister also goes on and says in the province that there 
was 2,200 jobs created in the last couple of years. Well 2,200 
jobs is a far cry from the 10,000 jobs that the minister spoke 
about some three years ago. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, they know and we know that there were a 
lot more people moved out of the province simply because there 
were no jobs in the forestry industry. 
 
And they will continue to move out as long as we have the NDP 
government we have today. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, in 
regards to the National Forestry Week, May 5 to May 11, I 
applaud the encouragements that are . . . should be taking place, 
but aren’t. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Health Quality Council Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 41, The Health Quality Council Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to move a motion of 
urgent and pressing necessity under Rule 46. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As you know, there’s been a whirlwind of events 
which began mid-week last week regarding, first of all, the US 
farm Bill and then subsequently the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Pardon me. You have 
read the request for leave to a motion without notice under Rule 
46. 
 
Is leave granted . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just one 
moment. 
 
Order. Would the member please briefly state request? 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Conference to Debate United States Trade Sanctions 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Absolutely, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I was 
saying, there was a whirlwind of events last week beginning 
with the appearance of the US farm Bill, then the panel decision 
on softwood lumber. On Friday, we had the federal minister, 
Mr. Goodale, present in the House and he indicated that this 
was a time when action needed to occur. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, urgency is paramount in the matter of 
dealing with the issue of the softwood lumber dispute and the 
US farm Bill. Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am moving a 
motion that says: 
 

That the province of Saskatchewan invite government and 
opposition legislators from all four Western Canadian 
provinces to a conference hosted by Saskatchewan to 
discuss strategies in dealing with actions taken by the 
United States in terms of agriculture subsidies and software 
lumber tariffs, both of which will be devastating to the 
economies of all four provinces. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the same motion which we had 
discussed with the government on Friday. There is no changing 
to the wording. Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, I would move 
this . . . I would ask for leave to move this motion, seconded by 
the hon. member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I stand today 
on behalf of the government to table written responses to 
questions 150 and 151. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — 150 and 151 are entered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2002. The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2000 was passed in part to modernize the 
rules respecting surveying of provincial land and in part to 
facilitate the implementation of the new land system. It was 
proclaimed in force on June, 2001, and is being implemented 
across the province. 
 
It’s currently in force in six out of the 10 land registration 
districts. The legislation in the LAND (Land Titles Automated 
Network Development project) system now allow any person 
anywhere in the world to download and view more than 
120,000 plans of survey across the Internet. As the conversion 
of titles has occurred throughout the province, a number of 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

 

housekeeping amendments were identified that would assist in 
the work that is being done. 
 
As you may know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the system of land 
titles maintained in Saskatchewan is called the Torrens system. 
It’s a system of guaranteed title. Under the Torrens system, a 
title is issued for each parcel in the jurisdiction. One of the main 
amendments we’re proposing in this Bill will assist in defining 
those parcels clearly so that title can be issued. 
 
The proposed amendments also provide other minor 
enhancements to the Act by: (1) authorizing the controller of 
surveys to refund fees in whole or in part; (2) allowing the 
boundary confirmation process to consider unpatented lands as 
well as patented lands in the investigation of the true boundary 
of a parcel; (3) allowing on-line searches of plans to access 
plans that were maintained by the former chief surveyor’s 
office; (4) allowing the controller of surveys to modify the 
geographic information system view of the parcel to enable a 
province-wide seamless map of all parcels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce to the Assembly the receipt of 
Royal Recommendation for the following Bill. This was not 
received in time to appear on the order paper, therefore I beg to 
inform the Assembly: 
 

That Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor having been 
informed of the subject matter of Bill No. 32, The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, 2002 recommends it to the 
consideration of the Assembly. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend the Land Surveys Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to advise the minister that I 
cannot accept the motion until he reads the oral 
recommendation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I did. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
any time that you’re dealing with land titles and land issues you 
always have a lot of interest across this province because our 
whole system of our economy is based on property and access 
to that property and a clear title to that property. 
 
Therefore, when I hear the minister saying that this Act and the 
changes to it are going to make the title to parcels of land clear, 
I have to wonder what’s been happening in this province for the 
last hundred years that our titles to our property are not clear. If 
this Act is making it clear, then obviously the titles were not 
clear prior to this and you have to wonder how we’ve managed 
to survive, Mr. Speaker, ever since 1905 as a province with a 
system of land titles that was not clear as to who had ownership. 
 
I think very much, Mr. Speaker, that we did have a system of 
land title ownership that was clear and it’s only under this 
government and the changes they have been bringing forward 
that the land titles system has become unclear, Mr. Speaker. 

When you look at the issues and the items that ISC (Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), their new 80-plus 
million dollars land titles system that doesn’t seem to work, Mr. 
Speaker, what they’re bringing forward . . . When you had a 
land title previously you had one sheet of paper. It listed all the 
parcels on it. It listed all the caveats and liens against that land. 
It listed all the owners of that property, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what do you have but you have reams and reams of paper 
that make it extremely difficult to follow who owns what, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And this, as my 
colleague points out, is the new paperless system which utilizes 
10, 20, 30 times more paper than the previous system did. 
 
I guess maybe in part, Mr. Speaker, this is the government’s 
new forestry strategy, is to force us to use more paper, Mr. 
Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not efficient and it’s not very 
valuable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need a system, Mr. Speaker, that is clear; that when you 
look at a title, Mr. Speaker, it clearly says everyone that has an 
interest in it, both as a property owner, Mr. Speaker, and those 
people who have registered caveats and liens against that 
property, which is not the case, Mr. Speaker, under the current 
system. 
 
So I think the minister in his explanations as to what this Bill is 
doing will hopefully be clarifying exactly how he’s making our 
land titles system clearer and that it’s going to work, Mr. 
Speaker — because the old system is working; it’s the new 
system that is very much in doubt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we need the opportunity for the public to take 
a look at this Bill; for those people who work with land surveys, 
Mr. Speaker, to take a look at how this is going to impact their 
operations, how it’s going to impact the ownership of property 
in this province. 
 
And I know that the members opposite don’t really support the 
idea of property ownership because after all it was their 
premier, Allan Blakeney, that refused to allow it into the 
constitution, Mr. Speaker, prior to 1982. So perhaps that’s why 
it is being made unclear, is that they wish to erode the 
ownership of property in this province. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 
2002. 
 
Along with The Land Surveys Act, 2000, this Act was passed in 
2000 and proclaimed in 2001 in part to reform and update the 
law respecting titles to land and in part to facilitate the 
computerization of the land titles system. 
 
The legislation is being implemented district by district across 
the province in the land registration districts. And six out of ten 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

districts have already been implemented, with the Battleford 
land registration district scheduled for implementation on May 
27. Almost 300,000 titles have already been converted to 
electronic form. 
 
As customers have become accustomed to the new system, 
some have requested clarification of or enhancements to the 
legislation to assist in their interpretation of it. 
 
These include new provisions concerning the process for 
sheriff’s sales of land by court order; new provisions for 
removal of a court certificate of impending litigation from a 
title; clarification of the circumstances in which a title can be 
held by joint tenants with no survivorship, and in which an 
application be made to a court to end a joint tenancy. 
 
And one of the key amendments that we’re proposing will, 
along with the amendments to The Land Surveys Act, 2000, 
ensure that there are clear definitions for each new parcel of 
land after a new plan has been approved. 
 
In addition, some housekeeping amendments have been 
identified internally that will make the legislation more precise, 
such as a provision clarifying that the land titles registry 
includes its data as well as its documents; provisions to allow 
corrections to a title to be properly recorded against the title and 
maintained as a permanent record; and an amendment that will 
bring this legislation into accord with The Adult Guardianship 
and Co-decision-making Act which was proclaimed in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce to the Assembly the receipt of 
Royal Recommendation for the following Bill. This was not 
received in time to appear on the order paper, therefore I beg to 
inform the Assembly that Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of Bill 
No. 33, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002, recommends it 
to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of an Act to 
amend The Land Titles Act, 2000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Opposition 
House Leader has very clearly spoke concerning the previous 
Bill which has much to do with this particular Bill, No. 33, An 
act to amend The Land Titles Act, 2000. And once again, I 
would just like to go over some of the points the member from 
Cannington made. 
 
Again, the question has to be asked, if the system that has been 
in place has been working very well in the past, it’s interesting 
to . . . we have to question what improvements there are in this 
present system and what improvements there have been made. 
Clearly the old system did work and people have grown 
accustomed to the old system, so the government needs to be 
very careful about making this new system work for the good of 
the people and the property owners of this province. 
 
As the minister said, six out of the ten districts are already up 
and going, and hopefully the four remaining ones will be 
enacted, enforced, soon so that the whole province can be on 
the same system and everything is working hand in hand 

together with the people of Saskatchewan. And also it’s of 
interest that there’s a number of amendments concerning 
dependent adults and ownership, joint ownership, and areas like 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this and review it with the 
stakeholders. And at this time I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Education Amendment Act, 2002 
Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise today to outline for all members of the Assembly 
the substance and purpose of the amendments included in this 
Bill. 
 
The amendments deal with two specific items. Mr. Speaker, the 
first amendment deals with the Prince of Wales Scholarships. 
 
It has been just once . . . one year since the Prince of Wales 
visited Saskatchewan. During that visit the Premier announced 
a new fund called the Prince of Wales Scholarships. The 
Premier identified these scholarships as being the province’s 
gift to the Prince. The scholarships were announced as 
reflecting a special interest of His Royal Highness. 
 
The scholarships are intended to assist students in community 
high schools in completing their grade 12 education. The 
scholarships will be awarded to grade 11 students and will be 
paid out to the students in their grade 12 year. 
 
For many of these young people the challenges and problems 
they face can become barriers in preventing them from 
attending school. The Prince of Wales Scholarships will provide 
support to these young students and provide an incentive for 
them to complete their secondary education. 
 
As a gift from the province, the scholarship program was 
announced as a fund. It is not intended that the scholarship 
program become a government program funded exclusively by 
the government. Rather it is intended that the fund be 
established so that it can accept private and public 
contributions. 
 
The long-term objective is to establish a scholarship fund of 
sufficient size that annual scholarships can be funded by the 
annual investment of the fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would add that in his remarks the Prince 
indicated that, and I quote: 
 

The scholarships that you presented me with are for 
secondary level studies which I think probably is an area 
that requires particular attention. 

 
The Prince went on to say: 
 

I am delighted that the Premier chose the Prince of Wales 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

 

Scholarships in your community high schools as the 
province’s gift to me, and I much look forward to meeting 
my scholars in the future. 

 
The first scholarship recipients will be selected by the end of 
June this year. They will receive their scholarship next year in 
their grade 12 year. Initially, 10 scholarships at $500 each will 
be awarded. The number of scholarships awarded can be 
increased in the future as the fund permits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amendments in this Bill will provide the necessary 
statutory authority to establish and administer the scholarship 
fund and the program. 
 
The amendments also make provision for the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to make regulations related to the 
administration of the fund and scholarship program. Mr. 
Speaker, I am confident that these scholarships will assist 
students in community high schools in completing their grade 
12 education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second amendment deals with establishment 
of mill rates for newly amalgamated school divisions. I have 
reconfirmed to all school divisions this government’s policy on 
school division restructuring. And I congratulate those school 
divisions who have pursued and brought to a successful 
outcome amalgamation with their neighbouring divisions. 
 
In every case, the newly amalgamated divisions report a wide 
range of positive benefits primarily to their students, their 
teachers, and their classrooms. 
 
I also commend those school divisions who have been engaged 
in increasingly close partnerships or sharing arrangements with 
neighbouring divisions. 
 
To further encourage amalgamation, I have emphasized to 
school divisions my expectation that we will have 25 per cent 
fewer school divisions by October 2003, thereby enhancing our 
education system and providing a better level of service to our 
students. To support this expectation, I indicated our 
commitment to provide enhanced leadership in providing 
support and encouragement to those school divisions wishing to 
pursue restructuring. 
 
I indicated we would work with our stakeholders in attempting 
to remove any barriers that might impede amalgamation 
discussions between school divisions. A potential barrier that 
was identified is related to those neighbouring school divisions 
that have significantly different mill rates. 
 
Under the current provisions of the Act, school divisions would 
be required to establish a uniform mill rate commencing on 
January 1 following the date establishing that new school 
division. Many boards have expressed an interest in phasing in 
this uniform mill rate. 
 
The amendment in this Bill will allow a newly amalgamated 
school division to apply a different mill rate in the area of each 
of the former school divisions for a period of one or two years, 
rather than having to apply the same mill rate over the entire 
area immediately, as is currently stipulated in the Act. I have 
been told that this flexibility will assist restructuring among 

neighbouring school divisions where currently substantially 
different mill rates exist. 
 
The new provision will be enabling, not mandatory. Each board 
will have the option of applying a common mill rate or 
differential mill rates based on their own circumstances. This 
amendment has the unanimous support from the department’s 
restructure and coordinating committee, which includes 
representation from all our education partners. I believe this 
amendment demonstrates our commitment in providing 
leadership and support to school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 34, An 
Act to amend The Education Act, 1995, now be read a second 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as the minister pointed out, this Bill deals with two 
particularly distinct avenues. 
 
First off, it deals with the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund. 
Mr. Speaker, that is a very worthwhile fund and a very 
worthwhile project to encourage students to complete their 
grade 12. 
 
In this day and age it is exceedingly important that people be 
able to state that they have completed their second year . . . their 
post . . . not post-secondary but their secondary educations 
levels when they’re going to seek employment. It is even 
though, Mr. Speaker, a necessity that they carry on from that 
point as well and receive some post-secondary education, either 
at universities or at technical schools — whatever suits their 
individual need, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to get to that point, you need to have completed your grade 
12 education. So it’s exceedingly important that assistance be 
provided for those who find it difficult, for financial reasons, to 
remain in school and to complete their grade 12. And hopefully 
this particular scholarship will aid in doing that. 
 
I guess some of the questions though that the minister needs to 
be able to answer on this particular issue is, how will the 
determination be made and who will be making the 
determination as to who the worthy recipients are of this 
particular scholarship? It doesn’t state in this Act how that will 
be done, Mr. Speaker. So we need some clarification on that as 
to exactly how that will be done. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about 10 $500 
scholarships. As funds become available, if funds become 
available, Mr. Speaker, will that change? How will that change? 
Will there be more scholarships available at the $500 or will the 
10 scholarships remain in place for some other number of 
dollars availability, Mr. Speaker? Again, the minister hasn’t 
given any direction in that area that he might be thinking of. 
 
One of the things though that does concern me, Mr. Speaker, is 
when there are donations made to the Prince of Wales 
Scholarship, either by institutions or by private individuals, it 
would seem to be, as reading the Bill, that they have an 
opportunity to recommend that the funds they donate be used in 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

a particular area or used for a particular purpose. 
 
And yet it says, Mr. Minister, that the minister will not be 
bound by those directions. Again, we have to ask the minister, 
what is his intent in that area? What is the intent of 
government? Will they try to honour the request made by those 
people who wish to donate, those institutions? Or, will it simply 
be thrown into the pot, simply distributed as the minister sees fit 
with no relationship to the request from those donors? 
 
We’ve seen that happen, Mr. Speaker, in some of the other 
funds and foundations that this government tried to establish; 
namely, dealing with health care which, when push came to 
shove and there was a time to accept money, there was no 
money to be accepted, Mr. Speaker, because people didn’t like 
the way it was set up; the idea that they could make a donation 
in community A and that those dollars that they donated for use 
within this foundation would be spent in community Y where 
they had no connection. The people who were interested in 
making donations, Mr. Speaker, believed that there should be 
some connection between their donation and their community 
of choice. 
 
So again, if this scholarship is to be successful, Mr. Speaker, in 
receiving donations outside of the government venue, then I 
think it will be critical that those funds be available to be 
directed as the donor wishes them to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to dealing with the restructuring of 
school divisions, a number of communities have already gone 
through that very work. They have amalgamated two or more 
school divisions and yet the problems associated with that still 
seem to carry on. The idea of having a varied mill rate within a 
division, a newly formed division, may get them past the first 
year because it’s going to take a lot of work obviously to put 
everything in place to charge a unified mill rate. 
 
But part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, on that is that while you 
may be able to charge one fixed mill rate for the entire division, 
you have to know that you have a uniform assessment basis that 
affects that entire school division, because not all municipalities 
use the same assessment body. They’re supposed to follow the 
same rules but sometimes there are interpretations, Mr. Speaker, 
of what those rules are. So you need to know that the 
assessment as applied to the entire division is based on the same 
interpretations, Mr. Speaker, and that is going to be critical for 
everyone to feel comfortable that they are being assessed their 
taxes on their property in a fair manner compared to their 
neighbour. 
 
And in some cases you’re seeing a very wide variance of mill 
rates on property. Now does that translate into different dollars 
for the same kind of property? Perhaps not, but perhaps it does. 
 
And those are the things that this kind of an amalgamation 
really brings into focus for the people involved in it, is how do 
you implement a tax policy that’s fair for everyone especially if 
in some areas of the amalgamation you’re going from a low 
property tax to a higher property tax, Mr. Speaker? Those 
people who are in that lower taxed area are not particularly keen 
to join a high taxed area, and so that’s part of the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

And so the minister is going to have to be able to ensure that the 
assessment is done in a uniformly fair manner and that the 
municipalities that are involved in the divisions are using the 
same tax tools, and that is extremely important as well, Mr. 
Speaker. If some are putting more emphasis on one kind of 
property versus another kind of property, it moves out of 
balance the assessments and the taxes paid by the various 
taxpayers in that area. 
 
So the minister is going to have to be careful that those tools 
that are available to municipalities are working in unison so that 
it’s fair for all of the property taxpayers. And when you’re 
looking at this, Mr. Speaker, at restructuring schools, you don’t 
want to add to the property taxes for education; if anything, you 
need to be reducing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again this isn’t addressed in this area because while it’s 
relevant, it’s not necessarily a part of amalgamations. But in 
some jurisdictions some property taxpayers could very well be 
seeing an increase in their property taxes, while others in the 
same division may not necessarily see a reduction. So you end 
up with a situation where taxes are going up but nobody is 
seeing a reduction. 
 
I think the minister needs to take a very serious look at this, at 
how he can help to make these kind of changes, mitigate the 
harm that takes place to the individual property taxpayers in 
every area. 
 
So to give him an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to take a look at 
these and to come up with some of the answers that are 
necessary, as well as for us to have an opportunity to contact the 
school divisions that will be affected, contact the municipalities 
to see what their thoughts on this issue are, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:00) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today I 
have with me officials from Industry and Resources, as well as 
the Research Council. We’ll be focusing for the next short 
while on the estimates of the Research Council. 
 
To my right is Larry Spannier, the deputy minister; to my left is 
Dr. Laurier Schramm, who is the president and CEO (chief 
executive officer) of the Saskatchewan Research Council; 
immediately behind me is Crystal Smudy, the chief financial 
officer for the Saskatchewan Research Council; and to her right 
is Bryan Schreiner, the director of environment branch within 
the Saskatchewan Research Council. 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

 

Oh, and I may as well . . . Other officials that are with us today 
are Roy Anderson, the president and the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Tourism Saskatchewan; Lori Usick, the director of 
finance and administration from Tourism Saskatchewan; John 
Treleaven, president and CEO of the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership; Gerry Adamson, vice-president of 
Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister, for introducing your officials. I welcome you here and 
we’re . . . I’m looking forward to some of the questions. I think 
we can get through some of these fairly quickly and we can 
move along. 
 
And for Dr. Schramm, an apology. We tried to set up a meeting 
in Lloydminster, if you remember, and there was some 
complications in our timetabling with the Husky Oil and we’ll 
try . . . we’ll endeavour to redo that. So let’s not give up on that 
plan. I think it would be very useful for you and some of your 
officials to come out there for that. 
 
Looking generally, Mr. Minister, at the budget, the first thing 
that I would like to ask about the SRC (Saskatchewan Research 
Council) is where was it at one time? Why is it now in with 
your department, and is there a reason for it there and where is 
it going? Is it going to remain with your department? Is it going 
to be transferred to something else? Is it going to be readily 
available? 
 
Some of the other things are transferred into areas where we 
don’t have direct purview and I would like to make sure that it 
remains in the purview of the legislature, we just don’t know 
where yet. Could you respond, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would want to say 
that my knowledge of the Research Council as it relates to the 
government, the government structure and organization, the 
Research Council has in the past worked very closely with the 
department of . . . former department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development as well as the Department of Energy 
and Mines. 
 
The consolidation, as you will know, moved and merged 
Energy and Mines with Economic and Co-operative 
Development which became then Industry and Resources. The 
Research Council had its own vote prior to this year’s 
restructuring and this year’s organization. I think that the 
autonomy and the independence was reflected in that physical 
structure as it relates to the blue book and to the budget book. 
 
I think that the organization, as it has operated, will continue, 
you know, in spite of the new look within the votes and within 
the vote structure. I think that it will probably be reflected next 
year in the budget book the same as it was in the years previous 
to this year. 
 
But the functioning and the change, the role of the board, the 
role of management within the Research Council will remain 
the same and the relationship between the Department of 
Industry and Resources will, as it has been in the past, be very 
positive and a good, positive, close working relationship. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’ll be . . . I think 

keeping it as an independent . . . as independent as possible so 
that it can pursue the objectives as directed by their board is 
very important. 
 
The immediate question is the reduction in the budget for this 
particular year, 2002-2003. It looks like there’s a reduction of 
just over 6 per cent and I’m wondering if that is an indication of 
the commitment to the research and Research Council in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, and to 
the member opposite, I do thank you for the question and 
you’re right. The number within the Research Council’s budget 
very much reflects not a commitment to research, not a 
commitment to the Research Council by this administration but 
it reflects very much the budget pressures that we faced in this 
fiscal year. 
 
As you will know, we had some struggle in terms of managing 
a decreased cash flow which is not unique to Saskatchewan. It 
was faced by the province of Alberta, the province of British 
Columbia, the province of Manitoba and others. 
 
What will happen as a result of the reduction is that the 
Research Council is internal to its operations, reviewing 
programs to prioritize. It’ll result in the layoff of two staff 
within the Research Council. 
 
But as you will also know, part of the operations and the size 
and the magnitude of the operations of the Research Council is 
very much dependent on what external contracts they can 
garner, whether it . . . whether it be, you know, in the area of 
alternate energy or go through the different things that the 
Research Council does — Pipe Flow Technology Centre and 
the kind of resources that they’re able to generate from the 
private sector there. 
 
So I think it’s fair to say that it will put some pressure on the 
Research Council of what the Research Council is doing, as 
other entities of this government is, have done, and that’s 
attempting to operate within the confines of the resources that 
are available to us. And so I think it’s fair to say that the 
Research Council will remain healthy, it will remain a very 
focused entity of government as it relates to research and 
development, and be very supportive of the industry that it’s 
there to serve. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the 
advantages that an advancing economy has is its ability to be 
able to do research and do research on a basis of flexibility, 
what’s needed at any particular time. And I think the ability of a 
research council to help direct that is important. 
 
But I also think that there is a need to help stimulate, in some 
way, research from the private industry in association with this, 
trying to get as much private input into the research, both 
financial and direction, as possible, because they are the ones 
that are investing some pretty serious dollars in terms of the 
outcome of that research. 
 
Is there any thought from your department or from SRC that we 
should be increasing the partnership approach to research, 
particularly in light of the constraint on the provincial budget? 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I guess it would be 
fair to say that that has been the goal of the board of directors 
who develop policy and work very closely with the 
management within the research councils to maximize the 
opportunity for the private sector to work with the Research 
Council in the different endeavours that it embarks upon. 
 
I would give you, if I could, just one example of that kind of 
partnership; that being the petroleum research centre where the 
Research Council is partnered with Energy and Mines, Natural 
Resources Canada, with the private sector, to develop 
petroleum research capacity as it relates to enhanced oil 
recovery in our province. That’s been very much a partnership. 
 
I’m told in the years 2000-2001, that the contracts with industry 
totalled about 9.5 million. The contracts with the federal 
government totalled 1.9 million and the contract, as it relates to 
the provincial government, totalled 1.2 million for a total of 
$12.6 million. The vast majority, 9.5 of the 12.6, were in fact 
private sector contracts. 
 
In terms of research and development, and the investment . . . 
the risk investment, I’m told that there is, I believe, about $5.3 
million as it relates to the province and $3.9 million with 
respect to facility revenues. So that’s sort of the breakdown, but 
it’s vastly weighted towards the private sector and contracts 
with the private sector, which is the way it should be. 
 
Our goal is to — and certainly we want to as a province — 
invest in research, development, and the enhancement of 
technology, and forwarding and strengthening our provincial 
economy through that. The more money we can lever from the 
private sector — and certainly we’ve put some seed money in 
as the federal government does — then the better off we are. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m just . . . the 
reason for my question — and I appreciate the answer and the 
commitment from the private industry recognizing the value of 
SRC — I guess my question is going in this direction because 
for whatever reasons, the budget restraints in this particular 
budget has decreased the amount of money that will be 
available to you from the General Revenue Fund. Is that going 
to be a signal to the private industry? Are you going to be able 
to keep that commitment from the private industry? 
 
When I look at the annual report for 2001, it shows significant 
amounts of contracts increased from 2000, as you referred to. Is 
there any projection in the upcoming year, based on your 
budget, participation from private industry, because I think that 
is essential? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I 
don’t have a detailed breakdown but the projection for this year 
in contract revenue is about 15 million. 
 
And I don’t have the percentage by industry — federal and 
provincial. We can get that for you. I just don’t have the 
breakdown here. But hopefully we would see a proportional 
increase in those three areas as the total 15 million. 
 
As I said last year, the projection was 12.6 million. This year 

our target is about 15 million. So there will be growth. There 
will be incremental investment according to our targets. And I 
would assume it’ll come through on a proportion. 
 
I mean I think the private sector is well aware of the difficulties 
that governments across Canada have had putting their budgets 
together. It wasn’t certainly an optimum year for Saskatchewan 
nor for our neighbouring jurisdictions. And I think industry 
understands when revenue flows, when cash flow is tight, that 
government as well has to tighten its expenditures and . . . to 
match the tightening of cash flow. 
 
So my guess would be, and my assumption would be that the 
private sector would feel quite comfortable that we’re not going 
back to the days of deficit budgets and deficit budgeting and 
that we are managing within . . . in the context of what revenue 
we have and that all entities of government have been very 
supportive in terms of reducing the cost of operations. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Then, Mr. Minister, if that . . . if those 
projections are as optimistic as you indicate — and I hope they 
are — is there a incentive at all for the companies to invest in 
research? After all research is, as I mentioned, a fundamental 
aspect of economic development — particularly something that 
we want to achieve in this province. 
 
So what kind of incentives, tax-wise or other, is in place? And 
are you going to make any changes in those particular areas to 
either increase or decrease because of necessity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think 
it’s fair to say, that directly through the Research Council, we 
don’t have incentive programs as part of our budget and part of 
the funding for the Research Council. 
 
What we attempt to do is use the administrative support that 
comes from the 200 scientists, engineers, technologists who 
work at the Research Council to support industry investment 
and work within core funding to develop some opportunities. 
 
There is some funding as it relates to research and technological 
development from other arms of the Department of Industry and 
Resources — some of it for health care, directly to the U of R 
(University of Regina), U of S; some of it for climate change; 
there . . . through just a number of different programs, many of 
them federal/provincial cost share — but through the Research 
Council itself, there are no direct incentive pools of capital for 
industry. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, are there — maybe not 
directly through SRC, but from your government — are there 
tax incentives that would encourage investment in that kind of 
research? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well two of the areas that I think 
probably the Research Council would be more closely affiliated 
with would be the Saskatchewan petroleum research institute 
here in Regina and the other, I guess, program would be the 
alliance that we have put together with PRECARN and with 
Industry and Resources to help develop intelligent system 
technologies for Saskatchewan industry and business. There’s 
been about $4 million put into this program over the next four 
years. 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

 

So those would probably be two examples of programs that 
would support what the Research Council is doing. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — The reduction in the budget for this . . . in 
this year, 2002-2003, I’m sure will reflect a change of maybe 
full-time employees. When I look in the annual report for 2001, 
there was a reduction of salaries and benefits from the year 
before. Are we on a downward slide here in terms of the 
number of people that are working at the SRC? Are we 
reducing numbers; in what areas; or are they going to be 
constant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, my officials have 
indicated to me that the number of FTEs, full-time equivalents, 
for the 2001-2002 fiscal year would be 194. And within the 
budget of the 2002-2003 and the financial constraint, it will 
mean two fewer people, two fewer . . . well not bodies . . . but 
two fewer full-time equivalents. It’s a matter of restraint; it’s a 
matter of cost control. 
 
But I say again, the commitment of this administration to the 
Research Council has not and will not waver. It’s been an entity 
that has served Saskatchewan . . . I think the Research Council 
just celebrated its 50th or . . . Well it began in 1947. I couldn’t 
remember the exact year, but it’s over a half a decade that it’s 
served Saskatchewan’s people very well. 
 
It is represented on its board of directors by people across this 
province who understand and who know our province; who 
understand industry. And so I think when something is working, 
one would want to support the efforts that men and women who 
work in the Research Council. 
 
And I can only say to you in my experience with the 
administration, people who work, the 200 scientists and folks 
who work within the Research Council, serve Saskatchewan 
very, very well. And we will continue to support them. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If something is 
working well over that period of time, I agree. I remember 1947 
well, and I don’t think that I should be retired at this stage yet 
either. 
 
I just have a couple of quick questions and then I’m going to 
defer to my colleagues with some other questions. 
 
The one other question that I have, Mr. Minister, is with regards 
to the pension plan. And when I’m reading the annual report 
from 2001, there is a . . . there has been a change in terms of 
how the pension plan has been operating or administered. And 
there is a disturbing . . . At least I hope it’s not disturbing, but 
when I first read it, it’s a bit disturbing, and can I quote it to you 
from the annual report? And I’m quoting from page 43, which 
are notes to the annual report. It says: 
 

Upon termination of the plan, any accrued benefit assets of 
the pension fund remaining after deducting all liabilities 
shall belong to the council. The accrued benefit asset may 
be distributed in a manner to be determined by the council 
at its sole discretion. 

 
I’m not sure what that refers to. I hope that it is innocuous and 
not as threatening as I’m reading into it. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Chairman, here is where 
my officials really needed to help me because I, like I think 
many people in Saskatchewan, I’m not totally aware of how 
pensions work or how they function and all the terminology that 
they use. 
 
But my officials explain it to me in this way: that our pension 
plan is, first of all, fully funded; that the practices that they use 
to manage the funds within the pensions are standard practice 
not uncommon to other pension funds. There are two sides to it, 
as I understand the explanation. There is the defined 
contribution which is fully funded, and there is a defined benefit 
which has a surplus. 
 
So the practices within the operations of the employee benefits 
to the pension are very much of standard practice, and funds to 
manage those pensions are there. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When it says that 
it’s at the sole discretion of the council, I’m not sure that that is 
comforting. Most pension plans, in my understanding, is that 
they have their own particular board of directors and trustees 
that look after that plan. And once it’s set aside then it is 
distributed, as in other plans, back to the employees with 
particular regulations and protocol. 
 
At the sole discretion of the council, I assume means the board 
of the council. And the board being appointed, that doesn’t give 
me a great deal of comfort that they can operate a pension plan 
at the same efficient level as some of the other pension plan 
trustees. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the 
Pension Advisory Committee, comprised of five members, 
those are of the employees of the corporation. The pension plan, 
by their advice, by the advisory committee, has already 
provided full payment as provided by law. Revenue Canada has 
some guidelines that would limit the amount of payment that 
can be paid. They have given one year of a contribution holiday 
to divine . . . to defined benefit contributions and there has been 
a three-year retroactive increase to retirees. 
 
So they have been using the surplus for benefits of the 
employees and survivors of . . . or and retirees. So I think that 
they’re working to eliminate or decrease the amount of surplus 
inasmuch as they can by law. 
 
The advisory group are the people who are employed by the 
Research Council which is, I guess to me, would sort of make 
some sense. So I would feel some comfort that the employees 
are looking after their own affairs in a way. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Where I’m going with that question, Mr. 
Minister, is: if it is administered by a committee or a board of 
trustees and under recognized protocol, is there a particular fund 
that is set aside, is it lumped into SRC or departmental funds? 
And the reason I’m asking that question is there’s another 
investment fund that I wanted to ask you about in a minute. But 
I want to make sure that if that fund is available, is it set aside 
so that it’s not an unfunded liability to the taxpayers? 
 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I . . . again as it’s 
been explained to me I think you can rest with the assurance 
that the funds are managed well. They’re held in trust by 
Canada Trust. There is absolutely no ability for the 
Saskatchewan Research Council board or management to be 
able to tamper with the funds. 
 
So I think the pensions are secure, the employees should be 
comfortable in that they can advise how they’re managed and, I 
guess, Canada Trust is the entity that keeps the fund. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. We do have unfunded pension 
funds in this province that make us a little nervous, as you, as 
you know. The liability is the taxpayers’. 
 
That leads me to one other question. And that is regarding the 
restricted investments, which is note 4 in the annual report. And 
it’s talked about the investments that are represented in the 
Technology in Action Fund. And doing a little reading, I 
understand that fund was the basis of a contribution for a 
particular research, particular . . . in a particular area. And it 
says: 
 

The Council will maintain a separate account of the capital 
contributions and all investment income earned (from it). 

 
And I just wanted to confirm again for the record that there is 
an account, it is set aside, and it’s doing what it’s intended to do 
and not being used in a, kind of a general revenue sense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I can assure the member that 
that is exactly how it’s managed, how it functions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, and to your 
officials, I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today or 
to talk to you today and have a . . . answer a few questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, the last question was regarding the fund and my 
colleagues fear that maybe some of this money would go into 
like the General Revenue Fund or something of the sort. So I 
guess he probably is going to sleep easier tonight knowing that 
that fund can’t be transferred into the General Revenue Fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, your first question that you answered today talked 
about the status of the council and the fact that now it’s no 
longer a department or it’s sitting by itself and is now under 
your department. And you indicated that next year it was going 
to remain the same. Or is it again going to go back to where it 
was before as a sort of a free-standing department or area of 
government that would be under your auspices or perhaps under 
Energy and Mines like it was previous to this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think the 
administration as it operated under the previous bookkeeping 
system where it had its own, where it had its own place and it 
was not under the Department of Industry and Resources was a 
circumstance that government was comfortable with. 
 
In terms of the restructuring, the magnitude of restructuring, 
and the changes as Energy and Mines and Economic and 
Co-operative Development became one entity, I think it ended 
up under the Department of Industry and Resources and I can 
tell you that it is my intention to ensure that it becomes its own 

vote in the 2003-2004 fiscal year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that clarification. 
I’m sure many across the province are going to be glad to hear 
that it’s going to go back to where it was before. It won’t be, 
won’t be as easy to say then, well we’ll just move a few 
hundred thousand dollars here or there. Because I’m well aware 
of the importance of this area and I think it’s going to be 
important to make sure it can be sorted out separately and we 
can be watching its, its progress. 
 
I was concerned this year to see that there was actually a 
decrease in the amount of money that was allocated to the SRC. 
And when I look at the amount of work that was undertaken in 
the province and the need for research and development, this 
caused a lot of concern. 
 
I wonder if you can give me the figures on what percentage of 
the contracts that the SRC received this year were private 
contracts and what percentage were department contracts like 
the Department of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I had a bit of a discussion on this 
with the member from Lloydminster, but I’ll read the numbers 
into the record, Mr. Chairman. 
 
First, I just . . . I should say that the Research Council, as it 
relates to how it is reported in the budget document, the 
Research Council has its own Act. It has a board of directors 
appointed by cabinet by order in council. And it’s an entity that 
functioned, I thought, well, and so the reversion to its original 
status will remain. And I think . . . you know, I think it’s a 
comfortable situation. 
 
The contracts are, for the year 2000-2001: industry, 9.5 million; 
federal government, 1.9 million; provincial government, 1.2 
million; a total of 12.6 million. We’re targeting this year 15 
million. I don’t have the breakdown, but I indicated to the 
member from Lloydminster that I would undertake to get a 
breakdown of the estimates for the 2002-2003 fiscal year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I apologize for 
not, not having those figures. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the largest assets that we have now in the 
province when it comes to research and development is the 
synchrotron. Can you give me an idea of how your department 
is going to be working with the synchrotron, if there’s any 
moves underway to see if the SRC is going to own a part or a 
parcel of one of the beams? Or is there . . . are you going to be 
working with companies to ensure that you can have . . . there 
can be time allocated through the Research Council? Or is this 
going to be individual initiatives with every project to ensure 
that the synchrotron can be used to its utmost for the work of 
the SRC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 
member’s question because I think it’s really important that all 
of the entities of economic development within government 
take advantage of the largest research initiative that . . . in the 
history of our country. 
 
The work that the Research Council is doing as it relates to 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

 

uranium exploration, diamond fingerprinting, heavy metals, 
irritants in smokestack emissions, all of these are areas that I 
think the Research Council can value add to work that’s being 
done in the private sector and work that needs to be and can be, 
some of it done physically at the Research Council. 
 
The Research Council has recently signed, in September 2000, 
an MOU (memorandum of understanding) with the CLS 
(Canadian Light Source) institute as an expression of intent to 
collaborate in specific areas to benefit both organizations, 
because I think there are some synergies and there can be some 
support of the synchrotron for the Research Council and some 
reciprocal support of the Research Council for CLS. So I think 
that they’re trying to find ways in which they can work better 
and work closer. 
 
In terms of the purchase of a light beam, one of the issues that’s 
been raised here today is, I guess, the fiscal restraints and the 
priorities within the Research Council. If we had unlimited 
resources, I think it would be fair to say that the people at the 
Research Council, the scientists, the administration of the 
Research Council, would very much like to have access and 
have ownership of a beam or a portion of a beam. 
 
But I think as it exists now, the Research Council will have to 
work and collaborate both with the CLS and with the private 
sector to find ways on specific and individual bases where they 
can, where they can become involved. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some areas do take 
government support and things like research and development 
has to be seen as provincial responsibilities — especially on 
issues like the synchrotron that is bringing worldwide attention 
to this province — and the opportunity that the SRC has to take 
advantage of the synchrotron is unlimited. 
 
That’s why I, when I saw that there was a decrease in the staff I 
found it alarming because I believed that this might have been 
the opportunity to find someone that was trained and was . . . 
would be able to bring extra expertise to the SRC. 
 
So is there initiatives by your government to help the SRC bring 
the trained personnel that’ll be required to ensure that we have 
work coming into this province to use the synchrotron? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well I would want to say to the 
member opposite that I certainly hope that the reduction of two 
full-time equivalents out of a staff complement of 194 wouldn’t 
alarm her unduly. 
 
As I have indicated earlier, there were some financial pressures 
and the Research Council was not the only arm of government 
that saw a decrease in its allocation from the province. That’s 
unfortunate but that’s the kind of year 2001 was as it relates to 
cash flow and relates to the financial pressures that other 
jurisdictions as well have found themselves in. 
 
We had pressures on the other side where the health care 
funding has had upward pressures, the K to 12 system has had 
upward pressures. We put more money into research. There’s 
been an 80 per cent increase this year in health research and I 
would like the member opposite to recognize that there were 
some areas where research dollars have increased, health being 

one of them. 
 
It’s never easy when you’re putting a budget together, and there 
is never enough money when you’re putting a budget together 
to satisfy all of the needs and all of the good reasons for 
expending money. But one has to deal with the reality of the 
revenue versus your fixed costs and where there are some 
variable cost areas or perceived variable cost areas, those are 
the areas where you will do tweaks and changes. 
 
But I want to say that our commitment to research and our 
commitment to the Research Council as it relates to doing 
research and developing technology, and an understanding of 
things that can and will happen in our province, is unwavering. 
We support the Research Council 110 per cent. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, over a year ago the news media 
got hold of the issue of the board being dismissed by yourself, 
and a new board being reinstated, and I understand at the time 
that most of the concern revolved around the fact that the new 
board members mostly had background in the oil industry. 
 
I haven’t heard anything of late that would make me believe 
that there is a concern, but it did make many people believe at 
that time that there was going to be a refocus of the SRC onto, 
particularly onto the oil patch and oil work, and maybe leaving 
behind some of the other issues that we were, that are being 
dealt with. 
 
I had an opportunity to deal with the research council in Alberta 
and talk to the research council in BC (British Columbia), and it 
seems that Alberta has got a lot of focus on the oil industry, but 
they still have not limited the work that they are doing. 
 
Can you give some assurance to the people of Saskatchewan 
that the vision and the mission of the Research Council hasn’t 
changed with the new board members? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Absolutely, I can give that 
assurance. I can tell you that we are committed and the 
Research Council is committed to working in a very 
harmonious and a positive way with the Petroleum Research 
Centre and the work that’s being done in Regina at the 
University of Regina campus, which is a partnership of the 
Research Council, the Department of Industry and Resources, 
the Department of Natural Resources Canada, and the private 
sector. And I think I’ve got all of the partners involved in that. 
 
That commitment is there, and it’s strong, and we’re going to 
make PTRC (Petroleum Technology Research Centre) a 
positive driving force on Saskatchewan’s oil and gas 
development. 
 
But I can also tell you that our focus on uranium and the 
development of our other sectors of mining — whether it’s 
uranium or whether it’s potash or whether it’s diamonds — 
those are still and remain areas of commitment to the Research 
Council. 
 
Heavy metals, environmental concerns, work that’s being done 
as it relates to the Pipe Flow Technology Centre that’s taking 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

place in Saskatoon, work that’s being done as it relates to the 
alternative energy program, pressure vehicles using high 
pressure natural gas and hydrogen, that work continues. 
 
So I would want to say that the work that’s being done in 
biotechnology, value-added processing, just to name a few of 
the areas, this is not a myopic view that the Research Council is 
taking. 
 
And if you looked at the board and the new board members, 
you’ll find that these are people who very much are focused on 
a broad base of Saskatchewan’s industry. I can . . . I’ll just 
name some of the board members and I’m sure they won’t mind 
because it’s part of the reason that they are there. 
 
Keith Hanson has a background in building performance and 
energy efficiency as it relates to housing and affordable 
housing. So I think a very positive — a good appointee. 
Someone who knows the area of expertise that the Research 
Council’s developed and understands the emerging changes as 
it relates to that. 
 
Doug Kelln, who is someone very familiar with alternate 
energy, is someone who’s also connected to one of our Crown 
corporations, SaskEnergy. Larry Cooper, industrial . . . involved 
in industrial instrumentation. Craig Zawada, in technical 
transfer and commercialization. John Bennett, farming and 
sustainable development. 
 
So I mean, I guess not every board . . . or every board is 
imperfect in a way because there’s always room for 
improvement. But I think the Research Council, as it operates 
and as the board is existing at this point, is a very strong board. 
And I can tell you that it’s been done very much — the work in 
putting the board together — has been done very much by the 
private sector. 
 
There are sometimes, I guess, concerns that boards become 
political because a minister of the Crown ultimately signs the 
order in council that appoints them. I can tell you that this board 
is very much industry driven and came as a result of input from 
the private sector. And I think the calibre of people that we have 
on here and the work that they will be doing and are doing will 
very much reflect the nature of the people and their expertise 
and their background. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that 
background. And I guess if they’re a strong, very capable board, 
then we don’t have to worry that we’ll see a headline in the 
paper again that the minister has fired the whole board. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you . . . is there any area that the Research 
Council was working on in the past while that has been . . . has 
been dropped from research? Is there one particular area that 
they’ve decided it isn’t a profitable . . . or one area that isn’t 
really valuable to the people of Saskatchewan so is really being 
not looked at any more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The management of the Research 
Council, on an ongoing basis, are analyzing the different areas 
that they work. And the board, you know, reports to the board, 
and the board will then, you know, analyze whether or not the 
industry is . . . if there’s an industry need for the kind of work 

that they’re doing. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that if the Research Council is going 
to be current and if they’re going to be relevant, that they need 
to be monitoring their operations on an ongoing basis and 
determining whether in fact it’s an area that requires 
development, it’s an area where they can support the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
The unfortunate thing . . . I guess it would be, when you do 
those kinds of reviews and when you’re developing policy and 
direction, there are always many good places and many good 
areas where you would want to do work. But ultimately, you 
have to focus to what is doable and what is sustainable as it 
relates to financial resources. And I think the Research Council 
has been doing a very good job in terms of keeping themselves 
relevant with what industry is requiring and what the economy 
of the province is requiring from it. 
 
Ms. Draude: — That being said, Mr. Minister, is there any area 
that it’s been considered not been relevant, has it been dropped? 
Any area dropped lately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 
say, although there aren’t a lot of areas because the Research 
Council has been a very forward-looking entity, as you will 
know, having been a past board member — and I think the 
work that you did in your time and the work that’s been done 
subsequent to that would have really kept the Research Council 
focused in areas where they need to be. 
 
The one area that I guess my officials have indicated change has 
taken place is with respect to sodium sulphate. It’s a very 
changing . . . very much a changing sector of our mining 
economy. The markets have switched and changed dramatically 
and the viability in terms of those entities is becoming a bit 
more marginal. It’s becoming more and more difficult and the 
research dollars from private sector to support the work that the 
Research Council has been doing, as I understand it, has 
somewhat contracted and it’s not an area that they’re doing 
research in at this point. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s a couple of 
areas that I’m just wanting to confirm that there is work being 
done on and perhaps you can just give us a bit of an update. 
 
Is research still being undertaken around fuel emissions and the 
bovine lab? 
 
And then, particularly this year with the concern with water in 
North Battleford and other parts of the province, what . . . is the 
Research Council doing work for the Department of 
Environment or Sask Water on some of the water concerns 
across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, with respect to the work being done on fuel emissions, 
that continues. The bovine lab, the answer is a big yes — very 
important to the work that the SRC is doing. 
 
The Water Corporation continues to work with the former 
department of SERM, now the new Department of 
Environment, and with Sask Water as a collaborative approach 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

 

to water management. So the work that’s being done inside the 
Research Council continues. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Are any of the water sampling and the testing 
that’s being undertaken right now being done at the SRC, or are 
they all being done at SERM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, the water testing is still being 
done inside the council. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So the testing that . . . the samples that each 
town sends in on a monthly or a weekly basis is sent directly to 
the SRC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that — this 
is how I hear it works — the municipalities have the option of 
either sending it to the water lab or sending it to the Research 
Council for testing. The water lab does it at no cost, but the 
Research Council does it on a fee-for-service basis. But in spite 
of that, there are still some municipalities who do send samples 
in for testing through the Research Council. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So is there some . . . would do they do it just 
because of the speed that you do it, or do they feel more 
confident if it’s done through the SRC, or why would someone 
send it to a facility where they’re going to pay for it, if they can 
get it done for nothing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I guess that would . . . Probably the 
motives from the municipalities may vary, may differ. It may be 
the time to turn around. I can’t speculate as to why they would 
choose a fee’d service as opposed to a free service. 
 
Only, I guess, fair to say that the service is available and I think 
that’s what the municipalities are wanting and what the 
different jurisdictions are wanting, is assurance that they can 
have their water tested when they want and that they can ensure 
safety of the water quality for the people who they represent. 
 
Ms. Draude: — How much money did Sask Water or 
Municipal Government pay to the SRC last year for work that 
they did on water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that our 
people don’t have those numbers here but we’ll get them for 
you and we’ll send them across. But they don’t have that 
detailed of a figure here, at least broken down in the way you’re 
asking for it to be presented. But we’ll get it to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When board 
members were let go last year, was there a severance package 
given to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Madam Chair . . . or Mr. Chairman, 
I’m sorry, and to the member opposite, board members are paid 
on a per diem basis. So the days they work they’re paid per 
diem and they’re, of course, paid travelling and accommodation 
and food allowance based on rates that are pretty much standard 
across government. But in terms of severance, no, because there 
was no salary. It’s only a per diem. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, my colleague from Lloydminster 
had asked you a question on a fund, and I believe it was 

probably the fund that was initiated by Dr. Ian Wong. Is that the 
one that they were discussing? 
 
I’m wondering if you can give me an update on that and tell me 
if there’s been any other donations that were put into that fund 
in the last four or five years and what the . . . how much money 
is given out each year in contracts or awarded . . . awards for 
people that are requesting research and development work? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The Technology in Action Fund, I 
am told, is 25,000 a year, as the member will probably recall. 
There is $10,000 a year towards student awards, 15,000 towards 
project awards. And I am told there has been some very small 
funding, additional funding, but just really inconsequential in 
terms of the overall Technology in Action Fund but paid out 
25,000 a year — 10 to students and 15 to project awards. 
 
Ms. Draude: — My colleagues are asking that I should 
probably wind up but I just have one last question to ask you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I recognize the importance of the Research 
Council and so do my colleagues on this side of the floor. We 
understand that there is a lot of work that they probably could 
be doing with not only with the extra funding but perhaps, as in 
other agencies and maybe businesses in this province, we find 
that there is a . . . the government gets in the way. 
 
Have you been told by your board members or by the CEO here 
that there are actual things that your government should be 
doing to allow the Research Council to be doing their work 
better? And would you expand on the information that the new 
board has given you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I think, Madam Chair or Mr. 
Chairman, I’m told — and for the member opposite — I’m told 
on a consistent basis, the board members say in order for the 
Research Council to do their job better more money, more 
funds would be helpful. And I think I hear that from, you know, 
from other boards of a similar nature. 
 
We allow . . . I should say that the Research Council board 
operates in a very independent way in that they . . . we make 
them aware, from a government’s perspective, of the broader 
policy initiatives and the broader policy focus that government 
is moving towards. And I think based on that, the boards will 
work in the targeted areas of economic development that are 
identified by the province; that, working with the management, 
with Dr. Schramm and his people, that the Research Council 
does remain very focused and very positive. 
 
I haven’t talked with board members recently, I can tell you 
that. I don’t meet with the board on a regular basis. 
 
I do however, though, meet with the president and the CEO of 
the Research Council on a regular basis, who reports to me the 
operations and the board and the functioning of the board. And 
I would want to say that I believe the new board has developed, 
and the president and CEO has developed a very positive 
working relationship which has meant for a very healthy 
Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

It was a difficult transition and it was a difficult time for the 
Research Council and it was a difficult time for the government, 
but I think that we have come through this. We’re looking to the 
future. We’ve got a very strong board. We’ve got a strong 
Research Council with very strong support by the provincial 
administration. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, thank you very much. I of course 
have lots of questions I would like to ask and probably some 
comments on the . . . on your version of what’s happening 
within government, but this is probably not an appropriate time 
to talk about it even though you did take the opportunity to 
whine a little. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, I do appreciate the officials that came 
here today. I want to applaud their work that they’ve done and 
know that we look forward to more of their very good work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. I too want to thank the officials from the 
Saskatchewan Research Council for their support during the 
year and their support during the estimates and the work that 
they do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As agreed, we were to report progress on these estimates at 
around 4 o’clock and it is around 4 o’clock. So, Mr. Chairman, 
I would move that we report progress on Industry and 
Resources and move to Highways and Transportation for the 
duration of the afternoon. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
introduce deputy minister of the department, Harvey Brooks, 
who is seated on my left; and behind me on the left is Carl 
Neggers, assistant deputy minister of policy and planning; and 
directly behind me is Don Wincherauk, the assistant deputy 
minister of corporate services. To my right is Barry Martin, the 
assistant deputy minister of operations; Fred Antunes, the 
director of operations and planning, is right behind Barry 
Martin; and Cathy Lynn Borbely is at the back, and she is 
leader of the budget development group. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to 
the minister and all of the officials. There are a number of 
people that would want in today and I’ll just take up the first 15 
minutes or so and try and set the tone for this. 
 
I guess the first question, Mr. Chair, to the minister is, we’ve 
had a number of different ministers over the past while in 
Highways and Transportation and I just wonder if the minister 
could give us how his philosophy is different from his 
predecessors and what difference we can see from the 
department now that we have a new Minister of Highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I thank the member for the question 
and want to make it very clear that as a government we do 

operate as a team, that there is no substantial change in our 
overall philosophy of building the infrastructure to try and 
support the economy. 
 
And I think it’s very important to note that as we are able, we’re 
also accelerating the process and the progress of our work of 
fixing the highways and building to try and sustain and support 
a growing infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to start 
out . . . I guess before I get into some specifics on the 
constituency, I want to start out just a little bit on airports. 
 
And I noticed, Mr. Minister, that airport funding on page 70 is 
down $3.6 million. And in 2001-2002 it was $3,698,000 for 
airport capital, and this year it is nothing. And the overall 
airport’s budget last year was $4,976,000, and this year 
$1,369,000. Can the minister explain this difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. One of the 
changes this year is that there is sufficient loss of federal 
dollars. Airports were receiving three point — what is it 
roughly here — $3.6 million under the federal airport capital 
assistance program. That’s no longer there. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That was the 
figures that I read out — 3.6 — and that was from the federal 
government. 
 
I take it the 1.3 million then is also from the federal 
government. Will you confirm that? If the balance in the 
airport’s program is 1.369 million, is that federal funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No. That’s all provincial funding. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So we’re not getting any federal funding 
at all for airports in Saskatchewan. Will you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. We’ve done a lot of major 
renovations with the ACAP (airport capital assistance program) 
funds that were provided. And there is substantially no funding 
left in that federal program because we really . . . we’re working 
with the communities. We’re making sure that we’re bringing 
the airports up just as quickly as we could with funds available. 
So there is substantially nothing left in the federal funding. It’s 
only the provincial funding left. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Chair, I guess the answer to my question then is no, you’re not 
getting any funding from the federal government for airports in 
this province for this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to 
switch just a little bit, still dealing with airports. We know that 
the security fee has been quite devastating, I think, to an awful 
lot of operators in this province. We understand that short-haul 
carriers can and will be or are being hurt by this. 
 
And I do know that you, Mr. Minister, according to a press 
release, had sent a letter to the Minister of Transport — and the 
date, I think, escapes me here, but I think it was February 19 — 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

 

expressing your concerns about the $24 charge that took effect 
on April 1. 
 
And in that letter, which I totally agree, you stated that it would 
be a major disincentive for short-haul air travel within the 
province and interprovincially. We know that this will have a 
definite impact on passengers and costing. 
 
And my question to the minister is: have you received any 
correspondence from the Minister of Transport, the federal 
Minister of Transport, with respect to the letter that you sent? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you again for the question. We 
have at this date received no direct response from the minister 
and in fact I have written several letters seeking some response 
directly from the federal minister. 
 
We are pleased though that there are some adjustments that 
have been made. Northern communities have received some 
adjustment. There will be no air security charges for domestic 
travel to and from our northern airports such as La Ronge, 
Wollaston Lake, Stony Rapids, and Uranium City. So that was a 
help. 
 
But we’re still very disappointed that there are fees still 
applying to the short-haul flights because it can be very 
detrimental to travel within Saskatchewan and to those ports 
that we travel to close by. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — One other thing I’ll just mention is 
that we are anticipating a review of this whole issue in 
September and hopefully we’ll see some adjustments by then. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it that 
was a federal initiative that come back and said that, or was 
something that we have done here to allow those particular 
airports not to charge a security fee? Did that come from the 
Minister of Transport nationally? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, it is our belief that the letters 
from all of the stakeholders, ourselves included, and what 
pressures we were able to put on through stakeholders and 
directly, have impacted on the fees being charged on the 
northern airports. 
 
And we also believe that it is that continued pressure that is 
making some effect on the decision to review, and hopefully it 
will affect what those prices are, or what the decisions are 
around putting a charge on . . . for security. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
do you have a number of Sask operators that have been affected 
by this fee — Sask operators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, we would have to say 
that all Saskatchewan operators are affected. All who are flying 
in and out of Saskatchewan are also affected by this. But there 
is no doubt that all those who are flying domestically will be, 
will be affected here. 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason for 
my question is, is my next question. Does this fee apply to only 
scheduled carriers or are charter carriers also charged . . . have 
to pay this fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The fee would not be applied to . . . 
with the exceptions that I’ve already read out, it would apply to 
all regularly scheduled flights. And in terms of charters, we are 
aware that it will apply to some of those charters. Other charters 
it would not apply to. If you need more detail, we would be able 
to provide that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Yes, Mr. 
Minister, I would like that. If there’s information as to what 
charters are exempt and which ones are charging, I would 
definitely like to know that and the rationale as to why some are 
exempt and some are not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. We’ll provide that in 
writing at our earliest convenience to you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. There’s 
an awful lot of people that want to jump on board here today so 
I’ll only ask one more question on the air side of it. 
 
And some of this is more by just word of mouth, but I’ve 
understood from some carriers that this fee has caused 
substantial cutback within their service. In fact as recent as, I 
think it was yesterday or Saturday, it was indicated to me that a 
carrier, a northern carrier has actually gone out of business 
basically because of this fee. 
 
And I’m wondering if the minister could respond to that? If the 
minister or staff know how many of the carriers have cut back 
because . . . directly related to this fee and in fact, if any carriers 
have gone out of business in the North — well in Saskatchewan 
but that would pretty much be predicated to the North — 
directly related to this fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you again. We have no direct 
correspondence that would indicate that any companies have 
gone under because of the fee, but we will check that further 
and that will also be included in our response to the previous 
question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And not to 
cast any wrongdoings on . . . aspersions on previous years, but 
I’m still waiting for information from one of the departments 
from last year in estimates. So can you give me a deadline of 
when you would have that information for me please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Next time we appear in committee 
we’ll bring that with us. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the minister: 
Mr. Minister, in the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers I 
would like to bring your attention to an issue that is of a great 
deal of concern to a community that is there. This community is 
situated very close to Highway No. 3 which runs from Prince 
Albert east and through the city of Melfort. 
 
Along that route there’s the village of Weldon. Weldon is 
connected to the No. 3 Highway by a short access road that has 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

since the ’70s, since the 1970s has had a dust-free surface on it. 
In the last couple of years, Mr. Minister, the Department of 
Highways has been trying to negotiate with the rural 
municipality and the village to be able to come up with an 
alternative on that short piece of access. And the communities 
are certainly quite willing to talk to the Department of 
Highways to try to seek resolution. 
 
The unfortunate aspect to this, Mr. Minister, is that through the 
goodwill that had been going on with the department through 
the ’70s, through the ’80s, and all of the ’90s, is that that short 
piece of access — about 3 kilometres, 2-3 kilometres — was 
maintained at a level probably more conducive to highway 
traffic in the ’40s and ’50s. 
 
And unfortunately the traffic over that road is an access into 
north of Weldon, is a main access, and the traffic on it is quite 
heavy, heavier loads, B-trains, super B’s. And the rural 
municipality through the appropriate encouragement from 
Municipal Affairs in the past has built their portion of a road 
north of Weldon to a standard to accept the heavy-haul traffic. 
And now that short piece of access is unable to bear the . . . 
today’s weights that the rural communities have become 
accustomed to. 
 
And the communities are trying to continue to work with the 
Department of Highways to keep that highway . . . that short 
access to a secondary highway status or get it to a secondary 
highway status. And I’m wondering if you and your officials 
could respond and . . . and what you know about how 
negotiations are going with the rural municipality of Kinistino 
and the village of Weldon in reaching resolution to this issue. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. With regard to the three 
kilometres into Weldon, it’s reported that any time that the 
community has had any interest in meeting with the department 
on this, that we have made . . . staff has been available, has 
gone and met with them. And we’re interested in looking at the 
alternatives that are possible there, including partnering with the 
communities to rebuild and upgrade that piece of road. 
 
In terms of the fact that it’s a TMS (thin membrane surface), 
they want to keep it at least up to good standards there. It is in 
competition with a wide variety of TMS throughout the 
province that are also demanding a great deal of attention to 
keep them up to a standard. 
 
But when we can partner with a community, when we can work 
with them to build it up, then we’re quite prepared to do so. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
I’m encouraged by your comments because that’s certainly 
what I’m hearing from the communities, that they’d be quite 
willing to enter into a great deal of partnership opportunities. 
They believe that they have something to offer and they know 
that the department through the next —well possibly even as 
many as 10 years — are going to have to be expensing dollars 
on that short piece of access anyway. 
 
So they would like some assurance, especially from the senior 
level, that encouragement could come from, from your office to 

your regional office in Prince Albert, that the people from 
Weldon and the RM (rural municipality) of Kinistino would be 
most accepting to be able to work with the Department of 
Highways, with the regional office in Prince Albert, to work out 
a partnership agreement where it would remain dust free. They 
would be willing to accept a thin membrane surface and, in all 
likelihood, be able to work in a partnership agreement to 
achieve that with as much assistance as they can provide from 
those two jurisdictions. 
 
So I’m wondering then, Mr. Minister, if you can provide myself 
and my constituents there in Weldon and the surrounding rural 
municipality that your department will encourage the regional 
office to work with those communities to achieve what is 
necessary for a dust free surface there, surface there? 
 
They understand that the department is going to have to 
expense dollars there anyway over the next 10 years if . . . 
they’re wondering if those dollars could be just as well spent 
with the dust free surface so that heavy haul can be maintained 
on that short piece of road, as all secondary roads are in this 
province for approximately ten and a half months, ten to ten and 
a half months a year. 
 
I wonder if, Mr. Minister, you can give me some assurance that 
you could encourage the regional office in Prince Albert to seek 
resolution with those two communities in the very, very near 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Yes, I’m really pleased to 
say as I’ve travelled around the province and met with our 
regional people that there is a clear understanding of the 
importance of working in partnership with RMs and 
communities to try and maintain and to upgrade the surfaces 
that we have out there. 
 
When I’ve been out meeting with them — and I’ve been up to 
the northern district and met with Stu Armstrong there and 
continued to encourage not only that district, but each of our 
districts to work in co-operation — I have no problem 
encouraging them to continue to do that and to try and seek the 
earliest and best possible resolution in this situation as I do in 
others. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your delegates. In my constituency along Highway 
3, going west of Spiritwood, is a town called Glaslyn, and 
Glaslyn is situated on the crossroads of two major highways. 
One is Highway 3 going east and west, and the other one is 
Highway No. 4 which comes from North Battleford going to 
Meadow Lake. 
 
Now in the town of Glaslyn, there is a Highway department 
building. And under a proposal that was sent to the town of 
Glaslyn . . . and in that proposal it’s stating that there is a 
Highway department shed there and it’s going to be moved to 
Spiritwood and that there will be no Highway department office 
in . . . or building in Glaslyn. Now the cost of taking this 
building down and moving it to Glaslyn is going to be $150,000 
according to the quote on this paper. 
 
My first question to you, Mr. Minister, is why are you 
undertaking this proposal to move the building from Glaslyn to 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

 

Spiritwood? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Since ’94 there’s been 
significant work at consolidation of regional operations, and 
this is directly a part of that. And it comes down simply to a 
question of economics. When you put out tenders for a new 
building, you’re looking 5, $600,000. And the cost to relocate 
the existing building in the neighbourhood of $150,000 is 
significant savings to the department. 
 
So with the consolidation that has been in process since ’94, 
this is a movement simply of good financial stewardship to 
keep our costs as low as we can. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. In 
regards to your answer then, are you looking at putting up a 
new building in the town of Spiritwood at a cost of some 5, 
$600,000, and you feel that by moving the one from Glaslyn is 
a better move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We’re looking at the overall 
economics of this move. So the existing . . . what is existing in 
Spiritwood, we would look at. Can it be added to? What would 
be the economics of simply adding to that? What would be that 
relative to the cost of moving the building from Glaslyn? 
 
And there hasn’t been a clear decision made on that yet. It’s not 
happening this . . . in this budget, but that’s basically what the 
general process is in terms of decision making. It’s what is the 
best financial stewardship; what will give us the kind of 
buildings that we need in the . . . in the point of consolidation. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. In regards to buildings, and I can understand maybe in 
the town of Spiritwood, which is my hometown, that maybe 
they need an addition to their facility to house more equipment. 
 
But I think the bigger picture that the department has to look at 
is the fact that Glaslyn, who has this building site there right 
now, it operates vehicles out of there that look at high . . . 
servicing Highway No. 3 and No. 4. And No. 4, as you know, is 
a major, major highway. It links North Battleford to Meadow 
Lake. So if you’re going to tear this building down in Glaslyn 
and move that operation to the town of Spiritwood, then who’s 
going to look after that . . . those highways? Is Meadow Lake 
going to come all the way down? 
 
Wouldn’t it make more sense to leave that building there and 
operate machinery out of there rather than move everything 
over to Spiritwood? I mean the highway going north from 
North Battleford is a major, major highway. 
 
So you can look at economics but I think you also have to look 
at practical situation and this building in Glaslyn services such a 
big area. 
 
Also in the town of Glaslyn there are five employees out of the 
seven that live right in the town of Glaslyn. Out of the operation 
at Spiritwood, there’s only two employees. So, Mr. Minister, I 
would think that you’d take this into serious consideration 
before you make this move to relocate that building to 
Spiritwood. 
 

I mean the town of Glaslyn, who brought this to my attention — 
both RM and town officials feel that if it has to, they will come 
down and meet with you to try and get you to look at this thing 
from a broad perspective because it’s not good to move that 
building out of that area like Glaslyn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I think the important thing 
to recognize is that the issues that you’re raising in terms of the 
practicality, in terms of making sure that the level of service is 
high, the common sense issues that are raised, that those are 
addressed as we’re looking at the actions around the 
consolidation. 
 
And so what you would end up doing probably in a situation 
like this, is you would add a vehicle at the north end, the south 
end of 4, and probably another vehicle into Spiritwood area. 
And so your pattern of service is different but your level of 
service is still very high for the . . . for those roads. 
 
In terms of the community, you had asked if we’re willing to 
talk with them further. Of course we are. 
 
But in terms of the overall picture for the consolidation, we’re 
trying very, very clearly to take into account all of those factors 
— economics, the very practice of making sure that we have 
good service to those communities, particularly, I think in the 
wintertime where you’re looking at clearing snow and ice and 
so forth. 
 
So we would certainly be open to having people meet with them 
up there. At a convenient time we can have our district people 
meet with them or even raise it further up if we need to. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Thank you, Mr. Minister, for those comments. 
 
I guess my final question regarding that is I look on here and 
it’s just a tentative proposal. Does that mean under tentative 
proposal that it will not happen this year, that there may be 
some time to, like I say, have you come up and talk to the 
people of Glaslyn and the Highway department regarding those 
situations? Or is it time sensitive where this proposal is going to 
go ahead in the short weeks ahead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We have . . . When you say tentative 
plan, basically it’s we’re looking at our long-range planning 
here and trying to get a picture of what will be developing in the 
province. In this particular instance, it is not in this year’s 
budget and there is time to meet with people from the 
community and talk to them about what the directions are, why, 
and hear what they have to say in terms of their concerns and 
hopefully be able to address those in a satisfactory way. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’ve 
had a letter sent to me from the town of Langenburg — and I’m 
not sure if you have received this, I know the department has — 
but they have quite a valid concern. And they are talking about 
No. 8 Highway on the east side of the province possibly being 
slated for hard surfacing or paving in the year of 2003. 
 
And I just wondered if that was on the agenda for 2003 — No. 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2002 

 

8 from . . . north from McNutt to No. 10 Highway. 
 
An Hon. Member: — North of McNutt to? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — North of McNutt to No. 10 Highway on 
No. 8, it’s currently gravel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The work that is going ahead at this 
point is to — from the Calder access down — is to designate 
that as a heavy-haul road south and that will allow us to take 
some of the traffic off 8, the heavy traffic. And it’s also going to 
make No. 8 . . . No. 8 is designated for TMS, further work on 
TMS. 
 
No. 8 at this point is still in question. We’re looking at what the 
implications are there, whether or not that will be upgraded 
TMS or not. We’re not . . . We don’t have a conclusion. We’re 
still looking at that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I know the 
residents in that area would be very happy if that was the case. 
 
But I guess the town of Langenburg’s concern — and you may 
not have heard this one — is that if we go from the MacNutt 
corner straight out to No. 10 Highway with hard surfacing, 
Langenburg’s concern is that it will divert traffic and shopping 
patterns and everything else to Roblin, Manitoba. And it’s 
probably a very valid concern because what we’re doing is 
making it more convenient to shop out of the province than 
actually in the province. 
 
And I guess my concern would be that it would be nice to have 
the whole project done so that people would have the choice to 
either go Langenburg, go north out, and maybe even go to 
Yorkton or Roblin. 
 
And I guess it’s kind of a Catch-22. I know the residents out 
there would be very happy to see that highway hard surfaced 
and it is a very adequate big highway, but it is gravel. So if it is 
in the future plans, I would hope you would take into 
consideration the town of Langenburg’s concerns and maybe 
possibly we could have the whole project done in one year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I appreciate the question and the 
concern in wanting to keep our consumer traffic patterns 
supporting Saskatchewan business. And I think what’s 
important to know is that in virtually every area of the province 
where we’re working at improving our highways, we’re 
working very closely with the area transportation planning 
committees. 
 
And they’re taking . . . I mean they live in the area but they’re 
also taking direct input from people within the area. And I think 
again at this point when we’re talking about No. 8, the piece all 
the way from No. 10 south to Langenburg, there is no 
conclusion as to when and how that will be done but I know 
that those things will be taken into consideration in the 
planning. 
 
The main thing that will happen at this point is that the heavy 
traffic will be taken off of there and moved onto the road in the 
centre, the Calder road, and that will allow maintenance to 
happen that will make that a better surface to travel on at this 

point anyway — No. 8 will be. Okay. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in your 
department’s news release dated December 4, tendering for 
spring roadwork, there was . . . part of the list of projects 
advertised in this news release was servicing of 10.5 kilometres 
of Highway 22 from Dysart to east of Cupar. 
 
I guess my question is: when will that work be done and what 
will be done on that work site? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. The contract on that will 
close tomorrow and we’re looking at spending $1.4 million. 
That’s one of the areas where we’re going to be working with 
PSI, (Pavement Scientific International), on a TerraSim project 
and hopefully you’ll have a good hard surface — subsurface 
there, and a good road before the end of the summer. 
 
If we ever get spring they’ll get started at it and it should be 
completed before the end of summer. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You certainly have 
eased some of the fears of the residents of that area because 
they noted in a recent ad that your department had in local 
papers that Highway 22 was not part of the ad, and they 
certainly were concerned that perhaps that work was going to be 
shelved. It’s, at least the copy in one of the local papers that I 
have — perhaps it was a printer’s error or whatever, but it 
certainly . . . folks were concerned. 
 
I guess the only other question I would have: after the work is 
completed will that highway be capable of carrying primary 
weights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We are building the road to handle 
secondary weights. The other thing that we’re well aware of is 
that there is a lot of development in the province, a lot of 
pressure where there is economic development going on to 
accommodate primary weights. 
 
And so when we’re looking at what’s going into a road like this 
and we’re looking at that whole issue of demand around the 
province, it’s led us to realize that we need to review . . . do 
some review on the issue of weights and measures and trucking. 
And as we’re doing that piece, we will hopefully come up with 
some clear answers about what can be hauled on what roads. 
 
At this point, all I can say categorically is that it is being built to 
handle secondary weights as it has in the past. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Just one quick comment, Mr. Chair, if I could. I 
would encourage the minister when the highways are being 
reconstructed and resurfaced that they be done to a standard that 
will be capable of carrying primary weights in the future 
because, as the minister indicated, there is a lot of economic 
activity, a lot of demand, and I think we should plan for the 
future by building them to primary weights. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. Those . . . I think all I can 
say in this regard is that we are building the roads at this point 
to at least secondary weight standard and we recognize the 
demands. We see what the demands are for the future. We also 
recognize the costs. 



May 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

 

And at this point, Mr. Chair, I would like to ask the committee 
rise and report progress. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The minister has asked the committee 
report progress. Is this agreed? Carried. It now being near 5 
o’clock the committee stands recessed until 7 o’clock tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


