















































Hansard: June 11, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1989 
 June 11, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 13 — Containment of Forest Fires 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to get up and 
talk a little bit more about the amendment brought forth by the 
member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood: 
 

That this Assembly urge the provincial government to be 
more forthright in accounting for the necessary costs of 
fighting forest fires in Saskatchewan. 

 
And I believe that they should. This government, it always says 
that it wants to be more open and accountable to the people, and 
I think they should know what it costs to be fighting these fires. 
We were hearing rumours that it might be up to 17 million so 
far. I believe that they’ve only budgeted $34 million and I think 
last year they had spent $39 million, and we’ve had at least 100 
more fires this year I understand than we had last year. 
 
So I mean the cost. And we’re only into the middle of June so 
the cost is going to be more — should be more if you go by the 
figures — this year than it was last year. So where’s the 
government going to find the money? Is it going to have to 
borrow the money? Is it going to take it out of somebody else’s 
budget, Mr. Speaker? 
 
But they should be more offright. What’s it costing right now? 
And the communities that have asked for help in firefighting, 
such as Nipawin. Where’s that cost going to come from? 
 
There was a huge fire at the Turtle Lake inferno where 56 
homes were burnt and destroyed there, Mr. Speaker. That 
needed to be a lot of firefighting to be going there, Mr. Speaker. 
And we need to know the budgeting. How much of the province 
is going to be helping there? 
 
Another question I have to ask is, I didn’t really know till we 
kind of got into this debate before, Mr. Speaker, was that you 
can request, if you have fires — a farm fire or a grass fire, RMs 
(rural municipality) — that you can request water bombers to 
come out, Mr. Speaker. Who absorbs the cost of that? Do the 
RMs pay for it? 
 
Let’s say if there was a raging forest fire out . . . you take out in 
our area the last . . . I’d say the last six years maybe . . . no, it’d 
be in the last 10 years, Ducks Unlimited, Ducks Unlimited, Mr. 
Speaker, has started to buy land starting at Hanley going up 
towards the Allan Hills there. They have as much as now — 
there’s some private pastures in there — but they have as much 
as 20 to 25 miles of grass in there. And last year was really dry. 
 
I remember we had a meeting with the RMs and they tried to 
have a meeting with Ducks Unlimited to have fireguards 
ploughed every mile, to have grass cut, and Ducks Unlimited at 
that time had said no. Part of their plan was to have a lot of this 
land left natural, which was good when it was . . . there was a 
lot of wet years. 
 
Last year we were in a very dry year, as we are this year. The 

farmers wanted to go in and either cut it or turn some cattle in 
it, but the biggest fear starting . . . Once we got into July, that 
grass was about a foot to two feet high, dead grass that had been 
there for two . . . two, three years that accumulated over the 
dead years, and they were really concerned that a fire would’ve 
got going. 
 
Now they would’ve . . . no way would’ve been able to put that 
out, Mr. Speaker, with the equipment they’ve got. I mean if it 
raised with some of them winds, it would’ve just taken off. And 
there’s farmyards and acreages kind of spread out through there, 
Mr. Speaker, and they were . . . there were a lot of families were 
very worried about it. 
 
So one . . . you know, one of the things if that fire would’ve got 
going, would you have been able to . . . what would’ve been the 
routine to call in the fire bombers, the provincial end of it, and 
who would’ve absorbed the costs? I remember that was some of 
the questions that were asked of me and I kind of asking the 
Assembly now, like would the RM after the fire . . . Because I 
mean naturally you just put the call out, the fire bombers go. I 
mean, you know, same thing. I mean there’s a fire, you’ve got 
to put it out. You worry about the costs after. 
 
But after everything would’ve happened, if the fire would’ve 
been put out, who would’ve absorbed the costs? Would the 
RMs had to have bear that cost? Would Ducks Unlimited had to 
bear that cost? Would the province have eaten it? Or would the 
RMs have to declare kind of an emergency state funding? 
 
I believe the Premier was up in Nipawin and he had talked 
about declaring kind of an emergency and possibly giving them 
some funding and, you know, kind of shrugging his shoulders 
and saying that there probably would be some help but not 
laying out nothing — a concrete plan — which this government 
seems to be kind of famous for, is not kind of laying things out 
in advance, laying out a plan. 
 
And also at the budgeting end, that’s . . . We still don’t know, 
and I believe the member from Carrot River has asked what is 
the cost right now for firefighting, and he still hasn’t gotten a 
question . . . or an answer of what it’s cost right up to this point. 
So we know in opposition how much money, how much money 
is already in that that is going to be needed and how much is 
going to be needed in the future possibly. 
 
And that’s as opposition it’s . . . And the province needs to 
know that that’s what it costs to fight these fires, instead of at 
the end of the year all of the sudden just kind of saying, well no, 
we’re not going to even help these communities now, you’re on 
your own. And also all of a sudden we’re running a deficit. 
We’re going to pull 10 million out of this budget or we’re just 
going to borrow the money. 
 
I think this government should be more upfront with the costs 
of what this costs so far, of what the projected costs are of the 
fires. Of what the Turtle Lake fire has cost. What the Nipawin 
fire has cost up to date. What the numerous fires have cost in 
the North so far and even some of the southern fires that have to 
have been fought. 
 
I know Alberta there, I was reading somewhere, and it wasn’t 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

that long ago, they pretty well had their costs laid out. Basically 
they were only about two weeks behind the fires, of what it was 
costing to fight them and how much money was needed and 
how much of it was already spent and allocated that way, and 
how much would possibly be needed in the future. 
 
I think we’re probably two months behind. I mean we’re still 
working from possibly the spring budget when they had just put 
in some money in there. Now I understand at one time they had 
a firefighting contingency fund and it sounded like they’ve kind 
of exhausted that last year from the questions if I can remember 
here in estimates with Environment. And it sounded like this 
year that they did not budget as much that was spent last year. 
So I mean they are probably, Mr. Speaker, going to be running 
into trouble further down the road when it comes to their budget 
end, which seems to be quite normal for this government. 
 
Another concern is also the costs you know of the volunteers. 
And in . . . I was going to say, back to the fire there, if it ever 
would have got out of control in the Allan Hills there, would 
they have brought in the provincial firefighters plus the water 
bombers? The RMs, how would they have got to maybe 
possibly get the army in because when you have to fight a fire 
you need a plan, you need to set it out so that it can be 
implemented within hours when you hit an emergency 
situation? 
 
And if that fire would have ever got rolling in them hills there, 
you know where it’s burning probably you know covering great 
distances, and you’re going to need . . . the RMs are going to 
have to know who to call and who can be there and who is the 
authority to say we need these water bombers, and they’re 
going now. Or we need the army in to work ahead of this fire to 
fight . . . plough guards ahead or fire banks or you know, 
whatever a lot of the firefighters do to try to — fire breaks — to 
try and stop the fire from going there . . . from going there 
further. 
 
But the biggest thing is, Mr. Speaker, is accounting for the costs 
of it. And this side, when the House is in session — and it’s 
probably going to be here till, I’m guessing, you know 
sometime later July, whatever, you know how things there go 
— but with stuff that’s in front . . . but it would be nice now if 
we can have these costs so we can debate them now in the 
House rather than holding them back over a length of time, 
bringing them up possibly in the fall when this government 
doesn’t want to have a fall session, which we’ve always called 
for. 
 
We’ve always wanted a fall session and this is another reason 
why, Mr. Speaker, we probably should have a fall session 
dealing with this amendment. So there is lots of things that 
happen in the spring, through the summer, with the budgeting 
end, that can be discussed and debated in the fall. And I think 
this motion is a very good argument for that. 
 
One of them is the firefighting end of it, and that’s why we 
support the amendment. And I think the government on the 
other side, I would hope that they would also support that 
amendment and . . . because there was a lot of business that is 
before this House that could be done in the fall, that happens 
through the summer. And one of them is firefighting costs of 
the budget and how it’s going to affect the upcoming budgets. 

Which budget it should come over, which government 
department? Or is the government going to have to possibly 
borrow some money or get some money from . . . transfer some 
money from CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan)? That should be debated in the . . . that should 
be debated in the House rather than by an order in council by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And like I say, we’ve always supported it, and this is a good 
example of why we need to have some more answers. When 
you only sit three . . . for three months of the year, and this 
government, you have to force them to sit them three months of 
the year. There’s a lot of business that could be debated in this 
House that probably isn’t or that it’s possibly nine months old, 
that’s already past the budget year. And having a fall session 
just before the budget is done in January, or getting close to the 
budget end, would do very good to do some budgeting at that 
end, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I support this amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 
an interesting afternoon actually. We’ve been debating a 
resolution as it relates to people who work in the forest fires 
that invariably happen, unfortunately, in this province and 
others, about the forest fire suppression initiatives and programs 
that have been developed in this province over a number of 
years. And I have listened with interest to some of the forest 
fringe MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
Saskatchewan Rivers and from Shellbrook-Spiritwood as they 
have articulated their concerns about old forest firefighting 
equipment, old aircraft. Well I hear comments from the other 
side, and I won’t go there, sir. 
 
But I want to say that what I do know is that this province has 
the most effective forest firefighting and the forest fire 
suppression system anywhere. And that’s beared out by the 
quickness to which they attack a fire and the size at which the 
fire is ultimately put out. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I know that all of us that 
represent the forest fringe are very concerned about the costs 
with respect to forest fire suppression. I think I can say on 
behalf of my colleagues that all of us support very much the 
people who put their lives at risk every day when they move in 
to the fire. And that is not unique . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I listened very much with 
interest as this debate on this motion took place, that some of 
the members opposite were trying to isolate urban from rural, 
north from south, suggesting that people in southern 
Saskatchewan who represent this place, this province had less 
concern for the people who work and less understanding for 
what happens up there in the forest fringe. 
 
And so I say to members opposite, I think the people of this 
province clearly understand the importance — the importance 
of what the people who work in that industry do. 
 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

 

I know people who fly those airplanes, those 30-year-old 
airplanes, and I know the mechanics, as they do, that work hard 
to keep those airplanes together. But I tell you what, Mr. 
Speaker, I know also the people who work in the GIS 
(geographic information system) system that monitors the fire 
hits, and the people who understand what it takes to lower the 
cost of firefighting in this province. And so we all do. 
 
And so let’s all support good work that’s done up there, sir. 
And I think we all do. 
 
Is that a priority for us as a province? Yes, it is. Is it a priority 
for us as people? Yes, it is. 
 
And the members opposite want to debate and I say to them 
they will have ample opportunity to debate, not only through 
resolution which we’ve debated since question period this 
afternoon but they will have ample opportunity to in depth 
question the minister responsible for the department that funds 
our fire suppression initiatives. And I asked earlier today, this 
government asked you earlier today that we would move to 
House business so we could do that. 
 
And I think, sir, this debate has been well debated, well 
debated, and we all support the people who work in the 
industry, and we all support as well the initiatives and the 
facilities that we put in place and the funding that we put in 
place to make this happen as a province, as people of this 
province. So I think it’s been well debated today and we could 
be well served by adjourning this House tonight. 
 
So I move that we adjourn debate . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . or adjourn this House. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 19:16. 
 


