















































Hansard: June 06, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1849 
 June 6, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to stand today to present a petition on behalf of the people in the 
Humboldt constituency and area who would like to ensure that 
the Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing remains in Humboldt. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt, the communities of Bruno and St. Gregor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
petitions from people who are concerned about the closure of 
the Sask Housing Authority office in Humboldt. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
The people who’ve signed this petition are from Muenster and 
Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bredenbury, Churchbridge, Saltcoats, Pierceland, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with crop insurance 
premium hikes and coverage reductions, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Bracken, Orkney, and Climax. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents of Weyburn and other 
areas, and the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this treatment centre for the abuse of alcohol and 
provide funding for the same. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn; Calgary, 
Alberta; Kisbey, Midale, and Red Deer. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from the citizens of Elbow: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increased crop insurance 
premium rates. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and Shellbrook. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition from the citizens concerned about the closure of 
the Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority. And the prayer reads as follows: 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 
 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt and 
St. Gregor. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of my constituency that are concerned about the 
tobacco legislation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from my 
constituency of Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and Mildred. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
citizens of the province concerned about the crop insurance 
premiums. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing the coverage in order to pay 
off the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Climax and 
Orkney. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today with a petition from citizens concerned about the 
high costs of prescription drugs. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed the good folks of Bracken, 
Frontier, and Orkney. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 11, 18, 24, 59, 117, 129, 132, and sessional paper no. 157. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills, I now present 
the sixth report of said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and has 
agreed to report the same without amendment: 
 
Bill No. 301 - The Conference of Mennonites of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2002 
Bill No. 302 - The Sunnyside Nursing Home Amendment 

Act, 2002 
Bill No. 303 - The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 
 
And further that the fees respecting Bills 301 and 302 be 
remitted to the petitioners less the cost of printing. 

 
Your committee also wishes to report that it has adopted a 
standard transitional provision as a model for private 
members’ Bills that seek to make changes to the 
incorporating provisions of a private Act. 

 
Respectfully submitted. 

 
I do now move: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in and that the said Bills 
be accordingly referred to the Committee of the Whole. 

 
Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Arm 
River. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Standing Committee on Communication 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
present the Standing Committee on Communications third 
report to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker as Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Communications presented the second report of the said 
committee, which read as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the recommendations of 
the Public Documents Committee under The Archives Act 
contained in retention and disposal schedules comprising 
sessional paper no. 124, including schedule no. 346, 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation; schedule no. 347, 
Saskatchewan Environment, policy and legislation unit; no. 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

 

348, Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs, Office 
of French-language Co-ordination; no. 349, Saskatchewan 
Justice, victim services branch; no. 350, Saskatchewan 
Environment, fish and wildlife branch; and no. 351, 
Saskatchewan Learning, post-secondary division, this third 
session of the 24th legislature and referred to the committee 
by the Assembly on May 7, 2002. 

 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules no. 346, 348, 349, and 351 and that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules 347 and 350 as amended by the Standing Committee 
on Communication be accepted. 
 
Your committee reviewed the report for the Legislative Library 
for the period ended March 31, 2001 and the committee also 
considered issues related to the broadcast of the legislative 
proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Cannington, that the third report of the Standing Committee on 
Communications be now concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 61 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister of youth and culture: with regard to the new 
sound stage in Regina, how many productions are currently 
being produced there; how many booking contracts have 
been signed for future productions and what is the value of 
each of those contracts; what was the original budget for 
the development of the new sound stage in Regina; what is 
the current projection of the anticipated total cost? 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 61 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how many employees were laid off 
at SOCO when that organization was eliminated and rolled 
into CIC; how many of those employees have been rehired 
by CIC? 

 
And further to that, Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall 
on day no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Executive Council: what are the names 
of all the people employed by Executive Council; and for 
each person, what is their title and their current salary? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: how much revenue was 
generated in 2001-2002 from the various environmental 

charges and/or taxes placed on consumer products, and 
how much of this revenue is used for environmental 
programs; what was the breakdown in revenue for the 
various environmental charges and taxes? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this year Cornwall Alternative School in Regina is celebrating 
30 years of leadership in the area of education. And I say 
leadership because of the work that they do with young people 
who do not easily benefit from a regular school setting. Theirs 
is a very difficult task and they’ve done it well over 30 years. 
 
Here this year on their 30th anniversary visit to the legislature, 
or a celebration of 30 years, is a group of grade 9 students from 
Cornwall Alternative School. They’re accompanied by their 
principal, Eunice Cameron, and by instructors Joe Eklund and 
Alicia Witte. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the legislature to join 
with me in welcoming these students and staff to our Assembly 
and to congratulate them on their dedication to education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
guests to introduce to the Assembly and to you, Mr. Speaker, 
this afternoon. The first, it is our honour to welcome to the 
Assembly this afternoon the Hon. Sharon Carstairs, 
Government Leader in the Senate of Canada who has joined us 
on the floor of the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Ms. Carstairs informs me that at one time she was the sole 
Liberal member of the Manitoba Assembly. I’m just giving the 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may also introduce to you two good friends of 
mine also seated on the floor of the Assembly, Burt Dougan and 
Glenn Dougan. They’re both very interested and active in 
politics, although I have to say that over the years I’ve found 
Burt’s political judgments to be a lot sounder than those of 
Glenn. 
 
In the Speaker’s gallery is Michelle McDonald, who is 
accompanying Senator Carstairs today. And in the east gallery 
is David Karwacki, Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 
 
This evening Grant Karwacki will be contesting our nominating 
meeting in Saskatoon Nutana, which I know has the member 
there very scared because I understand in preparation for his 
political run, Grant has been taking elocution lessons for the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome these guests to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce through you to all the members of the Assembly a 
group of very fine public servants who are with us touring the 
legislature and seated in your gallery today. 
 
Now these are participants from the departments of Learning; 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization; Health; Industry 
and Resources; Social Services; Justice; Environment; the 
Legislative Assembly systems branch; and the Legislative 
Assembly Legislative Library. 
 
And I do look forward to meeting with this group after question 
period and ask all the members to join me in welcoming them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition I would like to join the 
government member in welcoming the government workers 
from the various departments. We hope that you enjoy the 
proceedings and our House Leader will be looking forward to 
meeting with you a little later on. So welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join the member from North Battleford in welcoming 
Senator Carstairs to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
I want to also recognize, Mr. Speaker, the accomplishments of 
Senator Carstairs in her time in politics. In 1990, as we know, 
Senator Carstairs was first . . . was the first woman in Canada to 
be elected as the leader of the official opposition. 
 
Then she was later appointed to the Senate of Canada in 1994. 
And then in 1997 she was appointed as the deputy leader of the 
government of the Senate, the first woman, Mr. Speaker, in 
Canada to hold that position. And then she was appointed as 
leader of the government in the Senate on January 19 of the 
year 2001. 
 
On March 14, 2001 Prime Minister Chrétien gave Senator 
Carstairs special responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, for palliative 
care. This new appointment is a major, first major step forward 
in the federal government’s commitment to quality end-of-life 
care in Canada. And tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, Senator Carstairs 
will be speaking at the Saskatchewan Palliative Care 
Association annual general meeting here in Regina. 
 
And I invite all members to join with me in extending a healthy, 
a healthy Saskatchewan welcome to our province and to say 
that we observed her as the sole opposition member in . . . as 
Liberal member in Manitoba and we recognize what an 
outstanding work that she has done there. We’re yet to see it in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with other members in welcoming Senator Sharon Carstairs 
to the Saskatchewan legislature. She has a long tradition in 
Canadian politics, and certainly we’re pleased to see her here. 

She’s a bit of a rare commodity — a Liberal coming to 
Saskatchewan. But we are indeed happy to see her here and we 
welcome her here sincerely. 
 
I also would like to introduce a group of women and men in the 
Speaker’s gallery who are very important to Saskatchewan 
Party MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) because 
they are the constituency assistants who do such wonderful 
work for our MLAs back in our ridings. They make us look 
good and we very much appreciate them. 
 
They are here this afternoon to watch some of the activities in 
the House and also to meet with some of our staff and some of 
the Assembly officials as well. Also on their agenda, I think, is 
to attend one of the fine restaurants in Regina, perhaps see some 
of Mosaic, and as well tour Government House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce them by name. And as I 
mention their names if they would please stand up. 
 
I’m happy to introduce Charlene Orr from Wood River; Gwen 
Beitel from Thunder Creek; Jean Ball from Cannington; Cindy 
Bell from Weyburn-Big Muddy; Tammy Danychuk from the 
wonderful riding of Rosetown-Biggar; Shelley Dufault from 
Kelvington-Wadena; Susan Dunne from Watrous; Tina Durbin 
from Moosomin; June Epp from Saskatchewan Rivers; Leanne 
Fox from Estevan; Annie Frechette from Lloydminster; 
Whitney Friesen from Rosthern; Everett Hindley from Swift 
Current; Beth Humphrey from Cypress Hills; Amanda 
Loehndorf from Shellbrook-Spiritwood; Shelley McCrea from 
Carrot River Valley; Audrey McEwen from Moosomin; Carol 
Mellnick from Last Mountain-Touchwood; Margaret Payne 
from Saskatchewan Rivers; Clark Puckett from Arm River; 
Shelly Schroeder from Estevan; Marcie Swedburg from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy; Mary Anne Telfer from Humboldt; 
Sherry Webster from Cypress Hills; Vonnie Widdis from Indian 
Head-Milestone; and last but not least, Ed Young from 
Redberry Lake. 
 
Would all members of the legislature please welcome these 
hard-working people here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first I would 
like to join with my colleague from Regina Victoria in 
welcoming the students and staff of Cornwall Alternative 
School. They’re accompanied by one of my favourite principals 
in the whole world, my cousin, Eunice Cameron. So I’d like to 
have all members of the Assembly join with me in giving them 
a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Also in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, I have 
58 grade 8 students from White City School. Mr. Speaker, 
they’re going to have a tour shortly after they observe some of 
question period. They’re going to meet on the steps for a photo 
and have some drinks and a time to be able to ask questions of 
me. So I hope members will accommodate and be reasonably 
respectful during question period. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teachers, 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

 

Joyce Dudley and Chris Beingessner, and by chaperone Liz 
Gurr. 
 
I would ask all members to join in welcoming the 58 grade 8 
students from White City School in my constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to add my words of welcome to the member for 
North Battleford in welcoming Glenn Dougan and Bert Dougan 
to the Assembly. They’ve both been friends of mine for many 
years, Mr. Speaker, and Bert is very active in politics in North 
Battleford. And Glenn has been very, very active in terms of 
community and neighbourhood work in the Caswell 
neighbourhood in Saskatoon and has contributed enormously 
there. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government members, we 
want to add our warm welcome to Glenn and Bert. Welcome to 
the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of legislature, 41 
students from the community of Dalmeny. It’s good to have 
them here today. It’s just a real beautiful little community and 
all of those MLAs from Saskatoon probably know of it quite 
well. 
 
Those are 41, as I said, grade 6 students. And they’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Darlene Thiessen and Roxanne 
Bitner. And I’ll probably have an opportunity after question 
period to meet with these students. 
 
I believe I’m also having something to do with their community 
on Saturday when they have their parade. I hate to admit this, 
but I hope it’s rained out. But I do look forward to seeing them 
and hope they enjoy their time here at the legislature and in 
Regina. 
 
Would you join me in welcoming them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming one very 
special person here today, and that is Charlene Orr, the 
constituency assistant for the member from Wood River. 
 
Charlene, of course, is my first cousin and proof of the 
dynamism of political thought that occurs in families. And also 
proof that regardless of whether we hold a Saskatchewan Party 
membership or a New Democratic Party membership or, 
indeed, a Liberal Party membership, we all care very 
passionately about this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I briefly want to join the member 
for Rosthern in welcoming the students and teachers from 
Prairie View in Dalmeny. I was able to visit their class. It’s a 

very well-run class and very well-behaved kids, and I learned a 
lot. 
 
So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nomination Contest 
in Saskatoon Southeast 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Last night the Saskatchewan Party had a 
nomination contest in the riding of Saskatoon Southeast. Unlike 
other party nominations where it’s tag you’re it, two 
high-profile candidates brought over 500 people to vote for the 
next MLA for Saskatoon Southeast. Mr. Speaker, I say the next 
Saskatoon Southeast MLA because the Saskatchewan Party is 
confident that Mr. Don Morgan, the successful candidate, is 
going to win this seat in the next election. 
 
Both Don Morgan and Kevin Waugh ran excellent campaigns 
— a sign of many more quality Saskatchewan Party candidates 
in nominations to come. 
 
This nomination contest validates the growing support for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the cities. It’s becoming more and more 
evident that people of Saskatchewan are ready for a change in 
government and are willing to take steps to ensure that change. 
 
Don Morgan is a well-known Saskatoon lawyer, public school 
board trustee, and community volunteer. The members from 
this side of the House congratulate Don and look forward to the 
day when he joins us in this Legislative Assembly as part of the 
next government to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mosaic 2002 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is Tourism 
Awareness Week and as everyone in this city well knows, the 
other word for awareness is Mosaic. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, 
starting this evening and running throughout the weekend, 
Regina’s annual, and Saskatchewan’s first, multicultural 
festival gets underway. 
 
Mosaic is listed as one of the top 100 festivals in North 
America and for good reason. During these three days, for the 
incredibly reasonable price of $20, you can travel to 4 
continents and 37 countries. Your Mosaic passport will take 
you where you want to go, and in Regina, Mr. Speaker, you 
don’t get hassled at the border. 
 
How do we celebrate our multicultural heritage? In some very 
enjoyable ways, Mr. Speaker. We taste the wonderful and 
authentic regional cuisines that are served at every pavilion. 
And we may even have a beverage. 
 
We are entertained by some of the most capable and 
enthusiastic dancers you can find anywhere. Air Canada can do 
no better and can’t even approach the cost. 
 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this is Saskatchewan. And what that 
means, of course, is that Mosaic is planned, operated, staffed, 
and presented by a huge number of volunteers. Volunteers who 
very much deserve our admiration and our thanks. 
 
So go with the member from Lakeview to the Scandinavian 
pavilion, with the member from Cumberland to the First 
Nations grand entrance, with the member from Wascana Plains 
to hang out with the Scots, or with the member from Sherwood 
to the Polish pavilion — then you only have 30 or so more 
choices remaining. 
 
Have a good time in Mosaic, and thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Earns Earth School Designation 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
Earl Grey School celebrated its achievement of attaining the 
prestigious environmental designation of Earth School awarded 
to it by SEEDS (Society Environment & Development Studies) 
Canada Foundation. 
 
SEEDS Canada Foundation, the society for environment and 
energy development studies is a national program that 
encourages students to undertake projects which enhance the 
environment. 
 
Students and staff receive recognition as they proceed in the 
program, becoming a Green school at 100 projects, a Jade 
school at 250 projects, and an Emerald school at 500 projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Earl Grey School, a school of only 105 
students, had to complete 1,000 environmental action plans in 
order to receive Earth School status. This is truly an amazing 
achievement when one considers the fact that of the 5,400 
schools across Canada that are registered with the SEEDS 
Canada Foundation, less than half complete 100 projects. Only 
200 schools across Canada have reached Earth School status, 
the Earl Grey School being one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the students and staff of Earl Grey 
School for their impressive efforts and achievements in 
completing 1,000 environmental projects, thereby earning the 
right to be called an Earth School. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Decoration Day Services 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Today is the 58th anniversary of D-Day — 58 years ago, Allied 
soldiers including troops from Canada landed on the beaches at 
Normandy to begin the final push towards the liberation of 
Europe and the end of World War II. 
 
As the title of the Hollywood movie suggests, it was the longest 
day. And it was a costly day for many of our young soldiers 
from across the Allied troops. 

(14:00) 
 
With the passing of each year there are fewer veterans of the 
war to be acknowledged and thanked for their services and for 
their sacrifices. And that is why this evening I’ll be taking part 
in a Decoration Day service at the Royal Canadian Legion in 
Yorkton. 
 
Decoration Day, Mr. Speaker, is not a declared national holiday 
as is Remembrance Day, but is a day observed by Legion posts 
across the country to honour all veterans, in particular those 
who served in World War II, which is why the day of June 6 
was chosen. 
 
In some places this day is observed on the Sunday closest to 
D-Day, and the observances involve the visits of local 
gravesites of veterans, with an appropriate service on site, 
which will happen tonight in the community of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although the focus of this day is on soldiers of 
wars past, it will give us an opportunity as well to take a 
moment and say a prayer for the safety and speedy return home 
of our men and women currently serving in Afghanistan and in 
the many peacekeeping places and areas across the troubled 
world. 
 
And I know that all members will share in this prayer and day 
of remembrance today. 
 
And I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan 55 plus Games 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the great 
community of Humboldt is currently hosting the Saskatchewan 
age 55 plus Games. 
 
I had the opportunity to be in Humboldt last Monday for the 
opening of the games and to meet and speak with seniors as 
they prepared for their athletic challenges over the next week. 
 
The zone 5 seniors have been involved in many activities this 
week. Activities such as bowling, bridge, cribbage, golf, track 
and field, cycling, darts, shuffleboard, and so on. And I am 
confident that they have been shown a very great time by the 
people of Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan seniors deserve to be commended 
for their determination to live healthy and vibrant lifestyles 
through sport and participation in a myriad of community 
activities. And these games are an opportunity for seniors to 
gather to celebrate their wonderful vitality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the seniors in Humboldt 
who hosted the age 55 plus Games as well as all the participants 
and the award winners. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

 

Student Cultural Conference in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today 
Her Honour Lieutenant Governor Lynda Haverstock and I had 
the pleasure of attending a truly unique conference at the 
Carpenter High School in Meadow Lake. 
 
The Flying Dust First Nation and the Meadow Lake School 
Division are hosting a one-day conference called Cultures 
Working Together to Overcome Challenges. 
 
The conference will focus on working together, building trust, 
celebrating cultures, and overcoming challenges, which will 
lead to the building of bridges between cultures and in turn will 
foster and promote healthy relationships and partnerships. 
Students will participate in team building and cultural 
awareness sessions. 
 
The conference has received funding from the Department of 
Culture, Youth and Recreation as well as the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Students from Meadow Lake and surrounding area have been 
working together to organize this conference. This is an 
excellent example to others of how hard work and co-operation 
can make a difference. 
 
The conference features Inuit recording artist Susan Aglukark 
and motivational speaker Alvin Law, who will discuss the 
difference one person can make in the world, and the power 
people have in overcoming disabilities. 
 
In closing, let us congratulate the staff and students of 
Carpenter High School, the First Nations, and local 
communities for a job very well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Annual Youth Business Excellence Awards 
Held in Outlook 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about an event of 
which I attended in Outlook a few days ago, the First Annual 
Youth Business Excellence Awards. 
 
The evening was set up to recognize the group business 
planning achievements of students from both the Beechy High 
School at the town of Beechy, and the Lutheran Collegiate 
Bible Institute in Outlook. The program was developed this past 
year by the Mid Sask Community Futures Development 
Corporation as a way to encourage students to develop a 
business plan. 
 
The first year of the program had 18 students from the 2 schools 
taking part in the group business plan category. They submitted 
eight different business plans and on the awards night three of 
the eight plans were selected for top awards — first prize being 
$200, second prize 100, and $50 for third. 
 
Nicole Lay from the LCBI (Lutheran Collegiate Bible Institute) 
and Ron Hromec from Beechy were the mentors for the 
students. 
 

First place was awarded to grade 11 students Dani Ringrose, 
Melayna Covey, and Stacey Jansen of Beechy. Second place 
was awarded to Grade 10 students Claire Peacock, Leslie 
Patkau of LCBI in Outlook. Third place honours went to Grade 
11 students Sonja Gell and Derek Mitchell of Outlook. 
 
I believe that the remarkable efforts to develop and succeed in 
business was evident in the awards which were presented on 
Saturday evening. We must work hard to encourage our young 
students to develop new business initiatives and to keep those 
initiatives right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
congratulating the remarkable student achievements from the 
students at Beechy and Outlook. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

University of Saskatchewan Construction Plans 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
head of this member’s statement says University of 
Saskatchewan construction plans approaching half a billion 
dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with Saskatchewan’s centenary in sight, 
University of Saskatchewan is being upgraded, retrofitted, and 
expanded. Colin Tennent, director of architecture and 
engineering services in the facilities management division says, 
“It’s an unprecedented volume of construction and renovation.” 
 
The Canadian Light Source Synchrotron has stimulated a rash 
of upgrades and new projects. These projects will also attract 
highly qualified new faculty which will make it easier to recruit 
new students. 
 
The addition of the Engineering Building to accommodate the 
Chemical Engineering department represents $12 million of the 
original expenditures. Healthier, safer lab facilities will be 
constructed in keeping with the vision of a research-intensive 
university. 
 
The Geology Building is getting a modernized natural sciences 
library valued at $1.2 million and a brand new Kinesiology 
facility is under construction to replace the old phys-ed 
building. 
 
Some of the other improvements include a MRI (magnetic 
resonance imaging) device and a new oncology facility. The 
College of Nursing, Medicine, School of Physical Therapy will 
be getting to the tune of $200 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is further example of the achievements which 
are helping the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) become a 
leading centre of research and innovation. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Claims by Government Agencies 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the minister of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) over there. 
 
On May 27, May 27 I asked the minister in the House if SGI 
had hired Robinson Investigations to run surveillance or 
otherwise investigate Saskatchewan residents who make 
no-fault insurance claims. He said he had to take the question 
under advisement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is now June 6 and again I pose the question to the NDP. Has 
the NDP government, through SGI, hired Robinson or in fact 
any other private investigation firm to run surveillance or 
investigate Saskatchewan residents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I appreciate the question. I’ve been advised that in fact 
they do not. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
next question is for the minister responsible for the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. On May 27, I asked the minister whether 
or not WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) hires private 
investigators to run surveillance or otherwise investigate WCB 
claimants. The minister said and I quote: 
 

. . . I will take it under advisement and I will take notice of 
the question. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, several days have passed and I hope the 
minister has the answer. 
 
Once again, to the minister: does the Workers’ Compensation 
Board hire private investigators to run surveillance or 
investigate WCB claimants? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My next question is 
for the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Does the Department of Social Services hire private 
investigation companies to run surveillance or investigate 
Saskatchewan residents who receive social assistance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, the Department of Social 
Services has its own unit which does reviews. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
1996, Virginia Cook of Griffin, Saskatchewan was injured in an 
automobile accident and has been dealing with SGI ever since. 
 
Earlier this year, she requested her personal injury claim file 
from SGI. In her file, she was shocked to see expense bills of a 
private investigator including expenses for a video. She asked 
her SGI rep what these bills were for and it was confirmed that 
SGI had hired a private investigator to run surveillance and to 
videotape her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this contradicts everything the minister just said 
about what type of investigations they run and their use of 
private investigators. Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the 
people of Saskatchewan what criteria is used by SGI to 
determine the use of surveillance and to determine whether they 
videotape? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I’m not familiar with that specific case and I don’t want to 
comment about it here in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would say, Mr. Speaker . . . I would ask that the public 
questions many things that these opposition members raise. I 
said, and I’ll say clearly again, I’ve been advised that SGI does 
not use any private investigating firm, nor have they used 
Robinson’s or any surveillance of any sort, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
bill submitted by the private investigator to SGI, there was an 
expense listed for the video. Virginia Cook asked SGI if she 
had been videotaped and, in a letter dated March 5, the SGI rep 
said, and I quote: 
 

Our special investigative unit did do an activity check on 
you. To my knowledge, there was no videotaping done. 

 
Yet in this same . . . this is the same SGI rep who personally 
talked with the investigator and who authorized the payments to 
him. And in the PI’s (private investigator) transcript, it names 
the SGI rep as having regular contact with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the video. If, as the minister just stated, 
video surveillance . . . Is video surveillance an accepted practice 
of SGI and why did SGI lie to Ms. Cook and deny that they 
were doing video surveillance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Again all I can say, I can’t comment on the specific 
case but I have been advised by my corporation that they do not 
hire or employ any private investigating agencies, Mr. Speaker, 
for the business of surveilling individuals or individual cases, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister for SGI told the media that there are about 6,500 auto 
injury claims each year in Saskatchewan and only between 8 
and 10 of those claims are investigated in depth. 
 
Virginia Cook was injured in 1996 and had been working 
through the SGI injury program. SGI was only paying Ms. 
Cook to go to treatment. She was not on income replacement. 
Yet in the year 2000, SGI suddenly determined they needed to 
do an activity report on her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the majority of the transcript of the surveillance 
and the video is about people other than Ms. Cook. It’s about 
her family, it’s about her landlord, and other people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the minister justify this harassment and 
invasion of privacy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well again I’ll repeat, I will not comment on the specific case. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to this issue before and so have 
officials of SGI out in the rotunda in front of the media, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The member is correct when she says there are some 6,500 
cases that are . . . that come before as a part of . . . come before 
SGI as a part of injury claims, Mr. Speaker. As a result of that, 
I’m advised that between 8 and 10 are investigated in depth but 
that’s done internally, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not done by any . . . 
it’s not done, I’m advised, Mr. Speaker, by any private 
investigating agencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, we clearly seem to be getting 
mixed messages here. On May 27 the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) admitted that SGI does investigations but the NDP 
insisted these investigations were only done if there was 
suspicion of fraud. And the minister responsible for SGI told 
this Assembly and I quote: 
 

. . . these checks are not routine . . . These checks would be 
done in situations where it is believed that there has been 
insurance fraud . . . where stolen property or stolen vehicles 
would be involved . . . 

 
Then the Minister of Justice said, and I quote: 
 

. . . There is no wholesale, willy-nilly investigation of 
people in this province. 
 
If fraud is suspected . . . if crimes are suspected, then surely 
it’s proper that this government take every step (in order, 
step that) it can . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to Virginia Cook and her 
family what fraudulent activity, what crime she was suspected 
of committing to warrant SGI carrying out a video surveillance 
on her? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me point 
out that the NDP are located at 1122 Saskatchewan Drive. 
They’re not involved in this okay, Mr. Speaker? So it’s not the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the corporation 
again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much again, Mr. 
Speaker. Again I say that look, if there are situations, Mr. 
Speaker, that require investigation, it’s done internally, I’m 
advised, by SGI themselves — the investigation unit, Mr. 
Speaker. Injury claims, some 6,500 annually, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
advised that between 8 and 10, Mr. Speaker, are investigated in 
depth, but it’s done internally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have the bills from the private investigator under contract. It is 
not paid by the . . . working for SGI. It is not internal, it is 
contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Virginia Cook feels like SGI through her . . . 
through their invasive actions has taken her life away from her. 
She feels angry; she feels violated; she is shocked that her 
privacy was invaded for no valid reason. 
 
The last sentence in the private investigator’s transcript of 
surveillance is that the SGI rep is satisfied for now and the file 
is closed. But Virginia Cook is wondering if she is now under 
investigation again. Has the file been reopened? 
 
Her life has changed, Mr. Speaker. She’s afraid to go out alone. 
She keeps her curtains drawn in her home, and she sits with her 
back to the wall and she constantly looks over her shoulder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much more money is SGI going to spend on 
surveillance and harassment of Virginia Cook before they leave 
her alone and give her her life back? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say 
categorically that SGI does not go around harassing and 
surveilling any members of the public, Mr. Speaker. They 
absolutely do not do that, Mr. Speaker, and they will not do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in cases where there are injury claims — I’ve said, 
some 6,500 across the province annually, roughly — SGI, the 
corporation, Mr. Speaker, will investigate in depth, Mr. 
Speaker, some 8 or 10 annually I’m advised, Mr. Speaker. But 
they do not . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, to reassure the public of 
Saskatchewan, SGI and our corporation, Mr. Speaker, here in 
this province, will not go around harassing and surveilling any 
members of the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is clearly not internal. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a private investigator. Who is advising the 
minister? Is the minister in charge of this department? Or who 
really is running the show and who is responsible for SGI? Will 
the minister either admit his incompetence or fire the 
incompetent people that he has working for him? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well first of all let me say, Mr. Speaker, 
if she’s suggesting that the minister should be the person that’s 
involved in approving investigations, Mr. Speaker, maybe that’s 
the way they used to run it, Mr. Speaker, but that’s not how it’s 
going to be run on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say again, I’ll . . . Mr. Speaker, I will advise the member 
that in a majority of the cases, Mr. Speaker, some 6,500, there 
are only 8 or 10, Mr. Speaker, that are investigated, and that’s 
done internally. I will commit to that member, Mr. Speaker, that 
I will look into this case to find out what’s going on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
question period on May 27, SGI officials and the minister 
responsible for SGI told the media very specifically that 
Robinson Investigations had done work for SGI but it was 
limited only to the delivery of warrants. That’s what he said, 
Mr. Speaker. When the media asked if any other private 
investigation firms were used, SGI officials said no. 
 
But clearly SGI hired Stan Montgomery, a PI from Moose Jaw, 
to follow Virginia Cook and her husband over a 13-day period 
at a cost of over $3,500. Mr. Speaker, why did the minister and 
SGI lie about their . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. According 
to the rules of this Assembly, the member knows full well that 
there are certain words that are not to be used. I would ask him 
at this time to stand and withdraw the words . . . the phrases 
including the word lie, and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With regards to 
what you said, I withdraw the word lie and other words such as 
prevaricate and we’ll let the people of Saskatchewan decide . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
please. Order. Once again I would just ask the member . . . 
Order. I would just ask the member unequivocally to withdraw 
the statement and apologize to the House for use of the word. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that word and 
apologize to the House for using that word. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
not much more that I can say. I’ll look into that specific case, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do say again, Mr. Speaker, that SGI has advised me, Mr. 
Speaker, that they do not hire or employ any private 
investigating firm for the issue of surveillance, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 28, this 
same minister, on the John Gormley show . . . the minister was 
asked, do you use a PI company in those seven or eight cases 
where you do an in-depth investigation. The minister said, and I 
quote: “No, we do not.” 
 
Mr. Gormley then asked: so there’s no role for PIs to get 
background data on people? And the minister said, and I quote: 
 

I don’t believe that would be the case, John. I mean I’m 
quite sure in saying there’s not a role for them. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister mislead the people of 
Saskatchewan in that instance when it’s obvious that SGI does 
hire private investigators to investigate the people who put 
claims in to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s not much 
more that I can add to what I’ve already said, Mr. Speaker. Let 
me say again to the people of Saskatchewan, the corporation, 
SGI, does not go around harassing and surveilling people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have been advised by the corporation — I don’t know if I can 
be any clearer than this, Mr. Speaker — I’ve been advised by 
the corporation they do not employ private investigating firms, 
Mr. Speaker, for surveilling any of the public, Mr. Speaker. If 
there is an issue — I’ve described in some 6,500 cases, 8 or 10 
of them require further and in-depth investigation — that’s done 
in-house, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some time ago, Mr. 
Speaker, Leader-Post, Regina, Wednesday, October 1, 1997, 
Lingenfelter apologizes. Why did he apologize, Mr. Speaker? 
Because SGI was investigating at that time and Mr. 
Lingenfelter said it wasn’t happening. 
 
I think it’s time that minister gets up and apologizes to this 
province for the shoddy way in which he’s running his 
department, for the shoddy way in which he answers questions 
about the surveillance that his department is doing on the 
people of this province. 
 
Will he get up in his place and do that now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well often you 
have to question the information that is provided. But I will say 
to the members of this House, Mr. Speaker — if they’ll listen, 
Mr. Speaker — I will say that if I am incorrect in this, I will 
apologize, Mr. Speaker. I will absolutely apologize. 
 
But I’m advised by the corporation, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
no private investigating firms, Mr. Speaker, who are employed 
in the business of surveillance . . . 
 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 

Cost of Fighting Forest Fires 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
with the unusually high number of forest fires that we saw in 
this province this spring, people are concerned that the 
government has adequate resources in order to be able to make 
sure that they protect the resource, to make sure that their 
communities are protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is very simple. What 
has the cost of firefighting operations to date been in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report to that 
member and to the House that the cost of fighting forest fires up 
until June 1 was approximately $17 million. We don’t keep 
track of costs on a day-to-day basis, but I want to say this, Mr. 
Speaker. There are 1,420 employees, permanent and part-time, 
who are fighting fires in this province and it’s a very serious 
situation. And, Mr. Speaker, they are doing a good job, they are 
protecting lives, they are protecting property, they are fighting 
fires. 
 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, is interested in fighting the 
fires; we’re not interested in playing politics about forest fires 
like that member and that party opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that is the 
first indication from this government as to what the cost to date 
has been. 
 
And I do want to agree with the minister, Mr. Speaker. The 
people that are out there that are fighting the fires are doing an 
absolutely fantastic job and they should be congratulated for 
doing that job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — But, Mr. Speaker, we all know that there 
is added pressure. The minister of SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) has admitted that the 
department is stretched to the limit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, are they going to depend on their non-existent 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund to cover any excess costs that 
may be met as a result of the high number of fires this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to say to that member and that party 
over there, Mr. Speaker, that we have had years in this province 
in the last 10 years where the cost of fighting forest fires has 
been close to $100 million. And we have paid for that, Mr. 
Speaker, under difficult circumstances. And we are going to 
devote the resources, financial, personnel, and otherwise, that 
need to be devoted to fight the fires. 
 

We’ll be doing that, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be playing politics. 
And while they’re playing politics they can talk about 
non-existent funds all they want, Mr. Speaker. But what I have 
to say to that member is he should listen to what Bruce 
Johnstone says, in the Leader-Post, who says, “the concept of a 
fiscal shock absorber (referring to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
that that party says doesn’t exist) makes good sense.” Michael 
Rushton, of the University of Regina, says, “There is nothing 
hidden here . . . ” 
 
And that Finance critic, by the way, who’s yelling from his 
chair, Mr. Speaker, what did he say about these funds? In 
Hansard May 15, page 464 . . . 1464, he said when I challenged 
him on this kind of nonsense . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member’s time has elapsed, 
I’m afraid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Use of Wildlife Habitat Lands for Grazing 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the last couple of 
weeks I’ve had numerous communications with the Minister of 
Environment asking that our wildlife habitat lands be opened to 
grazing. 
 
As you know, Ducks Unlimited has already made a similar 
announcement about their lands. We now have APAS 
(Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan) saying 
that we could have as many as 800,000 of our cattle sold off 
this year — a massive sell-off. 
 
And one small thing our government can do immediately is 
open wildlife habitat lands to grazing. Is the minister ready to 
make that announcement? 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite and to the House that we have, in the last several 
months, had discussions with a number of people about opening 
up some additional lands again. 
 
Last year, as the member opposite will remember that we talked 
with the Ducks Unlimited corporation in this province and 
asked them to open up some additional lands. Last year in this 
province, SERM opened up around 10,000 acres to livestock 
producers and ranchers in this province. 
 
And we can announce today, which will be announced later this 
day or tomorrow morning, that we’ll be opening up again, for 
ranchers and producers in this province, 10,000 acres in order 
that they might be able to use for grazing lands in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the government 
is finally moving. 
 
What is the percentage of lands they are not opening up? And 
also, will there be any charge to ranchers? And what about the 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

need to have electric fences on these lands? And why has it 
taken a whole month in the current drought situation for the 
minister to get around to making this announcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that these conversations and these discussions 
have not only taken place this year. These conversations and 
discussions took part . . . took place last year. 
 
And we’re going to use and implement the same practice that 
we did last year in allowing and ensuring that producers have 
access to lands in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I wanted to say to the member opposite, he tells us on a 
regular basis that both he and the Leader of the Liberal Party 
have direct access to the federal government about getting 
money for Saskatchewan producers and farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
And I read this in the newspapers and I see it on the television 
set. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, being the Liberal . . . 
lone Liberal representative for Saskatchewan, show me what 
you’ve done in the last six or eight months . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Would the member just direct 
his questions or his comments through the Chair, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want the member from 
North Battleford to rise in his chair or to go out and tell the 
media what he’s done for producers in Saskatchewan as the 
Liberal member from Saskatchewan. Because I can tell you 
what the member from North Battleford has done, Mr. Speaker, 
for farmers in this province — absolutely nothing . . . or the 
Leader of the Opposition have done absolutely nothing for 
farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Who’s been leading the campaign for producers in 
Saskatchewan today? This Premier here, Mr. Speaker, and this 
government on this side of the House. That’s who’s been 
leading the campaign for farmers in Saskatchewan today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 71, The Environmental Management and Protection 
Act, 2002 be introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 72, 
The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2002 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Status of the Artists Act/ 
Loi sur le statut de l’artiste 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 73, 
The Status of the Artists Act now be introduced and read the 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
74, The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Amendment 
Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
on behalf of the government to stand and convert for debates 
returnable questions 262 through 265 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 262 to 265 converted to orders for 
return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses for questions 266 through 271 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for 266 to 271 inclusive have been 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand and convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 272 converted to debates returnable . . . 
motions for debates returnable. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to table a written response for question no. 273 on behalf of the 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 273 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — . . . that we convert for debates returnable 274, 
275, 276, and 277. Pardon me, all the way through to 281. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 274 through to 281 converted to 
motions for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
After my comments, I’ll be moving second reading of The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been over a century since the plough met 
Saskatchewan’s prairie. At first, the transition from prairie to 
farm land was slow. But after World War II, farmers cultivated 
more land and grew more crops. And often, Mr. Speaker, 
marginal land was cleared, ploughed, and used to grow grains 
and oilseeds. 
 
Southern Saskatchewan now has one of the most modified 
landscapes in the world. Over the past century, we have seen 
more than 75 per cent of our natural area in the agricultural 
region being used for farms and other developments such as 
roads, towns, and cities. And over the years the farm land has 
given us bountiful crops. It has also become home to wildlife 
populations which weren’t previously found in the province, 
such as whitetail deer, raccoon, red fox, and many small birds. 
 
This habitat provides food, water, and shelter to more than 400 
species of wildlife. Much of the remaining wildlife habitat is on 
Crown land. These natural areas are very important for 
maintaining existing wildlife populations. 
 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres 
of natural upland and natural wetland in the agriculture area. In 
fact The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act recognizes and 
supports some agricultural uses, and oil and gas activities. 
 
Much of the land under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is 
leased to cattle producers who use it for grazing or haying. I 
want to emphasize that The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
designation has no effect on the lessee’s right to continue 
leasing the land. 
 
Over the years producers who lease The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act land have proven to be good stewards, and 
wildlife is benefiting. We recognize that it has been the lessees’ 
good stewardship of the land that has maintained these very 
important natural areas. 
 
The philosophy of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is to 
conserve wildlife habitat while allowing traditional uses. For 
example, oil and gas companies may explore and drill but must 
ensure that they do very little damage to the surface. 
 
The amendment to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is a 
matter of taking a bit of land out of The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act and adding a bit back in. The amendment to The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act will allow the removal of 743 
acres. 
 
Some parcels of land included in the original Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act were already developed so much they had 
marginal value to wildlife but were of huge value to producers. 
Agreements with some of the producers involved will see us 
swapping some of this marginal wildlife land for high quality 

wildlife habitat. We will exchange 743 acres of marginal 
wildlife land for 320 acres of high quality wildlife habitat. 
 
This is a good move that will continue to meet the needs of the 
producers involved and to preserve important habitat. We are 
continuing to work to preserve habitat for our birds, fish, and 
animals. 
 
We’ve also used the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund to 
buy 6,741 acres of prime wildlife habitat. The Representative 
Areas Network, or RAN, is also part of the province’s efforts to 
conserve habitat. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, 12.4 million acres of prime wildlife 
habitats are included in RAN. When we have completed the 
RAN process, there will be 15 million acres of protected 
wildlife habitat. That is 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 10 per cent of 
the province’s land. 
 
Actions the province has undertaken under RAN: the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund and The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act have put Saskatchewan at the forefront of 
national and international habitat in ecosystem conservation. 
 
Wise, multiple uses of public land can curb habitat loss while 
accommodating the interests of agriculture, wildlife, and the 
public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Act changes the boundaries of a number of habitat areas. 
I’m not sure whether those changes though, Mr. Speaker, are 
increasing or decreasing the habitat area. 
 
The habitat, Mr. Speaker, is very important to the wildlife of all 
this province. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to people both 
in rural areas, so that they may enjoy the wildlife and the 
benefits thereof, and it’s important, Mr. Speaker, to the people 
of urban Saskatchewan, so that they can enjoy the communing 
with nature, Mr. Speaker — seeing the mammals, the birds, the 
fauna that’s out there, and the flora that we all enjoy in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And something that a good many of the tourists in 
Saskatchewan that travel both No. 1 and the Yellowhead 
Highway seem to miss. They whiz through the province, Mr. 
Speaker, from side to side saying, gee, isn’t it flat here, and they 
miss, Mr. Speaker, our most beautiful areas because they 
simply don’t stop and look. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we do have wonderful flora and fauna in this 
province and we need to learn to appreciate it. 
 
But in doing so, Mr. Speaker, in increasing the amount of 
habitat that is available, particularly to wildlife, to large 
mammals to waterfowl, Mr. Speaker, we also create a problem 
— a problem for our agriculture producers. 
 
(14:45) 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

They suffer the depredations of that increased either herd or 
flock, Mr. Speaker. And yet this government is cutting the 
compensation that is paid for that depredation. And fact is, if 
you look, Mr. Speaker, under the Agriculture department 
budgets this year, they have eliminated both the Big Game 
Compensation Fund and the waterfowl compensation fund, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So while on one hand it’s good to increase the number of 
wildlife we have in this province, Mr. Speaker, it should not . . . 
the cost of that should not be borne totally by the agriculture 
producers of this province. That cost should be borne by all of 
those that enjoy our wildlife, our flora, and our fauna. And 
that’s both rural residents and urban residents, Mr. Speaker. So 
therefore that compensation should come from the General 
Revenue Fund, not from the hip pocket of the farmers who own 
the land on which the big game animals and the waterfowl are 
feeding. And that is exactly what is happening today under this 
government. 
 
The minister talked about marginal lands being put to the 
plough and that was indeed the case. But there was a reason for 
that, Mr. Speaker. The reason for that was that under the 
Canadian Wheat Board, to be able to sell your crops, an 
agricultural producer had to maximize the number of acres he 
could claim to have under cultivation. It was the Canadian 
Wheat Board’s fault, Mr. Speaker, that a good many of the 
farmers ploughed up that marginal land so that they could 
increase the number of acres they had and thereby sell the 
commodities they had for sale. It was the failure, Mr. Speaker, 
of the supporters of the Canadian Wheat Board that caused 
those marginal lands, Mr. Speaker, to be cultivated. 
 
Because there are a number of lands, Mr. Speaker, in question 
here, there needs to be a determination on how that is going to 
affect the neighbouring properties when these change. How 
much depredation will take place upon the neighbouring lands 
by the increased wildlife? And, Mr. Speaker, the minister has 
not made any comments in that direction, has not given any 
indication that the government is prepared to pay compensation. 
That needs to be considered further, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore at this time I would move we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move the 
second reading of The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 
2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act is being amended to accomplish the goals 
of reducing provincial government involvement in local 
decision making, enabling the introduction of new property 
assessment methods, and increasing the reporting and 
transparency requirements for municipal, water, and sewer 
operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to broaden the scope of 
municipal authority respond to municipal sector requests for 
more municipal autonomy in matters that are truly local in 

nature and do not involve an overriding provincial interest. 
Many of these amendments address specific issues raised by 
municipal stakeholders. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill will provide 
municipalities with greater flexibility to deal with local issues, 
streamline administrative processes, and enhance the 
decision-making capacity of municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business and commercial sector has lobbied 
for improvements to commercial property valuation for many 
years, including the use of the income approach. Enabling the 
use of new assessment methods should enhance equity within 
commercial property classes and will place Saskatchewan’s 
assessment system on a par with those in other jurisdictions; 
such as Alberta, BC (British Columbia), Manitoba, and Ontario. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill dealing with property 
valuation will remove the current legislative prohibition on 
income based methods and enable the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and the other assessing 
authorities to work towards the implementation of the income 
approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) and the municipal sector, as the drivers of the 
assessment system, are now in a position to manage the process, 
not the province. Current provisions will be expanded regarding 
the collection of assessment information and there will be 
increased consequences of non-compliance in providing the 
necessary information. Additional measures will be provided to 
safeguard and keep confidential, potentially sensitive 
information. As well, councils will be allowed to open the 
assessment roll year-round and refund fees for . . . refund fees 
for deficit appeal notices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments for enhancing local decision 
making and introducing new property assessment methods have 
been reviewed by SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and the other municipal stakeholders. The 
government has undertaken extensive discussions on the 
legislative issues regarding the implementation of the income 
approach with the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency and the four major cities. 
 
Both SAMA and the city mayors support in principle 
implementation of the income approach by 2009. How quickly 
implementation takes place is up to the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and the cities. Our recent 
budget, Mr. Speaker, had funds to assist SAMA in this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to these amendments, an amendment 
that increases reporting and transparency requirements for 
municipal water and sewer operations is proposed as part of 
government’s long-term, safe drinking water strategy. 
Municipalities will be required to publicly disclose their utility 
rate policies and strategy; the complete, final operations of the 
utility including transfers to general revenue; and the creation of 
a long-term financial plan that includes strategies for the 
replacement of aging infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although, as a result of these amendments, 
municipalities will have to provide more information to the 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

 

public, an essential element of the government’s strategy is for 
the public to know how their water systems are being managed 
to ensure public safety. This is consistent with the principle of 
municipal accountability to the public as opposed to the 
provincial government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, passage of this Bill will increase municipal 
autonomy and authority while reducing provincial oversight. 
Passage of this Bill will continue the process of providing 
municipalities with greater political independence to manage 
their own affairs and will broaden the scope of local authority 
and decision-making capacity balanced by increased public 
accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, passage of this Bill will enable the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and the assessing authorities 
to work towards implementation of assessment methods at their 
own pace and to determine when and how the methods are 
introduced through the assessment manual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is truly my pleasure today to move second 
reading of Bill No. 54, The Urban Municipality Amendment 
Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
speak on Act No. 54 to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 
1984. 
 
The minister has raised a number of questions and concerns in 
this Act. And the number one concern that has to be highlighted 
is the history of what the senior governments have been doing 
as far as off-loading services and underfunding municipalities. 
 
The federal government has done that and in turn the provincial 
government has underfunded the municipalities in such a way 
that it leaves the municipalities in a situation where they have 
control, they have the laws to do things, but they have no 
funding to actually carry out their duties. 
 
And it’s of great concern that the funding aspect is as important 
or more important as changing rules and regulations to give 
municipalities more funding. And off-loading onto the 
municipalities has been a serious concern for quite some time 
and it increases the taxes at the local level while the provincial 
government continues to off-load their responsibilities onto the 
municipality. 
 
The minister spoke about the assessment method in SAMA. 
And as we know, SAMA’s been basically in upheaval for quite 
some time and hopefully they have got their house in order and 
have the urban municipalities onside as far as the operation of 
SAMA is concerned. 
 
When we speak of the method of assessing, the minister speaks 
of the income on the property — there’s a number of questions 
concerning that. What is the income going to be based on — 
actually what the land generates or is it based on a lease rate or 
the activities that is on the land? 
 
So there’s a number of questions concerning that particular item 
as well. And it’s a matter of the owner leasing the land to 

someone who has a factory or has a business on it, and what is 
that income really based on? 
 
Another area which I have a bit more personal involvement 
with, is the area around the . . . concerning the resort area 
around Turtle Lake. Having requested that the lake itself be 
considered a common boundary within the meaning of the 
section, and so on and so forth, I have a number of people that 
have talked to me that live at Turtle Lake or have cabins at 
Turtle Lake, and they do not want to belong to a larger 
municipality. There are certain people in that area that is 
forcing, forcing the issue and these citizens are quite happy with 
the structure that they have right now. 
 
And it’s of great concern to me and to those individuals living 
at Turtle Lake that they be consulted and have a voice in any 
decision that is made concerning amalgamation. And whenever 
we talk about amalgamation we always consider what the 
government tried to do as far as forced amalgamation with the 
rural municipalities in the past. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of questions, concerns here, 
and we will have our critic for municipal governments take a 
very close look at this. And we, as legislators on this side of the 
House, will consult with the stakeholders and the citizens and 
. . . before we proceed with this Bill any further. 
 
And so at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move the 
second reading of The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 
2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, similar to The Urban Municipality Amendment 
Act, 2002, read just a little earlier, this Act is also being 
amended to reduce provincial government involvement in local 
decision making, to enable the introduction of new property 
assessment methods, and to increase the reporting and 
transparency requirements for municipal water and sewer 
operations. 
 
Similarly, the amendments proposed in this Bill will provide 
municipalities with greater flexibility to deal with local issues, 
streamline their administrative processes, and enhance the 
decision-making capacity of municipalities. 
 
As well, the amendments proposed in this Bill dealing with 
property valuation will remove the current legislative 
prohibition on income-based methods and enable the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, or SAMA, 
and the other assessing authorities to work towards the 
implementation of the income approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments for enhancing local decision 
making and introducing new property assessment methods have 
been reviewed by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and therefore we . . . the consultation has been 
undertaken with that association. 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

The government shared drafting instructions with the municipal 
associations and other stakeholders so that they had the 
opportunity to analyze the proposed amendments in greater 
detail. The direct consultations again prove to be a good basis 
for achieving a consensus on virtually all of these amendments. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Similar to The Urban Municipal Amendment Act, 2002 
introduced earlier, the government has undertaken extensive 
discussions on the legislative issues regarding the 
implementation of the income approach with the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency. 
 
Various umbrella groups within the business and commercial 
sector, the municipal associations, and assessing authorities 
were as well sent drafting instructions to both refine the 
wording of the provisions and ensure support for the 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the specific changes to this legislation are 
worth highlighting. And I’d like to do that. 
 
First of all, the property tax exemption has been extended 
regarding agricultural improvements to include leased storage 
space at producer-owned inland grain terminals. Secondly, rural 
municipalities will have the authority to hold joint elections 
with school divisions or urban municipalities when election 
days are only days apart to prevent voter confusion. 
 
Next, councils will have the option of applying any outstanding 
custom work charges to property taxes as opposed to requiring 
councils to do so. This is consistent with the provisions in the 
urban and northern Acts. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, amendments will simplify and enhance 
the authority to provide grants to persons as well as 
corporations and businesses, consistent once again with similar 
provisions in The Urban Municipality Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, with The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, passage of this Bill will increase municipal 
autonomy and authority while reducing provincial oversight. 
Passage of this Bill will continue the process of providing 
municipalities with greater political independence to manage 
their own affairs and will broaden the scope of local authority 
and decision-making capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, passage of this Bill will enable the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency and the assessing authorities 
to work towards implementation of assessment methods at their 
own pace and to determine when and how the methods are 
introduced through the assessment manual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 55, The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as my colleague from Redberry pointed out in The Urban 
Municipality Act that was up earlier — the amendments to it — 
this is very much the same. Problems that a large part of the 
municipalities are facing deal with the downloading by this 
government onto the municipalities, onto the property taxpayers 

of those municipalities. 
 
So while you may make adjustments, Mr. Speaker, in how the 
assessments are being done, it still means, Mr. Speaker, that the 
same people are paying the bill. That it has no relationship, Mr. 
Speaker, is what’s happening — no relationship to the ability to 
pay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister has talked about making changes allowing it to go 
to income based assessment, Mr. Speaker. But again, what kind 
of assessment is he talking about? Is he talking about whatever 
that piece of property might generate as far as rents are 
concerned? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, right now across rural Saskatchewan you 
can rent a lot of agricultural property for paying the taxes. So 
does that now become the value of the property — that its tax 
rate is 5, 10, $20 an acre, and that is now the value of the 
property for tax assessment? 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, is it based on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well the minister hollers across, productivity. That’s what the 
old assessment was based on, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t based on 
the income; it was based on a formula including the 
productivity of the land. It dealt with what kind of land it was, 
how much alkali there was, how many . . . how much rocks 
there were, how many trees and bushes and sloughs there were. 
On farm land, Mr. Speaker, it dealt with the productivity of the 
land, and that was the assessment base. 
 
But now when you switch to an income base, it’s . . . where is 
that income measured? Is it measured on the productivity of the 
land, of the items that were grown on that land? So the changes 
when one year you grow 20 bushels to the acre wheat and the 
price is $5 an acre, so now your income is $100 an acre, and 
next year — with this government in power and the Liberals in 
Ottawa ignoring the trade subsidies — the price of wheat is $2, 
so now the income is $40 for that same 20 bushels, that’s now 
the value of the land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How often does it change? How often are these reassessments 
going to be done, Mr. Speaker? Are they going to be done on an 
annual basis? Are they going to be done on a five-year basis? 
Are they going to be done on a 10-year basis, Mr. Speaker? If 
you’re unlucky enough to happen to hit a high productive year 
with a high price, for the next 10 years of drought you’re now 
faced with paying these high taxes. How is this going to work, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Those are some of the questions that the minister needs to be 
able to provide in an answer and he hasn’t done so, Mr. 
Speaker, in his initial address on explaining how this Bill is 
going to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also talks about restructuring. They’ve 
dropped the word amalgamation. They got burned a little bit in 
pushing amalgamation around the province, Mr. Speaker, so 
now they’ve changed the word to restructuring. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it talks about two municipalities 
restructuring to become one municipality, you know. And what 
I find kind of ironic in here, Mr. Speaker, is the minister is 
encouraging people, municipalities, to do restructuring and then 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

 

it says that the municipality shall apply to the minister to issue 
an order incorporating new municipalities or municipal 
districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what it should say is the municipalities shall 
inform the minister to issue an order incorporating new 
municipalities. The choice isn’t the minister’s to make, and 
that’s what it says when you apply to the minister, asking him 
please, Mr. Minister, will you allow us to incorporate. If two 
municipalities want to incorporate and form one, they should 
inform the minister they’re doing so and he should make the 
proper things happen to allow it to happen. 
 
That’s not what the Bill implies, Mr. Speaker. It implies that 
you have to go to senior government, to the minister, and ask 
permission. Can we please, mother? Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
municipalities should have the jurisdictional power to make that 
decision for themselves, and it’s simply the minister’s duty then 
to make sure it happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in another section of the Bill — and this one I’m 
not quite exactly sure why you would do this — but it says not 
more than once a day and at the end of the last working day of 
each month, deposit into any bank or credit union designated by 
the council, all collections received by the administrator. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s wrong with making your deposits 
more than once a day? Why does it say not more than once a 
day? Is it too far to walk down to the corner of the street to 
make your deposit at noon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I 
think the people who should be embarrassed by this, Mr. 
Speaker, is the minister and the government. 
 
Why would you impede somebody if they’ve had 20 people 
come into the office to make their taxes payment, which could 
easily be 50 to $100,000, why wouldn’t you want to put that 
money in the bank as soon as possible? Why are you forced to 
only do it once a day? Why are you forced to keep it in your 
office overnight, Mr. Speaker? Why? What sense does it 
possibly make to say you can’t make your deposits more than 
once a day? It’s just inane, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is making a number of changes in 
this Act and the last example is one, is just one of those, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many things in this Bill that need to 
be seriously looked at and questioned — need more explanation 
from this minister, Mr. Speaker, because he provided none; he 
provided fluff in his speech, Mr. Speaker — that at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again, 
this time to move the second reading of The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, similar to the urban and rural municipal 
amendment Acts read earlier, this Act is also being amended to 

reduce provincial government involvement in local decision 
making, to enable the introduction of new property assessment 
methods, and to increase the reporting and transparency 
requirements for municipal water and sewer operations. 
 
Similarly, the amendments proposed in this Bill will provide 
municipalities with greater flexibility to deal with local issues 
as well as streamline administrative processes and enhance the 
decision-making capacity of municipalities. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill 
dealing with property valuation will remove the current 
legislative prohibition on income-based methods and enable the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency and other 
assessing authorities to work towards the implementation of the 
income approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments for enhancing local decision 
making and introducing new property assessment methods have 
been reviewed with the Saskatchewan Association of Northern 
Communities. 
 
As I noted in both the urban and rural Acts read earlier, the 
government has undertaken extensive discussion of the 
legislative issues regarding the implementation of the income 
approach with the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency. As well, various umbrella groups within the business 
and commercial sector, the municipal associations and 
assessing authorities, as well, were sent drafting instructions to 
both refine the wording of the provisions and to ensure support 
for these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I’d like to just underline some specific 
changes to this legislation. An amendment will make The 
Northern Municipalities Act fully applicable to the town of 
Creighton. 
 
The town has requested to be governed for legislative purposes 
by the northern Act rather than the urban Act in order to 
provide wider municipal authority and enhance guarantees with 
respect to issues of inter-municipal co-operation agreements 
and to remove any ambiguity about Creighton’s eligibility for 
funding from the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account. 
 
The requirements for bylaws of a northern hamlet to be subject 
to prior approval of the minister will be removed. And as well, 
towns will be able to increase or decrease the size of council 
according to local desire. Councils will not be able to reduce the 
size of council below two aldermen — alderpersons — ensuring 
town councils will consist of at least three elected members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is consistent with the urban and rural Acts 
read earlier. Passage of it will increase municipal autonomy and 
authority while reducing provincial oversight. Passage of it will 
continue the process of providing municipalities with greater 
political independence to manage their own affairs and will 
broaden the scope of local authority and decision-making 
capacity. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, passage of this Bill will enable the 
Assessment Management Agency and the assessing authorities 
to work towards the implementation of assessment methods at 
their own pace and to determine when and how the methods are 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

introduced through the assessment manual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 56, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
to speak to Bill No. 56, An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has again discussed off-loading more 
powers and responsibilities to the northern municipalities. And 
again we have to make the point that the government has a 
tendency to underfund the municipalities, and it leaves the 
municipalities in a terrible situation where they have the power 
and they have the authority, but they don’t have any funding to 
carry out their duties. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke of water concerns, 
infrastructure. As we know, there’s been a huge problem in this 
province concerning infrastructure and water, and it’s no 
different in the northern communities. Again, the communities 
do not have the financial resources to look after their water 
concerns and like other municipalities in the province, they 
have a great deal of concern about that. 
 
One area, Mr. Speaker, that kind of jumps out at me. It’s kind of 
an area that some members of this House may take very 
seriously, especially the member from Rosthern. In no. 8 
existing provision it says, concerning junked material, it says: 
 

. . . In this section, ‘junked material’ means any 
equipment, electrical appliance or other manufactured item 
or any automobile, tractor, truck, (or) trailer . . . 
 

. . . has no (currently) valid licence plates attached to it 

. . . 
 
And it goes on and on concerning the description of junk 
material. 
 
And I’d just like to make the point that the member of Rosthern 
has a great love for — well let’s put it, some people’s junk is 
other people’s treasure — and the member from Rosthern has a 
great love of restoring vehicles. And I’m sure when he reads 
this Act, he’ll be gravely distressed to hear that this pieces of 
equipment are considered junk. It goes on to say: 
 

. . . is in a rusted, wrecked, partly wrecked, dismantled, 
partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition . . . 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member from Rosthern, this is like 
Christmas. I mean, he just can’t wait to find these vehicles. I 
was wondering if the government would like to have a list of 
these so-called junk material, put it on the Internet, Mr. 
Speaker, put it on the Internet so people like the member from 
Rosthern can go and find and buy this so-called junk pieces of 
equipment and restore them into their beautiful condition they 
once were. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is probably one of the more 
interesting parts of this. And it goes on to say only two out of 
the three amendments or the . . . need to be considered in order 
to call a piece of equipment junk vehicle. 
 
And so I’d like the minister to reconsider this and maybe speak 
with the member from Rosthern behind the bar after, or the 
member from Rosthern can ask some questions to the minister 
concerning this so-called junk equipment. And I know there’s 
many other people in the province who would take great 
exception to calling some of these treasures junk equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know there was a number of other 
provisions in the Act, and I would just like again to speak about 
the assessment manual that is being proposed. The manual . . . 
possibly we can have the listing of this junk equipment put in 
the assessment manual so everyone can see what is out there, 
and we can work at restoring some of these beautiful pieces of 
equipment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister has stated that SAMA has . . . 
the assessment manual has been established by SAMA and . . . 
but we would have to take a close look at what SAMA has 
considered and included in that manual as far as if it takes into 
account all the existing concerns and problems of the northern 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also again like to point out concerning the 
no income-based appraisal portion of the Act, and exactly 
where the minister is going in that area and to really confirm or 
explain that provision so that the general public knows exactly 
where they are. 
 
And again, I would like to speak on the provision of really 
democratic principles of the smaller communities having some 
say and rights in the changes that this amendment to the Act is 
taking place. 
 
So at this time I’d like to adjourn debate and . . . 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 37 — The Medical 
Profession Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise and speak about the provisions in The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
As you undoubtedly know, The Medical Profession Act is an 
Act that governs the legislation for the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons in our province. 
 
And the provisions in this Act depart from the norm to some 
extent in that it is intended that these provisions and these 
amendments are designed to accommodate podiatric surgeons 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

 

in the province. And this is a category of surgeon in the 
province that has not been properly covered under the existing 
legislation and there was some discussion and dilemma as to 
how it should be done. 
 
The Department of Health, I understand, talked to the College 
of Physicians and Surgeons to see if they would be willing to 
consider having amendments made to their legislation in order 
to accommodate the regulation and scope of practice guidelines 
and things of that nature for this special category of surgeons. 
And after some discussion, the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons recognized that this was a rather small group of 
surgical practitioners and that it would make some sense for 
them to consider accepting the responsibility of professional 
oversight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been some concerns raised by the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association because this is somewhat of 
a departure from the standard practice that has existed in the 
past, and some of these concerns have been raised and I think 
that they’re valid ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while there is sort of two opinions on this issue, I 
believe that the overwhelming benefit that would occur because 
of the need for this special category of surgery in the province 
to be properly governed and have oversight on, overrides the 
concerns that have been raised and I’m sure that as time evolves 
this can be accommodated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, podiatric surgery is an advancing category of 
specialty and it’s particularly important in light of the fact that 
our province and many jurisdictions are seeing a rather dramatic 
increase in the onset of diabetes in not only Aboriginal 
populations but non-Aboriginal populations as well. And one of 
the outcomes of diabetes is very often some very severe sores of 
the lower extremities and these are the exact conditions that 
podiatric surgeons are very capable of dealing with 
appropriately. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think in reviewing this legislation, on 
the principle of it, I am certainly, and we in the official 
opposition, are convinced of the compelling argument that this 
is important and necessary. We have confidence that the details 
of how the regulations within the scope of practice and the 
oversight body of the College of Physicians and Surgeons will 
be able to accommodate this very important category. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I have some questions when we 
look at the detailed clauses of the Bill to see exactly how the 
government and the department is going to handle some of the 
issues that have been raised, but at this time I certainly would 
be pleased to, in principle, extend our support to this legislation. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 39 — The 
Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
amendments to this Bill are largely as a result of discussions 
that occurred between the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical 
Association and the College of Physicians and Surgeons, and I 
believe it’s a direct response to a recommendation arising out of 
a coroner’s inquest into the death of Saskatoon resident Darcy 
Ironchild. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that were identified out of that 
inquest is that the current system that we have for identifying 
the patterns of prescription drug utilization, if you like, did not 
properly accommodate and was not possible in order to track 
multiple prescriptions. And so an individual might be able to go 
to a number of different physicians and get similar prescriptions 
and then use them in an appropriate way that could actually 
result in very significant side effects and overdose situations 
occurring. 
 
And so I think the coroner’s inquest strongly recommended that 
the enabling legislation be changed so that these kinds of 
conditions would be minimized or eliminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this is a very important consideration. 
There have been those that have raised issues of privacy and 
things of that nature, but again I think in a very practical, 
pragmatic way this legislation certainly provides an 
overwhelming public good. And as such, the official opposition 
will be pleased to lend its support to this legislation. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 38 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 38 — The 
Paramedics Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise and speak about the issues surrounding the proposed 
Paramedics Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the paramedics in our province provide a very 
vital and essential service in our province. And I believe that 
they are one of the very last health professional groups in the 
province that do not have their own independent professional 
governing legislation. 
 
And this legislation would give them the framework for 
self-regulation as a professional health body in the province. 
And as such, we think that this is an important bit of legislation 
and a very important concept. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve consulted with a number of people on this 
issue. And we think that by and large the information that we 
have back is that they are supportive of the general direction 
and thrust of this legislation. 
 
Certainly we’ve heard from the Paramedic Association and they 
themselves were very interested that this legislation be passed 
in a timely fashion. We’ve heard from the Saskatchewan 
SEMSA (Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services 
Association) organization, the EMS (emergency medical 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

services) owners and operators, and they’re very much 
supportive of it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have to report that there are at least one 
group of people who are feeling that they had something very 
valuable to offer in the discussion of the Bill and the 
Department of Health has not seen fit to consult them, and that 
is the fire chiefs of the province. And as you realize in some 
cities in this province, the actual fire department is very much at 
the lead in terms of providing the EMT (emergency medical 
technician) response in many of our cities. And so I think that 
it’s important that they be recognized and that their comments 
and their concerns be recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t hear them saying that they’re opposed to 
this legislation, but they’re feeling as if the Department of 
Health and the government could have done a more complete 
and thorough job of consulting with the stakeholders that have 
some insight and will be impacted by this legislation by being 
consulted. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to serve notice that I think it was a 
very serious oversight on the behalf of the minister and the 
Department of Health not to give due consideration and 
consultation to the fire chiefs of the province and to get their 
input as to this legislation. There are some specific issues that 
they would like to raise, Mr. Speaker, and I think that in 
principle we can certainly raise those issues on their behalf 
when this Bill is discussed in committee. 
 
In balance, Mr. Speaker, we very much are supportive of our 
paramedics in this province. We’re very supportive and very 
appreciative of the very excellent work that they do. And we 
think that they have developed the expertise and the track 
record to be considered a professional body in the health care 
field who have very much the capability and the commitment to 
self-regulate. And on that basis and principle we support the 
legislation. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 41 — The Health 
Quality Council Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
bit of legislation is a very significant bit of information and bit 
of legislation that I think it’s important to spend a little bit of 
time talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the idea of a Quality Council is an important 
philosophical concept and actually, in terms of health care 
change and health care renewal in Canada, is one of the issues 
that have been talked about really across this country. But I 
believe that this is perhaps the first legislative body that’s being 
constructed in our country and as such it deserves particular 
attention. 
 

In principle I think that no one can disagree with the concept 
that health care has to talk much more about quality and 
perhaps much less about quantity. Very often in our discussions 
and in our debates about the issues surrounding health care, we 
forget that what we have to focus on is the client — the citizen 
of the province who requires quality health care. And we say it 
without really thinking what that means in a very defined way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the past, we very often got bogged down 
into almost a bean-counting exercise of quantity and thought 
that we could deliver better health care if we somehow dealt 
with the quantity issues. And I think, Mr. Speaker, over the last 
while that that has been shown to not really work very 
effectively or efficiently at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the idea of a Quality Council that would try to set 
standards of quality practice and quality delivery of health care 
is a very noble and honourable exercise and endeavour to be 
aspired to. But, Mr. Speaker, I also think that there are certain 
issues that have to be discussed and we have to try to 
understand what is the best way in order to achieve that very 
noble result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation, as I understand it, is really an 
appointment of the minister, and is answerable to the minister 
and can deal with issues that are presented to it and referred to it 
by the minister as well as other issues. And I think that there 
has been and continues to be a very distinct and noticeable 
consolidation of authority and responsibility of the health care 
service delivery in our province in this legislative session — 
and other legislation that’s before the House confirms that as 
well, but that’s a discussion for another day — is a very distinct 
and deliberate consolidation of authority and responsibility in 
the hands of the Department of Health and the minister. 
 
And I think that that is potentially a double-edged sword. On 
one hand there is the possibility or the need to have some 
general direction and some consensus as to what are the 
provincial issues that have to be addressed. But on the other 
hand there has to be some ability for agencies who are looking 
at things to have an arm’s length and a level of independence 
from the Department of Health and the minister. 
 
If we’re going to ask a body to be a Quality Council that are 
independently evaluating how we do things, there has to be a 
level of independence from the department so that this Quality 
Council can truly exercise its work and make its opinions based 
on quantitative, independent analysis. And I think that there are 
some concerns that have been raised on a number of fronts that 
certainly raise concerns about the closeness of the Department 
of Health and the minister’s office to the appointment of the 
board and the rules that the minister will set down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the draft legislation or the legislation also 
basically says that this is an advisory body which, by definition, 
implies that the Department of Health or the minister are not 
obligated to accept the advice in any sort of a way. And again, I 
think that there has to be a methodology for putting more of an 
onus of a responsibility and independence on this Quality 
Council, and more of an onus and responsibility on the 
government and the minister to justify why they have not 
accepted the advice that this Quality Council gives. 
 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

 

I think that health agencies and health professionals in this 
province have, by and large, expressed their support for the idea 
in concept of a Quality Council. But I’ve heard from a number 
of these professional associations and they have expressed the 
concerns that I have outlined. 
 
And I guess that until we actually see in practice how this is 
going to work and we can make some suggestions about 
particular clauses of the legislation and get on the Hansard 
record exactly what the government’s intentions are as to how 
these issues will be considered, I think that in principle we, as 
the official opposition, join with health professionals across this 
province in our support of the concept of a Quality Council. 
 
The issues that I have raised in terms of concerns are issues that 
are shared pretty universally and it’ll be interesting to see how 
this happens in practice. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, again the official opposition would like to 
go on record as being supportive of the concept of a Quality 
Council and to point out that there are some issues that we think 
it is not only important but critical to discuss as to the details of 
how this legislation is going to be operated and how the 
minister is interpreting some of the issues that are rather vague 
in the legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to discussing those in 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 42 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 42 — The 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act, 
2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
legislation is largely a housekeeping bit of legislation that 
provides for methodologies of billing as a result of the changes 
that were done, I believe, last session that allowed for 
professional medical incorporation. And so that legislation and 
the changes to it to allow for medical professionals to 
incorporate in the province created some issues about the 
methodology of billing for different purposes. 
 
So this legislation is brought forward as a way of dealing with 
those issues. Very much nothing in here that we can see of a 
philosophical or conceptual basis but strictly an interpretive one 
and a housekeeping Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had spoken in favour and voted in favour of 
the concept of professional medical incorporation. We want to 
make sure that all the subsequent and consequential issues are 
dealt with. We understand that this legislation does that. We 
may have a few questions about specifics but we’ll deal with 
those in committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Hi, Mr. Chair. Today we have with us 
Angie Gélinas, deputy minister of the Department of Culture, 
Youth and Recreation. Seated behind her, Jill McKeen; and 
behind Jill, Bruce Medhurst, senior policy analyst. Oh I forgot 
to give Jill’s title — executive director of policy and planning. 
Behind myself, Melinda Gorrill, director of corporate services; 
behind Melinda, Peggy Brunsdon, manager of provincial 
heritage resources; and seated to Angie’s left, David Debono, 
president and CEO (chief executive officer) of the 
Saskatchewan Communications Network. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well hi, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair, and welcome to the officials once again. 
 
Madam Minister, last time we met was very brief, but the time 
before we got talking about the Community Initiatives Fund. 
And I had, I had asked some questions from the Associated 
Entities Fund which is now the CIF (Communities Initiatives 
Fund), and you were kind enough to give me the 2000-2001 
annual report. I appreciate that. 
 
But in the report, I believe I saw the balance in the 
neighbourhood of $12 million in the CIF. Could you confirm 
that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The 12 million is the year-end balance 
on the fund before any expenditures out of this year. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. What is the target of the 
amount of money in the fund? Or is there such a thing as a 
target? I mean, $12 million, when we look at what the 
Community Initiative Fund is for, it’s to help communities, et 
al. I mean, you’re very familiar with that. 
 
And we’ve got $12 million sitting in this fund and yet on the 
communities that ask for assistance, there is literally dozens of 
communities that did not receive any funding. 
 
And I’m curious to what this $12 million is sitting there for if 
we’ve got communities that are asking for money for cultural 
enhancement within their communities and if there’s a target 
that we’re going to hit a magical figure for some huge project. 
Or is there some reason that this has built up to the extent that it 
is at $12 million? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I guess I would say two things. The 
original expenditure levels for the fund were set based on 
estimates of casino profits. And what’s happened really is that 
the profits have exceeded expectations. 
 



1870 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

Now the question is when you’re spending a small amount of 
. . . or a smaller amount of money, you perhaps sometimes have 
less policy that drives the decisions around spending. But as 
that amount increases, you then have to reconsider, do you need 
to make any changes to the policy that’s driving that spending. 
 
And for example, there’s two issues really. One of them is some 
of the unmet needs in the community that would fall well within 
the purposes of the fund. But the second thing is to . . . It’s a 
little distracting with the other conversations going on. You 
guys . . . Pardon me, Mr. Chair, but they are in the same room. 
Couldn’t they sit closer together to have conversation? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. One of the rules that the Chair 
follows is that if the Chair can hear the question and the answer 
and it’s not bothering the questioner or the answerer, then it’s 
permitted to carry on. But if it’s distracting to either the person 
asking the questions or the person answering the questions, then 
we ask the committee to come to order. 
 
So I would request hon. members to do just that. And I would 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The second thing is that as casinos 
came on stream, they did affect the share of gaming revenues 
that other participants in the community were dependent on, 
whether that was break-open tickets or lottery funds or bingo 
funds. 
 
So in actual fact, all the departments that have beneficiaries that 
depend on these funds meet usually a couple of times a year to 
talk about whether we need to rebalance the relationships in 
who gets what portions of the fund so that people can continue 
to do the things that they depend on those funds for. 
 
I think it was probably about, oh gosh, it would be getting close 
to 15 years ago now that a decision was made to take a lot of 
the things that government did and move them out of 
government under the lottery’s fund. And when that decision 
was made, it made community organizations that were doing 
important things like the zone sport activities and some of our 
cultural facilities — art galleries, etc. — it made them 
dependent on lottery dollars. And then when the casinos came 
into the mix, it started to shift the revenue generating capacity 
of the lotteries, the bingos, and the break-opens. And of course 
the hospitals had the same issue with the break-open funds that 
supported hospital expenditures. 
 
So there’s two things that we’ll need to do in looking at this $12 
million. It’s again to revisit whether there’s been a change in 
the relationship in the beneficiaries of the various types of 
gaming funds to see whether we need to redistribute some to 
people who have been losing their market share of the funds. 
 
And the second thing is to look at, if there’s a substantial 
amount of revenue sitting there, I think two things: one, should 
we priorize some of it to meet strategic objectives that the 
communities have brought to us about things that they’re 
wanting to do that require larger amounts of money rather than 
small grants? And the second thing is we’ve had some people 
complain in both northern and rural Saskatchewan that the 
conditions required to get the CIF money has limited some 
communities from being able to participate in facilities, 

programs, and what not. 
 
So I think what will happen as we look at the unexpended fund 
balance is we’ll be talking to the communities that haven’t been 
happy about the policy driving the fund and see if we would be 
able to improve the policy in such a way that smaller 
communities have a bit more access, particularly on the capital 
side of the fund. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I haven’t read from Beauchesne's 
recently. On page 100, it says: 
 

Although difficult to enforce on occasion, Speakers have 
also consistently attempted to discourage loud private 
conversations in the Chamber, and have urged those 
wishing to carry on such exchanges to do so outside the 
House. 

 
So I would encourage members to either quiet down their 
conversations or move behind the bar. So thank you very much 
for your indulgence. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — At any rate, I could give the member 
opposite a few more of my thoughts on this, but I’m just giving 
you the big picture of how priorities are set within the fund. 
And there is a board of trustees. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. It 
didn’t really hit to the quick of the question that I asked. 
 
This $12 million didn’t just come from this past year. It has 
been obviously growing for a period of time. So it’s not like it’s 
a brand new revelation this year — all of a sudden we have $12 
million in the fund and now we better change the rules and 
regulations to do something with it. It’s obviously been building 
up over a period of, who knows how many years. And that’s 
what precipitated my question about: is there a goal? Is there 
something that the organization wants to . . . wants to do a large 
project? 
 
Like why all of a sudden now we’re looking at it and saying 
well we wish to change this, because I don’t have the figures of 
what was in the fund at the end of last year, but it’s obviously 
not just from this past year, this $12 million. 
 
So therefore, if it’s creeped up, even at a million a year, that’s 
12 years that this fund has been growing. All the time that we 
have communities that have been asking for support and are 
being rejected in their requests. 
 
And again I would ask, what the goal . . . the amount of money 
that was looked at for this fund to reach a magical pinnacle, or 
is it been just straight somebody sitting and throwing darts or 
something to say no you can’t get a grant this year, even though 
we have $12 million or $11 million in the fund depending on 
what year it was in. 
 
And that’s my question now. It’s kind of a concern when I 
know communities that have asked for money and not received 
any and, at the same time, we now find that there’s $12 million 
in the fund. So there’s got to be some explanation for that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just mention two things. One — 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

 

and I was reminded of this, I knew this, I just . . . it slipped my 
mind — that one of the things that has impacted on decisions 
around this fund has been the movement of casinos on-reserve, 
because some of the money that we would have shared in when 
they were off-reserve, once they move on-reserve, the share 
changes. 
 
So we were being somewhat cautious in expending funds until 
we knew exactly what the impact would be of the movement of 
the casinos onto reserve, which would then reduce the money 
going into the General Revenue Fund. Because there’s a flip 
clause that when the casino is off-reserve — I’m trying to 
remember — when it’s off-reserve 75 per cent, I think, of that 
fund went into the CIF, but when it’s on-reserve, 75 per cent 
goes into the FNF (First Nations Fund). So it completely 
changes the amount of money that’s available. 
 
And not knowing the timing of some of the casinos moving 
on-reserve, there was a bit of a caution to make commitments 
that couldn’t be sustained, and to have the fund drawn down 
below a sustainable level. 
 
We have a better idea now of how much is there, and there’s 
considerable pent-up demand. Not just from communities but 
from Aboriginal organizations who historically have not been 
big beneficiaries of the lotteries monies or of the casino monies 
off-reserve, and yet live in our urban centres. 
 
There’s a lot of pent up demand in the physical fitness and 
sports area. 
 
So these things are actually under active consideration right 
now, along with some changes in policy from communities that 
have not been happy about the cost-sharing roles in terms of 
accessing the funds. But no decisions have been finally made 
yet on that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well we’re getting around it, but we’re 
not there yet. The $12 million, I guess, you’re giving an 
explanation, Madam Minister, about the why with casinos 
moving back and forth, but what’s the magical number that you 
want to attain? 
 
You said something about now you know where the stable level 
is. What is the stable level? To me, if it’s a Community 
Initiatives Fund — unless there’s a huge project — the stable 
level should be very, very minimal because the fund is 
developed to help communities. 
 
So when I look and I see $12 million sitting in this fund, and 
now we can debate it whichever way and say, well now we’ve 
found a stable, is the stable fund . . . stable amount 20 million, 
is it 12 million, is it . . . or is it 1 million? 
 
And those are the questions I’m trying to get to, is here we sit 
with $12 million and I would like to see an explanation why 
that $12 million is sitting there and not being used, or if there’s 
some magical reason why we want this $12 million sitting? Or 
if there is a stable level that you wish to retain the fund at and if 
there is, then why? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Two things. One is that we try hard not 
to run out and spend all the money there is any time. But I’ll 

just mention that we do have, on an ongoing basis, an obligation 
to exhibition associations, to hospitals, to cultural facilities in 
the province. We do have an ongoing commitment that’s fixed 
at around $4 million. And that is stuff that would be seriously 
jeopardized if we drew that funding away from there. 
 
So that is a commitment that we have to maintain because 
otherwise we’d be taking money out of the hospitals’ funding; 
we would be taking money out of the commitments to 
exhibition associations. And those are ongoing commitments. 
Those aren’t one-time grants. Those are fixed ongoing 
commitments in those areas. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So, Madam Minister, does that mean 
that your stable level is $4 million? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m going to go back a little bit 
historically with the member, because it’s true that that was the 
level. At the time when that . . . when we moved to that $4 
million level, that was the level of money in the fund. 
 
In 1996-97 there was only a balance of 10,000 unexpended in 
the fund. The next year, in 1997-98, that moved to two million, 
eight hundred and seventy-four. The following year the fund 
actually had a deficit of one million, two hundred and 
thirty-three, less than expected in that year. And so it actually 
was lower in that year. And then in ’99-2000 it had a surplus of 
three million, seven hundred and ninety-six and in 2000 to 2001 
the surplus went up to four million, three hundred and 
ninety-five. And then in ’01-’02 it was two million, one 
hundred and sixty-four. So there have been bits each year but 
one year, ’98-’99, like I say, there was an actual loss where it 
went less than the amount required. 
 
So people were . . . that was the year, I think, that triggered the 
nervousness about the fact that as the casinos moved 
on-reserve, unless the profitability levels stayed up, there might 
not be the money there to guarantee the 4 million required to 
keep all the rest of the stuff going. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
Madam Minister, with the amount of dollars that we’re talking 
about and using a $4 million roughly as a base, did the 
Community Initiatives Fund transfer any funds to general 
revenue this year, this past year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, not in this past year. But I will say 
that there are important community ongoing projects like 
museums, the Science Centre, and other things that we certainly 
intend to consider having them be participants in the fund 
because they, in the current funding environment, are somewhat 
at risk for survival. And we think that these are important 
anchor facilities for people in our communities. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, in a written question I would like to read to you what 
the question was and what the answer. The question, quote: 
 

Which of these funds had some or a portion of their 
surpluses taken away through government action and how 
much money was affected in each case? 
 
(Answer) CIF, 7.4 million is budgeted to be returned to the 



1872 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

General Revenue Fund to address general government 
priorities in the area of non-profit culture, community 
facilities, and organizations. 

 
Madam Minister, I just heard you say that no money was being 
transferred. Could you explain? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You may have heard differently than 
what I was saying. But I just said that there was important 
community facilities such as museums, the Science Centre, 
Wanuskewin who would be participants in the revenues of the 
fund this year because otherwise they would have been at risk 
for funding reductions. And so those would be the 7.5 you’re 
speaking of. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, we’ll check Hansard 
tomorrow but what I’m sure I heard you say when I asked the 
question, was any money transferred to the General Revenue 
Fund? And your answer was no. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Let me put it this way because we’re 
. . . I think we’re talking about a technicality here. It has not 
been transferred. It has not. But the intent is to protect things 
like Wanuskewin, the Science Centre, the museums, etc., by 
transferring that 7.5 some time over this year. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Madam Minister, it would seem to 
me that the Community Initiatives Fund, looking after the 
cultural issues and cultural programs within the province, I 
guess I would have to ask a fundamental question as to why it 
would be transferred to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
It would appear to me at this point that if it’s transferred to the 
General Revenue Fund, it’s for other than the community 
initiatives, because it was for the community initiatives that the 
money is there. And if the money is there for community 
initiatives when it’s transferred into the General Revenue Fund, 
it gets lost and it can be used to balance the books for an 
example. 
 
So I guess my question is: did you sit and agree that this money 
should be transferred or will be transferred from the 
Community Initiatives Fund to the General Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The agreement that was made is that 
the money will be expended only in keeping with the purposes 
of the fund and the fact that the fund itself is not responsible 
technically for the WDM (Western Development Museum). 
The department works with the community on things like the 
WDM and on Wanuskewin and the Science Centre, etc. 
 
So not transferred in the sense you’re saying, where a bunch of 
money’s going off and nobody knows where it’s going and 
somebody’s going to pluck it. We know exactly where it’s 
going. It’s going to go to support those important community, 
educational, cultural, and heritage facilities that are used as 
educational tools for young people in the community and that 
are used for activity for young people in the community. 
 
So I mean again I think we’re talking about a technicality. Was 
the money expended in keeping with the spirit of the purpose of 

the money? And I believe it was, because to have spent that 
money in a different way and had things like the Science 
Centre, the Western Development Museum, Wanuskewin not 
be able to afford to operate would have been, I think, the wrong 
decision to make. And the board of trustees agreed and so 
nothing was done without the full discussion and agreement of 
the board of trustees. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m still 
quite some puzzled by this because, if the projects that you talk 
about come under the CIF, then why would it be transferred to 
the General Revenue Fund? Why would it not be handled 
directly out of the CIF? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They’re not administered out of the 
CIF, so it’s really an accounting issue. They don’t . . . They’re 
paid out of the department’s budget. So the support came from 
the CIF. 
 
The same way that I don’t pay the budget for the Family Place 
in Weyburn, but the CIF money goes to their budget. That’s the 
same way. 
 
It’s no different than when money from the fund goes to any 
project. The money is going from the fund to a project even 
though the fund isn’t administering the project. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, I have a hard time 
following that logic. Is this the first time that money has been 
transferred from the CIF to the General Revenue Fund in this 
manner? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In the other instances of recipients of 
the fund, the money goes directly from the fund. And I think the 
reason why we didn’t do it this way in this particular instance is 
we hoped that we will not need to have any continuing 
dependence on the fund to assist those facilities. And so they’re 
being . . . the money just went in a lump to the General Revenue 
Fund and then is being paid out to them. So it’s really that we 
just didn’t . . . we didn’t send the money directly to them. It’s 
going through the General Revenue Fund to them. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Could you confirm that those agencies 
do come under the CIF? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They would fall under the broad 
purposes of the CIF. But they are not administered by the CIF, 
nor does the money go directly from the CIF to them. It flows 
through the GRF (General Revenue Fund) to them. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So no money has ever been given from 
the CIF to these organizations before? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s right. We’ve never done that 
before. 
 
However I would say that under the lottery system, over time, 
we have added new partners into the lottery fund. I’m trying to 
think of an example . . . MacKenzie Art Gallery would be an 
example of a facility that was paid for out of the General 
Revenue Fund but then was transferred into the lottery system, 
but with the lottery system then being enabled to keep a larger 
amount of money in order to be able to support it. 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

 

So this has happened with different things in the past to bring 
all of these things under one umbrella, but this is the first time 
that these particular agencies have been paid through the 
Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, can we get a 
breakdown of this 7.4 million and what it’s going to be used 
for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well certainly the purpose of estimates 
would be to have the answers to financial questions, so we’ll 
undertake to get that for you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And can I 
have a timeframe on that because last year . . . I’m still waiting 
for an answer from you, I believe. And I think I’ll get to that in 
a couple minutes, but could you give me a timeframe for an 
answer for this question? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We will commit to having that to you 
by the end of next week. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s all I 
have for right at the moment. I’m going to turn it over to my 
colleague right now because it’s on the same topic. And I’ll be 
back with a couple more later. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good 
afternoon, Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I thought I heard you indicate that there are 
some ongoing commitments that are funded through the surplus 
of the Community Initiatives Fund. Then subsequent to that you 
also indicated that now there are some of those surplus monies 
that have been transferred over to the General Revenue Fund 
that are going to be, as I understood it, funding projects that 
would formerly have been funded directly through the 
Community Initiatives Fund. 
 
Okay. I guess if you could clarify for us, firstly, what are the 
ongoing commitments that the surplus funds, and then what are 
the commitments formerly addressed by the fund now being 
addressed by the transfer that took place to the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The ongoing commitments . . . And the 
ongoing commitments aren’t out of the surplus, they’re out of 
what revenues there are. And in . . . Just a second, I want to 
check on one figure that I don’t see on this column. Well the 
answer is fairly simple, it just . . . I wanted to make sure I got it 
right so that we didn’t build up any misunderstanding here. 
 
Now I’ll just reiterate that these are ongoing commitments on 
an annual basis that tend to be either the same or increase 
slightly year after year. 
 
But the one I was checking on was the money that goes to the 
Métis for their Economic Development Fund. And the reason I 
was wondering was because it shows up in ’01 — 2000 to 2001 
— but not to 2001 to 2002. And that’s because instead of taking 
it off the CIF, it is taken off before the CIF now because the 
Métis wanted to have a more similar arrangement that the First 
Nations have. So it was really done for, I guess, reasons of how 

they felt about being recipients of the fund. And so now that 
money is still the same amount of money but it comes off 
before the fund balance, not after. 
 
The exhibition associations get 485,000 on an annual basis; 
administration is 108,000; and the small grants that go for 
projects for vulnerable children, that’s 2 million; cultural 
facilities program, 1 million; hospitals, 300,000, the hospitals 
foundation; and the gambling treatment initiatives, 500,000. 
Now this is not the only place that money comes for those 
things. It’s just the money that comes out of this fund. And 
those have been ongoing for some years now, these particular 
commitments under the fund. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
perhaps I could use a bit of an analogy here and I think about 
the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund for example. One of 
the issues that really concerned the steering committee 
members when they found out that the surplus had been drained 
from that fund was that the operating budget of the fund is used 
to purchase land, for example. Then what they had done is they 
had accumulated a surplus over a period of time that they used 
to meet other ongoing commitments, such as paying the taxes 
on that land. 
 
And I guess the question, Madam Minister, is are there any 
types of . . . similar types of arrangements with the Community 
Initiatives Fund where perhaps a project was supported out of 
the operating budget of the fund but then other ongoing 
commitments related to that were perhaps supported out of the 
surplus of the fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Rather than calling it a surplus, it 
should be called really an unallocated balance because the 
intention is to allocate it. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Okay. Then just one more attempt, 
Madam Minister. Are there any commitments by the 
department with respect to ongoing expenditures that you may 
decide at some point or previously have utilized to fund any 
type of ongoing commitments? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The best way to answer that is that the 
ones I listed are the ones where there’s an ongoing 
commitment. And some of those commitments have sunset 
clauses, you know, five years of commitments; the exhibition, 
some of those have 30-year commitment time frames. So there 
are times when you could then make a decision when it sunsets 
whether to renew it or whether to then move on to some other 
priority. 
 
But the question you ask of, are there any others that are 
dependent on an ongoing basis — not technically. But take for 
example, again, I was in Weyburn at The Family Place. 
Although their grant is only for this year, it could be that they 
apply every year for different types of projects. So they may 
rely on getting resources to do different things they’re doing, 
but we don’t have an obligation in the sense that you’re talking 
about. It’s on a year by year, grant by grant basis. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 



1874 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

perhaps briefly we could discuss the role of the board of 
trustees of the Canadian initiatives fund. Could you describe the 
level of authority, if you will, that they are able to exercise in 
terms of determining the projects that are approved, 
determining levels of expenditure, and in developing and 
establishing program criteria? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They have at this point, really, total 
authority. And we work collaboratively so they may . . . If we 
say, you know, we’ve had a complaint from a community that 
we need to change our guidelines or something, we would then 
collaborate on a decision. But the board of trustees has the final 
authority on the distribution of funds. I don’t even see the 
applications that come in. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
what role did the board of trustees play in the decision with 
respect to transferring the $7.4 million to the General Revenue 
Fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Our officials met with them. And I 
subsequently met with them after that meeting just on a general 
conversation about where they thought the fund should be 
headed in the future. 
 
But what the conversation was about was, there’s some areas 
that are going to go without resources this year and we would 
like to have a discussion with you about whether you think 
these are important enough to provide some assistance from the 
CIF. So at the end of the day there was a complete and open 
discussion with them about whether or not they agreed that 
these fit within the purposes, and they felt that they did. 
 
And we will also be working with them every step of the way 
on the unallocated surplus. And once those decisions are arrived 
at, they will be responsible for all the decisions around how the 
unallocated surplus is spent. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
so you can assure us then that unlike the situation that existed 
with the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund where the 
steering committee didn’t feel that they had been adequately 
consulted with, that, in this case, if one was to speak with the 
members of the board of trustees, that they would all concur 
with the decision that was made and they would be . . . they 
would all be pleased with the decision to transfer $7.4 million 
to the General Revenue Fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I believe that they agreed that 
circumstances were such that very important services and 
facilities that are in the community that aren’t owned by 
government — we don’t own the Science Centre — were at risk 
if there was not some assistance provided to them in this current 
year and they would be part of any decision on the unallocated 
surplus. And I believe, both in their discussions with the deputy 
and with myself, that they would feel 100 per cent involved in 
the decision. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, back on 
April 15, I had asked you some questions dealing with the 
operation of SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network) 
and you were . . . provided me with a letter and some 
information as to the funding to SCN and the breakdown of its 

various categories, I guess. And I noticed with interest that 
there’s $2.74 million allocated to Saskatchewan regional film 
and video industry and 1.74 million for SCN’s e-learning 
network. 
 
I’m wondering if that ratio has changed this year or is that about 
the same ratio of funds allocated to both areas of activity in the 
past? 
 
I realize that the SCN budget is somewhat smaller this year, but 
have those ratios . . . are they . . . have they remained the same 
or has there been a shift in those areas? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I have to say, to my regret, because I 
think there’s need for growth in many of these areas, those have 
stayed pretty much the same for several years now. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, is the 1.74 million, is that 
meeting the needs for e-learning, the e-learning component of 
SCN’s activities? One would think that with the advance of 
distance education, those sorts of things, that there may be a 
greater demand for the SCN services in those areas. And I’m 
just wondering if the funds are approaching and meeting the 
demands that are out there, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well I’m told by Mr. Debono that he 
would be very happy to have a considerable infusion of funds 
into his budget because it is very tight. But of course we are 
only one of the players in distant learning. Post-secondary has 
portions in their budget and other places do as well, so this 
particular money is for satellite delivery of services. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
looked through the annual report dated March 31, 2001, and I 
noticed that there are a number of government agencies and 
departments that utilize the services of SCN for . . . Sask Health 
uses SCN to, I believe in August 2000, to deliver a professional 
development program. Other departments and agencies of 
government use SCN in a similar fashion. 
 
I’m wondering . . . and then there’s . . . I notice also a number 
of private organizations not related to government also use the 
services of SCN. What matter of costing as far as if a group 
other than . . . I guess it’s a two-part question. Government 
departments, when they use it, I would imagine that they are 
charged by SCN for those services. And how do those charges 
relate when an organization that isn’t part of government uses 
the services of SCN? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s standard rates that are charged 
whether you’re a government department or an outside user. 
And I would presume that outside users would want rates that 
compare favourably to other ways they might accomplish their 
goals. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I wonder, could you provide for 
me an example or a costing of an outside user using the services 
of SCN. Would it be an hourly charge? A flat rate charge? What 
type of a costing structure does SCN have? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The cost is 750 to $1,000 an hour. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I notice under the highlights of 



June 6, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

 

this annual report that under April 2000 one of the highlights is 
the NDP Party of Saskatchewan uses SCN training network to 
consult with over 300 members in 29 communities throughout 
the province. 
 
Madam Minister, the question I have is, what did SCN . . . or 
what did the NDP Party pay SCN for the use of SCN services 
on this occasion? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m happy to report that we paid the 
same as everyone else, and we’re very satisfied with the service. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Has the NDP Party 
used the services of SCN since April of 2000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No. The services were very specific to 
the policy renewal process, and it was a way of getting people 
who live in rural and northern Saskatchewan together. And so it 
was for a very specific project and that project came to an end, 
and we haven’t done that since, no. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, would you be prepared to table 
the documents of payment, the invoicing and payment that . . . 
between the NDP Party and SCN for the use of their services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We don’t see a problem with that, no. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m pleased that 
you’re able to provide those documents. 
 
Getting back to the breakdown of funding to SCN, there was 
$2.74 million for regional film and video industry. I wonder if 
you could briefly explain how those funds will be used and give 
examples of how they’ll be used. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s a few different things that 
come out of this 2.74 million. I don’t know if you’re very 
familiar with the structure of film funding in Canada, but 
Telefilm, the national funding body, requires that there be a 
first-in broadcaster in order for films to receive funding from 
the federal fund. 
 
And so one of the reasons that it’s important for us to maintain 
SCN is that otherwise our filmmakers, our documentary 
makers, etc., would have to go to Toronto or some other place 
to see if a broadcaster would be willing to give them first-in 
funding. 
 
And when you’re working on commercial product, that’s not 
much of a problem. But if you’re perhaps working on a 
documentary about farming in Saskatchewan or you’re doing 
some other kind of documentary material, the fact of the matter 
is, is that out-of-province producers are not very interested in 
province-specific material that may have to do with the history 
or activities or stories of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now 1.6 million of that money is used for production, a portion 
of that money is used for the master control system, and some 
of it is used to purchase satellite time. And I’m informed that 
for every dollar we spend there, we lever $10 in other people’s 
investments to match the dollars that are spent out of that 2.74 
million. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, you indicated that 1.6 million 
of the . . . portion of funds allocated to SCN in that area is spent 
on production. Now are these programs that SCN is producing 
themselves or is that paid to other companies in the industry? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Nothing is actually produced in-house 
by SCN; all of it is outsourced with local producers. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister. SCN holds a 
broadcast licence, I understand, and I guess my final question to 
you would be, is what is the cost to SCN for that broadcast 
licence? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It doesn’t cost anything. It’s a 
designation as the educational broadcaster for the province and 
with that designation the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission) provides the licence. 
 
And actually we would hope to be able to work more broadly 
across the Prairies providing educational broadcast services, 
because we have enough capacity to do that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
just one final question on this, on the Community Initiative 
Fund, the CIF. We talked about the 7.4 million going into GRF. 
When will that 7.4 million be transferred? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I presume that would be done when 
we’re completed the estimates process and the authority is there 
to do that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like 
now to switch to the sound stage and I’m wondering if you 
could give a quick update on the status of the sound stage and 
exactly where we’re at. 
 
And I’d also like, if you could at the same time, as maybe part 
of your response, indicate the costing and the costing to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers for the construction of the sound stage. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The province’s share of the 11.5 
million is 3 million. The other portions are coming from the 
Western Economic Diversification and from the supports 
through tax abatements, etc., from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and can 
you give us an update on the status of the sound stage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Although it’s not officially open yet 
there is one small production underway at the moment in one of 
the smaller studios — Prairie Berry Pie — a 13-part series for 
preschoolers. And negotiations are in process on three offshore 
productions that are feature films. 
 
And everything is complete except some of the lighting grids. 
So we are expecting an opening sort of imminently when this 
last remaining work is done. But we’d like some of the partners 
who are signing in to be able to share in the festivities. So that 
will be a little bit in the future yet. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thanks, Madam Minister. Thank you. 



1876 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2002 

 

And can you, can you advise us whether the sound stage is 
coming in under budget, on budget, or is it over budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — My understanding is that it’s on budget. 
Because this particular portion of money is through the Property 
Management Corporation, you could ask that question again in 
those estimates. But that’s my understanding. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Now one 
of the issues that we have with the sound stage is a feasibility 
study. And when I said I did not receive an answer back from 
you previously, on or about October 16 last year I wrote a letter 
to you and in the letter I had requested in . . . if due diligence 
had been done on the sound stage, and I had asked for a copy of 
any feasibility study done on the project. And I never received 
an answer of any description on that. 
 
Could you advise us today about the due diligence done on the 
sound stage and the status of the feasibility study, and if that’s 
available for us. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m going to answer this in two parts. 
And I do, despite the fact that I don’t remember everything, I 
think I do remember at the time saying that we didn’t do the 
feasibility study. The Regina Economic Development Authority 
did it and was very instrumental in assembling the financing 
arrangements for it. I actually had zero to do with this. It was 
the Regina REDA (regional economic development authority) 
that was very instrumental. 
 
And the part that we would have been involved in would have 
been the feasibility of the particular sound stage that was being 
built in terms of the cost of using the stage compared to the cost 
of building it. But the actual feasibility study done on the film 
industry, including the sound stage, was done by the Regina 
Economic Development Authority. And I don’t have the 
authority to give you their study. You would have to go directly 
to them for that. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Did you or 
your officials see the feasibility study and have a view of it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again because this department wasn’t 
instrumentally involved in that part of it — it was Sask Property 
Management in conjunction with the REDA (regional economic 
development authority) — so I think that if you want a really 
good answer to that, you’ll have to have that discussion with the 
Minister Responsible for Sask Property Management because 
we weren’t in any way involved in that part of it. That was a 
discussion between the city, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation), and the REDA. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:41. 
 


