















































Hansard: April 29, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1031 
 April 29, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the exorbitant increases in long-term care fees. Their 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the citizens of Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan 
who are very concerned about the increase in long-term care 
fees. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement . . . 

 
Oops, I’ve got the wrong petition today too. This is on the 
child sex trade: 
 

. . . implement all 49 recommendations of the final report as 
submitted by the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse 
and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade. 

 
And the signators on this petition are from the city of 
Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, and it is in 
regard to Saskatchewan residents who are in long-term care 
homes and have seen their fees scheduled for increase. The 
prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Rosetown, 
Eston, and Biggar. 
 
And I’m pleased to present these petitions to the House. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today on 
behalf of people from my constituency who are very concerned 
about the increase for long-term care rates: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Margo and 
Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
bring to light the concerns that people have about long-term 
care fee increases. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort and Star City. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also have a petition to present to do with the new rates for 
long-term care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Yorkton and 
the village of Rokeby. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition signed by residents of the community of Eastend 
concerning the long-term care home fee issue. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of this province 
that are very concerned about the huge increases in long-term 
care fees. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed primarily by people from my constituency of 
Estevan but also from Regina. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the increase in long-term care fees. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ogema, Coronach, 
Gladmar, Weyburn, Pangman, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about long-term care fee increases in the 
provincial government’s budget. The prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are all from the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about crop insurance premium hikes. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Findlater, Bethune, and Holdfast. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon by Saskatchewan residents who are very concerned 
by the outrageous increases proposed by the government in 
regards to long-term care homes. And the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people from Canora, 
Wadena, Elfros, and Wishart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about increased 
long-term care home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of North Battleford and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition with citizens concerned about the changes to the 
crop insurance program. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Allan, Colonsay, and Blucher. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents who are concerned about the 
changes to the crop insurance program. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plans to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

 

communities of Dysart and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too also rise in 
the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding 
long-term care fees. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Dysart and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise on behalf of citizens in my constituency who are 
outraged at the long-term care fees. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Limerick, Lafleche, Woodrow, Mankota, and Killdeer. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 7, 18, 23, and 31. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill entitled 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act, 2002 (Votes of Confidence). 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on day 
no. 36 I shall ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: in the year 2001 how many 
contracts for the grain option coverage were taken out with 
Saskatchewan crop insurance? Secondly, how . . . what was 
the total liability to crop insurance for the contracts for the 
grain option coverage? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also have another question that . . . 
similar question that deals with 2002. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before proceeding to introduction of guests 
by other members, with leave of the Assembly the Chair would 
like to introduce to you several people who are in the Speaker’s 
gallery today. 
 
First of all it’s my pleasure to introduce Walter Ostanek, 
Canada’s polka king, who has received 14 GRAMMY 
nominations and who has won three GRAMMYs in recent 
years. He is also a Member of the Order of Canada and several 
polka halls of fame worldwide, and has a star on Toronto’s 
Walk of Fame. 
 
With Mr. Ostanek are banjo virtuoso Ron Sluga — a.k.a. (also 
known as) Ron Banjovi — formerly a member of Frankie 
Yankovic’s band, and Norm Kobal, king of the tenor 
saxophone, both from Cleveland, Ohio, and Jay Michaels of 
Saskatchewan’s own Western Senators. 
 
Mr. Ostanek and the Western Senators have just completed 
shooting of PolkaRama, a 13-week television series, right here 
in Regina. 
 
Welcome to them. I would ask them to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now behind them, seated also in the 
Speaker’s gallery, is a large delegation who . . . these are social 
science teachers and officials from the Department of Learning, 
who are here on the fourth annual Social Sciences Teachers’ 
Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. I’d like to introduce 
them one by one and ask them to rise as I introduce them. 
 
They are: Alan Colpitts from Abbey High School; Eldon 
Danielson from Birch Hills High School; Lauren Dzaman from 
Herbert School; Joan Falk, South Corman Park School; Delise 
Fathers, Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw; Pat Fergusson, 
Estevan Comprehensive; Kelly Glaspey, Weyburn Composite; 
Faye Harrison, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), Woodland Campus in Prince Albert; 
Carri Lelliott, Oxbow Prairie Heights School; Dennis Moffat of 
Nutana in Saskatoon; Marea Olafson of Eston Composite High 
School; Robert Pantel from Gronlid School; Wayne Parohl, 
Elizabeth School in Kindersley; Tami Reynolds, Consul 
School; Jodie Ross from Preeceville School; David Rogers 
from Melfort Comprehensive High School; Dana Skoropad of 
Riverview Collegiate in Moose Jaw; Valerie Triggs, Southwest 
Shared Services. 
 
And I want to make special mention of our steering community 
composed of four teachers and five officials from the 
Department of Learning. They are: Trudy Betthel from Oxbow 
School, and Fred Caswell from Robert Usher Collegiate in 
Regina, and Kim Engel from Grey School, and Chris Siemens 
from Hazlet School. And from the Department of Learning: 
Armand Martin, Gail Saunders, Ray Robertson, Anna Schmidt, 
and Brent Toles. 
 
And I would also like to introduce a special guest, the program 
coordinator from the Ottawa Teachers’ Institute on Canadian 
Parliamentary Democracy, and that’s Ted Buglas. 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

Welcome all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the House, 
a distinguished groups of visitors who literally come to us from 
around the globe. This is a group of students who are enrolled at 
the University of Regina, English as a second language 
program. They are seated in your gallery. I look forward to 
meeting with them after the question period. 
 
And I would ask at this time to ask all the members to bid these 
people welcome to Saskatchewan and to this Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the member from Regina Victoria in 
welcoming our group of visitors here this afternoon from the 
University of Regina. I certainly hope that they have an 
interesting and rewarding visit with us here this afternoon. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Exemplary Corrections Service Awards 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning, the 
Lieutenant Governor, Dr. Lynda Haverstock, and the Minister 
of Corrections and Public Safety recognized 33 individuals who 
have provided exemplary service with the provincial and federal 
correctional systems. 
 
Corrections Exemplary Service Awards recognize the special 
obligations and hazardous conditions peace officers in our 
correctional system work within. The medal recognizes 
individuals with at least 20 years of full-time exemplary 
service. Ten of those years must be as a peace officer in an 
institution or with a parole or probation office. 
 
Today 14 members from the Correctional Service of Canada 
and 19 members from Saskatchewan Corrections and Public 
Safety were honoured. As a former colleague myself, I’d like to 
offer congratulations to each of the 33 recipients. Their 
contributions to keeping our community safe, and to the 
rehabilitation of individuals in conflict with the law, is 
commendable and admirable in our environment, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to the Tisdale Trojans 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker and members of the Assembly, 
a week or so ago, I asked that everyone join in congratulating 
the Tisdale Trojans and the best of luck in competing on the Air 
Canada Cup. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the best wishes from this Assembly 
obviously worked because fans across Saskatchewan are joining 
the town of Tisdale in celebrating with the Tisdale Trojans, the 
new AAA midgets national champions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, although our wishes may have 
encouraged the Trojans, the team, their organization, and 
community truly deserves the credit for this incredible 
achievement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the players congratulated each other and they 
credited everyone who worked so hard in making this a success 
as being an example of how Saskatchewan sticks together and 
works hard together and overcomes incredible odds to win. 
 
The team members certainly deserve to be proud of their 
performance, and I’m sure that this was an experience that each 
of them will never forget. 
 
Please join me in congratulating everyone involved with the 
Trojan team as they enjoy this very hard-earned victory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Children’s Choir “Sing for Peace” 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, what’s that line from the Bible, 
“And a little child shall lead them.” On Saturday night, I and a 
large, appreciative crowd were given a dramatic and very 
musical illustration. I attended the annual concert of the three 
parts of the Saskatoon Children’s Choir, and it was a 
remarkable concert indeed by a group of very talented singers, 
ably directed by Phoebe Voigts and accompanied by Bonnie 
Nicholson — and helped by a host of those volunteers we all 
praised last week. 
 
But this is a concert and a choir with a significant and laudable 
difference, Mr. Speaker. This is the fourth concert given in the 
support of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines, the 
campaign begun by 1997 Nobel Peace Prize winner, Jody 
Williams — a campaign, I suggest, that we all should support. 
The fact that it is children most likely to be harmed by land 
mines makes the choir’s involvement all the more poignant. 
 
At Saturday night’s concert, Jody Williams was the special 
guest speaking to the audience. Her message of hope and peace 
was augmented by the theme of the choir’s musical selections, 
which was entitled, We Rise Again: A Choral Concert for 
Peace. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this July the senior choir will be 
taking its music, and its message, on a tour of France and Spain. 
As well, on the way they’ll be singing at the Peace Gardens in 
North Dakota. 
 
Our province and our nation could have no better ambassadors, 
and I know all the members in our House will wish them well. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

 

Construction on Avonlea 
Crop Processing Plant Begins 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Construction of a $5 
million specialty crop processing plant in Avonlea has begun, 
building on the natural advantages of the area. When chickpea 
acreage in Saskatchewan grew by 30 per cent in the year 2000, 
acreage of that crop around Avonlea grew by 300 per cent. 
 
The plant will convert a vacant Sask Pool elevator and add 
processing facilities around it. Scheduled for a late September 
opening, the plant can process 3 million bushels annually. 
 
This plant will be one of the most advanced in Western Canada 
with two simultaneous lines handling flat or round seed pulse 
crops. The lentil line will process 800 bushels an hour and the 
pea line will handle 3,000 bushels an hour. A sorting device in 
the pea line allows sorting chickpeas by size at a rate of 1,000 
bushels per hour. 
 
The construction by Blue Hills Processors, aside from saving 
the Southern Rails Co-Op short-line railway, will create 
between 10 and 12 permanent jobs. More jobs will be created 
during peak times. 
 
Congratulations, Blue Hills Processors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mary MacIsaac Celebrates 108th Birthday 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured to 
have as a constituent a woman described by her friends as a 
shining example of the levels of involvement that women can 
attain when given strength, courage, and an independent spirit. 
 
I’m proud to say that I am one of her friends, as are you, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m pleased to announce to the Assembly that 
four months and two days ago, Mary MacIsaac celebrated her 
108th birthday. 
 
She is a member of the Three-Century Club, which is 
exceptional in and of itself, but hers is also a life marked by 
achievements far beyond longevity. 
 
Mary MacIsaac was born in New Brunswick and came to 
Saskatchewan in our provincial infancy to teach in some of our 
pioneer towns before settling in Prince Albert, where she and 
her husband Jack lived until his death in 1981. She has lived in 
Saskatoon since 1984. 
 
Her resumé is impressive enough to satisfy a crowd of 
overachievers. She’s been a teacher, a president of the Catholic 
Women’s League, a member of the Provincial Cancer 
Commission, and a member and developer of regional libraries. 
She was active in the establishment of hospitalization in 1947 
and medicare in 1962, and was a charter member of the 
Canadian Federation of University Women. She has an 
honorary Ph.D. from her alma mater in New Brunswick, and is 
a strong supporter of both the co-operative movement and 
Heritage Saskatchewan. 
 
Mary MacIsaac is a mother of five, an accomplished pianist, an 

avid canoeist, a sharp reader, and an embarrassment to all of us 
who can’t keep up to her. 
 
By the way, Mary celebrated her 106th birthday by going 
cross-country skiing, proof positive of the special strength and 
spirit of Mary MacIsaac — a wonderful woman and a great role 
model. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Skills Canada Competition 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-one 
L.P. Miller High School students from Nipawin took Saskatoon 
by storm recently, at the fifth annual Skills Canada competition. 
 
The competition is like a trade and technology Olympic playoff 
where students from around the province compete in up to 30 
trade areas. The Skills Canada competition was established five 
years ago to promote youth employment within our province. 
 
The 21 students entered 14 events and took home 15 medals. 
These medals included four gold, seven silver, and four bronze. 
 
I would like to mention the names of the gold medal winners, as 
they will be going on to compete at the national event in 
Vancouver, May 30 to June 2: Keely Relland, software 
applications, advanced category; Andrew Hildebrandt, 
electronics; Carl Dahl, small engine repair; and Leanne Ens, 
forestry. 
 
This will also be an international qualifying event. The gold 
medal winners from Vancouver will be invited to an 
international competition in the year 2003. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
instructors and the students from L.P. Miller High School on 
their recent success at the 2002 Skills Canada Competition. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kerrobert Credit Union 
 

Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, more good news for rural 
Saskatchewan. I rise today to bring more happy heralds of 
another credit union. The Kerrobert Credit Union made 
payments to members and was able to increase retained 
earnings with net income of close to $200,000 last year. 
 
Members learned of this windfall at the general meeting 
recently held in the Prairieland Community Centre. General 
Manager Gerry Brown said the profit enables the credit union to 
return about $63,000 in patronage dividends to members. The 
Kerrobert Credit Union has more than $17.3 million in deposits, 
and the institution has close to $12.4 million out in loans, along 
with $6 million in other investments. 
 
The strength of Saskatchewan’s credit unions demonstrate that 
rural Saskatchewan is still a dynamic and vibrant centre for 
commerce despite the opinions of the members opposite and 
national bank executives. 
 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

The success of these community-owned institutions, Mr. 
Speaker, illustrates clearly that rural residents are not willing to 
succumb to the negative attitudes. To quote the CEO (chief 
executive officer), Sid Bildfell, quote: 
 

. . . in good times, everyone wants to be here, while in 
challenging times, the competition leaves. It is in these 
periods — when others withdraw from our market — that 
we stand to gain the most. We are here. We remain. And as 
the demand for our services intensifies, we are presented 
with new opportunities to serve and build our communities. 

 
I am sure all members will want to join with me to congratulate 
Kerrobert Credit Union for another successful year. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Long-Term Care Fees 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. The Premier has had another weekend to think 
about these long-term care fee hike increases that he is putting 
on Saskatchewan seniors. Now our MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) have been hearing about this issue 
everywhere we’ve gone over the weekend. People of all ages 
are saying to us: you’ve got to stop this; you have to make the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) back down. 
 
My question to the Premier is: is the NDP listening? Mr. 
Speaker, has the Premier listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Will he stand up today and cancel the NDP’s 
attack on Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, over the course of the past 
week I have visited the communities of Muenster and 
Humboldt, Bruno, Peterson, Indian Head. I spent Friday and the 
weekend in my own constituency and city of Saskatoon. I have 
been speaking to seniors. I’ve been speaking to their families. 
I’ve been speaking to business people and educators and 
working people who may not have direct connection to 
long-term care. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been reading the letters, many of the 
letters that have come to the Minister of Health, letters that have 
come to myself. I’ve been listening to the petitions. And it is 
clear to me, Mr. Speaker, there is a high level of public concern 
and public uncertainty among and around the proposed changes 
to long-term care. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, today, as of now, I am placing this 
policy on hold and under review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future Casino Expansion in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Gaming. 

Last week the NDP announced they have signed a new 25-year 
gaming agreement with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations). Part of the deal gives SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) exclusive rights to any new casino 
development in the city of Saskatoon for the next three years. 
 
Presently the Prairieland Exhibition operates the only casino in 
the city. It was thought the new agreement would have to 
include some revenue-sharing arrangement with the exhibition 
to compensate for the loss of their casino. But in the new 
agreement this issue is not addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP signed a 
new gaming agreement before addressing the concerns of the 
Prairieland Exhibition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The agreement 
that was signed with our friends and partners, the First Nations 
people, had nothing to do with any type of casino expansions in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was a 25-year agreement of mutual trust between two parties. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s curious to me that the members opposite 
raise their concerns about a 25-year agreement with First 
Nations but never have yet asked one question about the 
25-year agreement this province has with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Is there some sort of questionable reason for why they’re 
concerned about our 25-year agreement with First Nations and 
not a multinational like Weyerhaeuser? Something curious here, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this side of the House is 
concerned with any 25-year agreement that the government 
might sign with anyone in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money generated from the operation of the 
Emerald Casino is extremely important for the continuation of 
community events and programming offered by the Prairieland 
Exhibition. The casino’s existence is now in question because 
of this new deal. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The exhibition board members were expecting the provincial 
government to address their concerns and for the provincial 
government to include compensation for the Emerald Casino as 
part of a new agreement. In fact, Don Featherstone states, and I 
quote: 
 

We need them (the government) to more or less guarantee 
our money. I don’t think our board would ever ratify a deal 
with SIGA alone. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the minister commit to 
addressing the concerns of Prairieland Exhibition and to being a 
partner in any new agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When that 
situation arises, there will be discussions and negotiations. I 
mean, that’s the normal process. 
 
But I do want to go back again and wonder; I’m very curious. 
We have 99-year leases with cabin owners. We’ve got other 
types of long-term leases with farmers on farmland. Mr. 
Speaker, why is it that opposition continues to have a serious 
concern about a 25-year agreement this province, this 
government, this coalition government has with our First 
Nations friends and partners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this is a business proposal, not a 
lease on cabins. It is a totally different issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the minister commit to 
addressing the concerns of the Prairieland Exhibition and will 
the government be a partner in any new agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Canora-Pelly asked me if I can handle it. I think I can. It’s 
too bad, too bad that they can’t handle their research a little bit 
better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve simply forgotten the fact that when the time comes to 
discuss those types of business arrangements, it will happen. It 
will come to pass. Be patient. Have you forgotten that there is 
an agreement between Casino Regina and the casino that was 
here where they paid $2.6 million a year? When there’s time to 
make a good business deal and arrangement, it will happen, 
members opposite, and Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Prairieland Exhibition 
Association and the people of the city of Saskatoon are very 
concerned about any new deal that might come forward. Mr. 
Speaker, the government’s own press release states: 
 

The NDP is committed to a process that would give the 
FSIN full jurisdiction to all forms of gaming on First 
Nations land. 

 
And Perry Bellegarde refers to this jurisdiction for gaming as 
the jewel in our crown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain this process to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and what the NDP are considering? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Once again, there’s 
an application process to enter into any kind of a casino 
agreement whereby the local municipality will, in fact, have a 
say as to whether or not it goes ahead or not. 
 
But you know — and, Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind the 
members opposite and this House — that I failed to mention 
that the agreement reached between Regina casino and the 

former casino here was a 30-year agreement. I didn’t hear any 
questions about that. 
 
And I think it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, given the kind of 
questions that are being asked, the Leader of the Opposition in 
his speech on February 28, saying that: 
 

Gaming will certainly play an important role in successful 
future First Nations economic development. 

 
Have they changed their mind, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the province was 
to agree to give full jurisdiction to First Nations for all forms of 
gaming on First Nations land, that could mean the 
establishments of casinos on reserves located in urban areas of 
the province and the province would no longer be controlling 
the expansion of gaming. 
 
It may also mean that casinos could be built on urban reserve 
land without the approval of the city and its residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain whether this will 
ultimately mean that SIGA could build a new casino on urban 
reserve in the city of Saskatoon without the approval of the 
people of Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, once again, there is a process 
that’s in place when a casino . . . when there’s a licence 
requested for a new casino and it involves the community at 
large, Mr. Speaker. It’s based on certain criteria that are 
required for the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority to 
look at before any such process is approved, Mr. Speaker. This 
has been around for a long time. 
 
I’m sure the members opposite would be well aware of our 
agreement, our partnership with First Nations. A partnership 
that we are pleased to have entered into given the accolades that 
they received, particularly the new chief executive officer of 
SIGA, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So our First Nations partners, we have confidence in them. We 
will follow the processes for community development of 
additional gaming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatoon 
will be very alarmed to hear that there was not a yes or no 
answer given to that question. I would like to ask the question 
one more time, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister explain whether 
this will mean that SIGA could build a new casino on an urban 
reserve in the city of Saskatoon without the approval of the 
people of Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how much 
more plainly I could say it, that nothing happens until the 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

community supports any kind of proposals that are put forward. 
There is a process in place and a community will have a say as 
to whether or not there is an approval to be considered for any 
expansion of gaming in that city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Action Committee on the Rural Economy 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning the Action Committee on the Rural Economy made 
public their extensive final report. And this report makes some 
very important recommendations on how to revitalize rural 
Saskatchewan. The report will officially be presented to the 
legislature this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has spent over $600,000 for this 
committee’s work. And this investment would be returned to 
the province many, many times over if the recommendations 
are implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand in this House and commit 
to implementing the priority recommendations put forward by 
the ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) 
Committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite the same comments that I made this morning to the 
media, and that is that the ACRE committee’s been in place 
now for 18 months. They tabled for us in the year of 2001 seven 
recommendations that they wanted the government to act on. 
And I can report today, Mr. Speaker, that those seven interim 
recommendations that the committee recommended to us, 
we’ve acted upon every one of them. 
 
I say to the member opposite there are now 40 
recommendations that are new priority recommendations that 
are before us, and 100 other recommendations that the 
subcommittees and the committee will review over the next 
period of time. 
 
And we make the undertaking, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to 
act on those recommendations over the course of the next while 
that we’re in government — over the next four or five or three 
or two years, or from two years to ten years. Over the next two 
to ten years, Mr. Speaker, we’ll make sure that all those 
recommendations will be implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I may have heard 
the minister wrong. But I believe him . . . that I heard him say 
that he acted on every recommendation in the interim report. 
 
But it contains several recommendations that they felt, the 
ACRE committee felt, needed to be acted on immediately. And 
they recommended that we ensure the consistency of taxation of 
all rural municipalities, taking steps to alleviate the current 
education tax burden on farmland and reducing the reliance of 
education funding on the property tax base. 

Instead the NDP cut the farm land property tax rebate program 
and the RMs (rural municipality) across this province are now 
in the process of raising their mill rates due to a reduced 
foundation operating grants and revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why do the NDP ignore the recommendations 
from the ACRE committee? Why is the minister saying that 
they followed up on every one of the recommendations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have the report in front of 
me and the member had an opportunity to review the report as 
well. And in the first part of the document, they talk about the 
interim recommendations, beginning on page 14. And on page 
14 there are seven recommendations, Mr. Speaker, of which the 
education property tax does not appear on any of those interim 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the member 
opposite, that you stop misleading the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would ask the member 
to make all his remarks directly to the Chair and the Chair only. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the opposition opposite, when you have the 
document in front of you, you’ve had an opportunity to examine 
it, why would you tell Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that 
the education property tax portion is in the interim report? 
Because, Mr. Speaker, it appears nowhere in the interim 
recommendations. And we’ve acted on every one of those, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that you should get the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Once 
again I ask the minister to speak directly to the Speaker and 
refer to the opposition in the second . . . the third person. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The opposition should in fact take another 
look at the report, Mr. Speaker. The member should take a look 
at the report and quit leading the people . . . misleading the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, with the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps the minister should read the entire report that was given 
to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ACRE committee involved a consultant to do 
an independent economic analysis of the rural economy and to 
help them develop a strategy that would increase output and 
employment in rural Saskatchewan. They determined that the 
population of rural Saskatchewan will need to grow by 225,000 
people over the next 20 years to provide an adequate labour 
force in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree that it is absolutely 
essential that we grow Saskatchewan? Does the minister agree 
with the finding by the ACRE committee? 
 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, clearly this government and 
this ministry agrees with the recommendations that have been 
put forward by the ACRE committee. We’ve been working 
closely with 43 men and women from across Saskatchewan 
over the past eighteen and a half months, and what we’ve been 
working on, Mr. Speaker, is making a difference in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s about partnerships. It’s about working with 
communities. It’s about working with farm organizations and 
groups. It’s about working with individuals in the transportation 
area. It’s about building our infrastructure. It’s about finding 
new ways of getting capital to grow the rural economy, Mr. 
Speaker. All of those things is what we agree in and are going 
to work with the ACRE committee to enhance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we made a conscious decision in the 
development of the ACRE committee not to put any of the 
Saskatchewan Party members on it, Mr. Speaker. Because when 
you put Saskatchewan Party members on this kind of a 
committee you have wedge issues and polarization, Mr. 
Speaker. And I say to the member opposite . . . to the members 
opposite, don’t get in the way of good public policy and good 
work in rural Saskatchewan today because every time you get 
involved . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, up 
until now I didn’t believe my questions were all that political 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Up until now I 
don’t believe that questions were particularly all that political, 
we just wanted to hear some direction from the government. 
And we didn’t need Saskatchewan Party members on the ACRE 
committee; the people of Saskatchewan were saying the same 
thing that the Saskatchewan Party’s been saying on their Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ACRE report also states, and I quote: 
 

The role of government is not to pick winners but to set the 
proper economic and business climate and (to) remove 
roadblocks so that Saskatchewan entrepreneurs and 
communities can take advantage of the opportunities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is again exactly what the Saskatchewan Party 
has been telling the NDP over and over. Whether it be with the 
invasive activities of the Crown corporations competing with 
private businesses or by direct government investment in some 
businesses while others are left out on their own, the NDP need 
to create a climate that encourages economic growth and 
development and then get out of the way and let business do 
business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that the ACRE committee has put it in print, 
will the NDP listen and will they quit competing with private 

businesses in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I said earlier in my 
comments that on this side of the House this ministry and this 
government are going to work at implementing the 
recommendations that are in the ACRE committee over a period 
of time. 
 
But what I say, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not going to do, what 
we’re not going to do is this, Mr. Speaker. Last year in this 
Assembly we had the member from Kindersley stand up — Mr. 
Boyd — and he made a speech about rural Saskatchewan and 
what a joke the Internet was. And he laughed about the need for 
Internet and he said cell phones. And I have a copy, Mr. 
Speaker, of that. 
 
And all the members on that side of the House said, well this is 
a great big joke; these guys are spending all their time on the 
Internet. Well, Mr. Speaker, what is the very . . . what are one 
of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And the member from Kindersley stood 
up, Mr. Boyd, and he made a mockery of the work that the 
ACRE committee was doing in developing infrastructure for 
communities. 
 
And every one of those members on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, laughed with joy and couldn’t hold their sides, Mr. 
Speaker, from the . . . And I say, on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to be building rural Saskatchewan, we’re 
going to be investing in rural Saskatchewan, and we’re going to 
be working collectively with communities and municipalities; 
and say to them, you should stay out of the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 
I was reading the ACRE report, throughout the ACRE report 
you get a sense of urgency. There is a definite urgency to 
change things in Saskatchewan and make it better. 
 
A number of times you see the message, it’s time for action, 
and there is also printed a number of times in the ACRE 
committee report that the status quo is simply not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand today and say if his party is 
going to be willing, or if the government’s going to be willing, 
to introduce any piece of legislature this session that would 
follow-up on a recommendation on the ACRE committee or are 
we going to study the study for another year until next year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, earlier I said that the member 
from Kindersley said this, and I want to go back to this, Mr. 
Speaker, because this is what the member last year said. And I 
quote what Mr. Boyd said: 
 

. . . it is almost laughable (that) some . . . things, (Mr.) . . . 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

Minister, and, Mr. Speaker, that they have put forward (the) 
. . . terms of (these) . . . thing(s). They are saying that one 
of the problems to rural Saskatchewan is the fact that (they 
need) . . . high-speed Internet, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
And then they laughed all about it. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to do a number of 
things. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to invest in rural 
Saskatchewan a variety of different ways. We’re going to make 
sure that there are capital funds, Mr. Speaker, through the 
investment funds, to make sure that rural Saskatchewan people 
can invest in opportunities. We’re going to make sure, Mr. 
Speaker, that we invest in infrastructure, in roads, in Internet, in 
cell phones, in power and gas and energy, to make sure that 
those communities have a vibrant opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to invest in people who can work in those 
communities along the way, Mr. Speaker, for people who are 
living in those communities and across the piece. We’re about 
building . . . 
 

Minimum Wage Board 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the 
Minister of Agriculture must be living in fantasyland because 
all of his answers are fantasy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Labour. 
Recently CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio 
reported on the expenses racked up by the Minimum Wage 
review board over the last year. It was revealed that the board 
spent $800 for research and consultation services, that this was 
the only original research the board undertook. 
 
We sincerely hope that the board requested, received, and 
considered other research material on which they based their 
conclusion that the minimum wage in Saskatchewan should be 
increased. 
 
However, on February 25, all the board sent to the Minister of 
Labour was one piece of paper with one sparse recommendation 
that the minimum wage be increased. There was no background 
information, no explanation, or documentation supporting the 
decision the board made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this House whether she 
received supplementary information or a report from the board 
explaining their recommendations; and if she did, will she table 
that documentation today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, during estimates when my 
department was up, I answered this question a number of times 
for the member of the opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I clarified that a number of times in the 
media, on the radio, that when the recommendation was put 
forward to me, it was attached to a report that had an economic 
analysis, an analysis on the province, research put into it from 
various presentations that had been made on behalf of 
businesses and interest groups to the minimum wage board. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d like to 
clarify what the minister said. She did not answer the question 
in estimates and the government shut down the House early that 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minimum Wage Board spent $800 on a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the Minimum Wage Board spent 
$800 on a report of independent research and QED Information 
Services. 
 
Will the minister explain what research the firm did for the 
board and what their research findings were and how that 
research factored into the board’s decision to increase the 
minimum wage? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, will the minister table that research report in 
the House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the research was 
done, the effort . . . the time, effort, and information was 
gathered by the Minimum Wage Board. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask the members opposite, what is their view on this? 
 
When you look at . . . the member from Indian-Head . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Indian-Head, and I quote in Hansard 
June 12, 2000: 
 

. . . I really think that a fair labour policy (in wage) is 
letting the market take care of itself . . . 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, then we’ve had other members . . . we have 
had other members that have commented that they know of 
workers that would be willing to fix roads for less than 
minimum wage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in fair wages and 
adequate compensation for workers in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. I would ask the member for Saskatoon Nutana and the 
member for Rosthern to desist. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, The 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 36, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 37, The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I stand to 
table responses to written questions 139 through 142 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 139, 140, 141, 142 
have been submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 17 — The Public 
Employees Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a . . . this 
Bill No. 17, the public employees pension Act, seems to be 
fairly short. The amendments that are put forward are fairly 
direct and to the point, and I think they have just reason. 
 
When I read through the amendments, or the proposed 
amendments, there was a couple of things that came to mind, 
Mr. Speaker, and I would like to maybe just comment on those 
if I could before we move this along into committee. 
 
The first thing that comes to mind when I was reviewing this, 
and it pertains to a changing way of life that we’re seeing here 
and changing norms and customs in our society. 
 
The Bill refers in this case, under the Public Employees Pension 
Plan, to spouses of members and this pertains to a marriage 
breakup. So that when a spouse, as a result of this marriage 

breakup, achieves the age of 50 instead of 55, that member or 
the spouse of that member can therefore move ahead and try to 
have a retirement fund set up from that pension plan. And I 
think that’s quite a desirable outcome and really what this 
amendments were made for. 
 
Unfortunately, that amendment wasn’t put in in the year 2000, 
when the other amendment was put in. So now we’re catching 
up and I think that that’s fine. 
 
I guess in the changing norm or the changing society, we see a 
lot of families, marriages that are certainly in trouble, not 
necessarily leading to a divorce but to a separation. And when 
. . . I don’t see anything in here or in the explanations that 
would allow that same kind of division of an asset under a 
separation or a legal separation. It would appear to me that this 
is a . . . may become a serious problem if in fact the asset that 
needs to be divided up under the separation has to be withdrawn 
entirely or cashed out. Then the interest would be . . . it would 
be taxable and the benefit would result in almost . . . in fact, no 
benefit for the member in this case. So that’s something that we 
want to talk about when we get . . . bring this Bill to committee. 
 
In another circumstance, Mr. Speaker, a family today often 
don’t go into a formal marriage arrangement and are in fact 
living long and very fruitful lives in a common-law situation. I 
don’t see in these amendments how this will apply to those 
situations when that kind of a marriage relation breaks up, not a 
formal marriage relation but one that is very common 
nowadays. And I think when we get to committee we should be 
looking at those consequences of this particular action. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that when we’re talking 
about pension plans, and in the other Bills that are coming up 
talking about pension plans, we have to understand that the 
numbers of people that are going to be coming into that pension 
plan in fact are going to be increasing in proportion to the total 
numbers. So we have to make sure that the pension plans are 
correct and have the right interpretations placed on the 
amendments. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we can ask some of these questions in 
committee and I’m prepared to allow this Act to go forward to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 18 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is another 
Bill pertaining to pensions, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Act. 
 
I think when the pension plan Act was first implemented, there 
was certainly a need in this province for an Act or a plan such 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

as this. It applies to self-employed people; it applies to farmers; 
it applies to those people that don’t qualify for pensions any 
other way. And I think it has, it has in fact filled a pretty 
valuable role in our society. 
 
One of the advantages of this Saskatchewan Pension Plan is that 
it is a tax-deferred plan and that will allow some planning once 
the . . . once we get to the age of 69 and the assets of this asset 
can start to be returned back to the people that were 
contributing to it all along. 
 
There’s some housekeeping amendments to the Act that I think 
are quite important. But I noticed in reading through this Act, 
Mr. Speaker, that there is a . . . an item or two in here that gives 
me some concern. And it also is a concern with some of the 
other Acts that we have seen — or amendments to Acts that we 
have seen coming before the legislature. 
 
The concern that we have here is that some of the details of how 
this is going to be administered have been taken out of the 
legislation and put, in fact, into the regulation of the Act. And I 
think once you put those details into regulation, it takes it out of 
the purview of the legislature. 
 
And I really believe that that trend is not the right direction. It’s 
quite disturbing to us because the purpose of the legislation . . . 
legislators is to be able to see what’s in the amendment, how 
they’re going to be affected, and we can contribute 
significantly. But if they’re in regulation, that’s strictly an order 
in council change. And that is quite disturbing. 
 
Also, some of the things that I mentioned earlier, in an earlier 
debate on Bill 17 regarding the numbers of senior people, 
proportionately, we’ll be experiencing in this province . . . the 
concern that I have also is that when people finally reach the 
pensionable age, there’s a tendency for those people to be 
leaving the province, taking their pension with them, and their 
asset base. 
 
I know from lots of situations on the farmers that have decided 
to leave the province for whatever reason, usually for education 
reasons for their children, for tax reasons, they finally, when 
they sell an asset, it too — the asset — is liquidated and that 
liquidation is transferred with them to out of the province. 
 
So not only do we have to make the pension plans relevant and 
pertinent, and we have to make it so that they will apply to 
everyone equally, we also have to put other conditions in place 
to make sure that once we get to that age that there is the 
necessary attraction for people to stay here in this province. 
 
Again when I look through this Act, there is some clarification 
that will likely be needed when we get into committee. But at 
this time I think the clarification would be better presented there 
and I will move that this go forward to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 19 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again with 
this particular Act, The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, this is the Act that applies to a 
rather specific number of people in this province. 
 
In this particular Act, it applies to those people up to the point 
of 1977, I believe it is. And so there is going to be a time when 
this particular Act will no longer be in place and all the people 
that have contributed or a pension plan has been built on their 
behalf will in fact be pensioners. 
 
The concern in this Act — and it’s being addressed in these 
amendments as far as I can see — really apply to making those 
conditions so that they’re the same as the federal Income Tax 
Act. Without those conditions, I think the pensioners in this 
province would be at a disadvantage. And so moving this one 
forward to committee will allow us to ask some more specific 
questions. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move this Act move 
forward to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 13 — The 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists 
Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to speak to the Bill that’s before the House, The 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists Amendment 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the government has been 
working with the association over the last year to . . . and 
they’ve recommended a number of changes. And I’m sure that 
every one of them is something that the people that are involved 
in the association feel is important. 
 
We have to take some time to acknowledge the vital role that 
these people play in our lives. Unless we were involved with 
someone that has a hearing or a speech problem, many of us 
just take their work for granted. 
 
But their work is seen not just in the health care industry but 
also in the education system. I find a number of the school 
boards that I work with across the province are always 
interested in finding people that have the experience and the 
professionalism to work in this field. And I know that the 
numbers are something that we would like to see an increase in. 
They’re needed in many parts of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re professional people and we know that their 
work is valued by the health care system and the education 
system as well. 
 
The Act that’s before us right now is basically a routine Bill. 
The people that we have spoken to are very much in favour of 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

 

the amendments that have been brought forward. Actually, we 
are proposing . . . the Bill proposes to increase the number of 
public representatives on the association from one to three and I 
guess this is something that they consider very vital and it will 
be helpful in doing their work. It also allows for one public 
representative to sit on the council’s Complaint and 
Investigation Committee. 
 
The amendment also extends a representative’s term from two 
years to three years. I’m sure that this is going to enrich and 
enhance the speech pathologist and audiologist’s work and give 
them an opportunity to make better use of their own time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other amendments that are being looked at in 
this Bill are really administration and it’s something that we 
have a number of questions on, but I’m sure they can be 
handled in Committee of the Whole. So at this time, I move that 
this Bill be sent to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 24 — The 
Powers of Attorney Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 sur les 
procurations be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I consider it a 
privilege to be able to get up and speak on this particular one 
because it has some very interesting components to it. I think 
the philosophy behind it is admirable. I think there’s some 
details in there that we need to discuss and we need to look at in 
detail. 
 
We know how this government works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, remember on Friday, I believe it was, we had the 
member from Qu’Appelle talking about he knew what the right 
thing to do was, and today he was abandoned by all the 
members on his side and he’s the only one left hanging there, 
wanting to continue where the government doesn’t want to go. 
 
So we need to look at this Bill carefully because the way 
they’ve been wishy-washing and flopping back and forth on 
their measures they are taking, they may do the same on this 
one. And we find out that this government is full of a lot of 
ill-thought ideas and plans. 
 
So it becomes imperative, Mr. Speaker, that we look at these 
closely and make sure that what the Bills that are passed by this 
particular House are Bills that are actually for the benefit of this 
province, not just for some of their political gain over there. 
 
The embarrassment that they’ve suffered over there is no 
problem. On this side of the House we rather enjoy watching it. 
 
However, back to Bill No. 24, The Powers of Attorney Act. The 
powers of attorney basically are those situations where 
individuals have signed away, for various reasons, the running 
of their financial affairs to someone else. And there are those 
situations where that’s necessary. All members, we are all 

familiar with individual cases involving vulnerable adults 
who’ve signed away their economic affairs through a power of 
attorney. 
 
And then the question comes up: how well and how carefully 
will these financial affairs be carried out by the person that is 
now responsible for those financial affairs? And in some of the 
cases that I think we’re all aware of, Mr. Speaker, we found that 
some of these situations have gone to court, and that’s as usual, 
Mr. Speaker, tied up the courts for many, many years — also at 
substantial cost to the individuals and their families, and the 
taxpayers of the province. And when finally a judgment is made 
it’s very seldom a win-win situation. There’s usually just a 
whole lot of losers. 
 
It makes sense, Mr. Speaker, to allow provisions restricting 
someone who’s been convicted of a criminal offence related to 
violence, fraud, or breach of trust in the last 10 years, that they 
cannot have power of attorney. And I think that’s good because 
the concern that is out there, Mr. Speaker, is that someone with 
some sort of a devious background, finding people who are 
vulnerable, talking them into giving them the power of attorney, 
and thereby basically turning over all their financial affairs to 
this individual. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And so to the extent that this particular Bill says that if you’ve 
been involved in some of these criminal activities in the last 10 
years, you cannot act as power of attorney unless there are some 
very unique circumstances that exist, that aspect, Mr. Speaker, I 
think takes care of one of the key concerns that everyone’s had 
across this province with power of attorney. 
 
The previous Powers of Attorney Act, as you’re well aware, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe is only one page of material. And it’s 
pretty hard to understand how in a complex financial situation 
all the concerns could be covered in a one-page document. So 
things have to be tightened up and have to be expanded. 
 
One of the problems that has been brought to us as members of 
the opposition is that there is an issue of a non-mandatory form. 
So there’s a form that’s not mandatory — rather interesting. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, if someone is granting a power of 
attorney to another individual, the question is, has that person 
been assessed as to his or her mental capacity? So the need to 
know that if someone is signing away a power of attorney, what 
is their level of capability at the time that that occurs? 
 
Another concern that’s out there, Mr. Speaker, is the concept of 
power of attorney. It’s a very legal document and yet a lot of 
people who haven’t been involved in a lot of legalities and 
manage to keep, you know, their lives out of court throughout 
their whole lives, may not really understand what is meant by 
power of attorney, how big it actually is and how binding it is. 
 
And so those are some of the concerns that are out there that 
people may not be fully aware of what they’re actually doing 
when they sign off on a power of attorney statement. 
 
There are also provisions, Mr. Speaker, that allow an individual 
the ability to name an alternate power of attorney. This wasn’t 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

in the old Bill. I mentioned that the old Bill was only one page 
long. This wasn’t in that old Bill. 
 
Previously this was not allowed, and yet the legal community 
has argued that if one could do this under a will, why not under 
a power of attorney? And so that’s why this is brought into that. 
And we’re quite delighted, Mr. Speaker, that the government in 
this case has been listening. 
 
And we know that when they form their Bills, they don’t 
always listen. I think today in the House, Mr. Speaker, we saw a 
prime example of that, where the beginning of last week we 
asked the Minister of Health questions about long-term health 
care and he was very firm in where he was going, Mr. Speaker. 
Then they had the Premier up, and the Premier underlined that 
and said, yes, we’re going and we know we’re going; we’ll 
continue there. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, they backed away on that, which is good 
— which is good. But it makes us understand that this 
government isn’t very sure where they’re going, so we need to 
look at all aspects. 
 
The accountability requirements, Mr. Speaker, on Bill No. 24 
will also be well received by all individuals, families, and the 
community in general. This will allow an individual or 
someone’s family to track the money as it is used or the assets 
are called in or sold. 
 
Now I think that’s very critical, because the accountability is 
there. I think we’re all familiar with estates that seem to have 
just disappeared in the hands of a few unscrupulous people that 
had powers of attorney. There now needs to be accountability 
on that, and I think that will clarify many of those concerns that 
are out there. 
 
There are still, as I said, Mr. Speaker, a number of other 
concerns that we have. Those things that we’ve . . . that I’ve 
mentioned this afternoon that we’re supportive of, we will 
remain supportive. We need to do a bit more research on some 
of those other items. 
 
And so we are encouraged by this Bill’s overall intent. It was 
needed. It needed to enlarge the concept that was out there, but 
we want a bit more time and consideration to do a bit more 
research on it, and do some more checking to see that there 
aren’t some more flaws in this one so that we don’t let the 
government make some more errors that they’ve been making 
quite often in the past — in the last week or two. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move that 
we adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 

The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce her 
officials and, if she wishes, make a few brief opening remarks. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. I would like to 
indeed introduce my officials and I would also, with your 
indulgence, like to make a few introductory comments. 
 
Immediately to my north is deputy minister . . . I’m not going to 
do right and left here, okay? I understand from The Globe and 
Mail that right and left are . . . is a concept that’s poorly 
understood by at least Canadians outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
So to my north is my deputy minister, Terry Scott. Even more 
northerly to Mr. Scott is Mr. Dave Phillips, assistant deputy 
minister of operations. On the south wing we have Mr. Bob 
Ruggles, assistant deputy minister of programs. To the east we 
have Donna Johnson, acting executive director of corporate 
services. And to the southeast, to the southeast, Mr. Rick Bates, 
director of communications services. And to the west we have 
the opposition. 
 
Now I would like to say that Saskatchewan Environment has a 
new name, a new deputy, a new minister. So I think it’s 
important that I take just a couple of minutes to give an 
overview of the department. 
 
I have other officials . . . Did you want me to introduce all the 
officials who are present here prepared to give us advice if 
needs be are: Larry Leckner, director of environmental 
assessment; Don MacAulay, director of parks and special 
places; Doug Mazur, director of sustainable land management; 
Joe Muldoon, director of environment protection; Dennis 
Sherratt, director of fish and wildlife; and Tim Kealey, fire 
management and forest protection. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan Environment protects the 
water, air, and land, the plants, the animals, and special places 
that are the foundation of a clean and healthy environment and a 
prosperous society. 
 
The quality of the environment, the strength of the economy, 
and the health of Saskatchewan people are linked and 
interdependent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of Environment’s goals is a clean and 
healthy environment and that includes clean water. So you will 
know that this government has recently completed a 
comprehensive review of its drinking water management 
activities. Short-term priorities were addressed and 
Saskatchewan’s long-term, safe drinking water strategic plan 
calls for expanded drinking water safety regulations and 
increased plant inspections. 
 
Over the last two budget years new funding for drinking water 
regulation totals 33 new positions and $3.8 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, other jurisdictions envy Saskatchewan’s 
air quality and our clean air strategy helps to ensure that it stays 
that way. 
 
As well, centenary funds are being used to clean up 
contaminated sites. More than $2.7 million will have been spent 
between the years 2000 and 2003 to assist municipalities in the 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

 

remediation of orphan fuel storage facilities. More than $2 
million will be used to help communities establish regional 
landfills. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan enjoys a well-deserved 
reputation for our effective fire suppression program. Focusing 
on early detection and initial attack capacity has proven to be 
very effective at preventing costly escaped fires. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to mention just a few other 
highlights if I may. Thirty-five species are being added to the 
list of species at risk due to habitat fragmentation, invasion by 
exotic species, or changing land uses that cannot easily be 
constrained. 
 
Just under 1 million hectares were designated as part of 
Saskatchewan’s representative areas network in 2001-02. This 
brings the network to 5.4 million hectares, containing 
representative areas from all of Saskatchewan’s 11 eco-regions. 
In co-operation with Ducks Unlimited and Sask Water, 
Saskatchewan Environment is implementing a pilot program 
where farmers are paid to retain wetlands. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment is now responsible for the urban 
parks program as well as Saskatchewan’s provincial parks. 
 
Some of the upgraded facilities that park visitors will enjoy this 
year include Moose Mountain’s renovated park chalet, 
Battlefords’ new park administration building, and new 
interpretative program centres at Saskatchewan Landing and 
Duck Mountain provincial parks. 
 
It is important to note that Saskatchewan ensures 
environmentally sustainable forestry developments by applying 
the best available management science, and thorough 
consultation with all stakeholders. 
 
As well, Saskatchewan Environment works diligently to build 
co-operative and productive relationships with Aboriginal 
peoples. Some recent accomplishments include the 
development of a First Nations conservation officer program, 
and fish and wildlife management projects that reflect 
Aboriginal rights. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment’s work to protect and manage our 
province’s natural environment contributes to Saskatchewan 
residents’ health through clean water to drink, clean air to 
breathe, and clean, healthy land to support us. 
 
We will continue to meet our objectives in a manner that 
supports the economic and social and recreational aspirations of 
all Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and to 
your officials, welcome this afternoon. 
 
There’s a large number of issues that your department deals 
with, and my colleagues are going to be ones to question you 
about various areas, but I’d like to start this afternoon by talking 
to you about the park programs. 
 
A few years ago — I think when I was first elected, and I’m 
sure the minister was there at that time — there was a 

considerable amount of money that was allocated for regional 
parks. And in the last number of years it’s down to two-digit 
figures. And I’m wondering if you can give me an idea of how 
that money is spent on regional parks today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’d like to thank the member for that 
question. With respect to the regional parks, there are two parts 
to the funding, Madam Member. First of all through the 
centenary program we provide $500,000. That is used for 
various programs within the regional parks. The Saskatchewan 
Regional Parks Association has a process internally to decide 
how those funds will be allocated. As well, we provide a 
$75,000 grant directly to the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 
Association. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, thank you. Could you clarify 
what kind of programs you were talking about? You have 
$500,000; it comes to the regional parks through the Centenary 
Fund. What type of programs or facilities are actually paid for 
with this money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to advise 
the House that I actually forgot to mention one particular aspect 
of the funding that goes to SRPA (Saskatchewan Regional 
Parks Association) in my first answer and that is with respect to 
the centenary student funding that they do receive for 
employing summer students. But you were asking specifically 
about the 500,000 capital. 
 
What that goes to is to maintain support of existing 
infrastructure in the regional parks. That would go for things 
like upgrades to water and electricity connections that are 
existing already in the parks, building maintenance and building 
improvements such as painting the buildings, and a big part of 
what it would be spent on would be roofing for the existing 
buildings in the regional parks. 
 
It's important also to emphasize that this money is allocated by 
a peer review system of a committee set up by the 
Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. They review the 
proposals by the different local park boards. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can you tell our viewing 
audience how many regional parks there are in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — There are as many regional parks in this 
province as there are spots on a Dalmatian. There are 101 
regional parks in the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, can a park apply for 
maintenance or upgrading of equipment every year or is there 
. . . and can they have a project that’s continued over for a 
number of years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Madam Member, every spring the 
Regional Parks Association has a call for submissions for the 
programs to spend the capital money, and certainly the parks 
could apply year after year. It will of course be subject to the 
peer review that I talked about earlier. 
 
As long as we have the centenary funding for capital, there is 
the money available. We’ve made a commitment right now 
through to the year 2005 for the capital money through the 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

centenary program. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I didn’t hear your answer, Madam Minister, 
whether a park could apply for money for a project that could 
be carried out over two or three years, if they have something 
that can’t be done in one year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Madam Member, the projects that are 
funded through this are relatively small projects, they’re not 
large projects, so at most they might be carried over for one or 
two years. But because they are essentially small capital 
projects, like re-roofing a building or doing some upgrades to 
water connections and so forth, generally the expectation is that 
they will be completed in each year. 
 
I should also point out that the Government of Saskatchewan 
provides the $500,000 that is used to basically assist in a lot 
more. Last year there was about $1 million worth of projects 
that were carried out in the regional parks. So we are essentially 
providing seed money, and then the local communities and their 
volunteer labour and so forth assists in levering that up so that 
more work can be carried out to do the very wonderful stuff 
that’s carried on in the regional parks. 
 
And I should say at this point that one of the very first 
pleasurable duties that I had when I first was appointed to this 
ministry was to attend the annual general meeting or conference 
of the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. And I was 
extremely impressed with the dedication and diligence of all the 
people who were represented there. 
 
I think that we have wonderful treasures in the form of our 
regional parks in this province and I would like to very publicly 
on record commend the Regional Parks Association and all 
people who are volunteers with the various regional parks for 
the excellent work that they are doing in maintaining those 
parks. They are truly Saskatchewan’s treasures. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I can’t agree with you more. 
They are a treasure out in rural Saskatchewan and they do . . . 
one way that we can attract urban people out to the rural areas. 
And it was a great concern a number of years ago when the 
money for regional parks was cut back so drastically. We have 
about the same amount of funding spent on our provincial parks 
now. 
 
And I’m wondering if you can tell me, first of all, the number of 
people that are attending the regional parks as compared to the 
provincial parks? I believe that the numbers have gone up in 
provincial parks since funding was cut to regional parks. 
 
And also just to clarify your last answer, are you saying that . . . 
this money that comes from the Centenary Fund is seed money? 
Does that mean you have to have a matching amount of money 
before you get any money from the Centenary Fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Just very quickly, Madam Member, no, it 
doesn’t mean it’s seed money or that you have to have matching 
money. The point I was trying to make was that the local 
communities do assist and certainly do a lot of volunteer labour 
and help to maximize the admittedly limited amount of capital 
funding that we are able to provide through the overall 
provincial budget for regional parks. So that they, by adding 

volunteer labour and so forth and local fundraisers, they’re able 
to make the projects bigger than you would think on the basis of 
the $500,000 for capital . . . Centenary Capital funding for 101 
regional parks. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, I shouldn’t ask two questions 
when I stand up because the other question was the number of 
people that are attending, or are going into our regional parks 
and the number that are going into our provincial parks? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I wasn’t ignoring your question. I did want 
to answer the second part first, because I thought I knew the 
answer without having to ask my officials. On the first part of 
the question, I’m advised that between 2.25 and two and a half 
million people annually attend provincial parks. 
 
We do not have an estimate or a guesstimate for the number of 
people attending regional parks. So if you want, I can take 
notice of that and get you an answer. I will tell you that I am 
one of those people who goes to the regional parks. I probably 
shouldn’t — since there are 101 of them — I probably 
shouldn’t single any of them out and give a commercial for 
those . . . for any particular park. 
 
But I think that probably just about every citizen in this 
province at one point or another goes for a moment of peace 
and tranquillity or some good fun and recreation to the regional 
parks. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, has the parks tracked the 
number of tourists that are outside of Canada in the last number 
of years or is it just noted as a park entry? I’m just . . . The 
reason I’m asking is I’m wondering if tourism to our provincial 
parks is increasing from our American neighbours with the 
difference in the dollar. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise you that, as you 
know — and I think we both have the same goals — we would 
like to see more tourists from outside Saskatchewan coming to 
our provincial and our regional parks. We don’t have numbers 
with us today to give you the number of American visitors, for 
instance, but I would like to just give you a few stats, a few 
figures. And then if you want further information I can certainly 
provide it to you. 
 
We do know that the visitation to the provincial parks has 
increased over the last five years. We also do know that there 
was a slight dip in 1999 in terms of the number of visitors. But 
that’s back up again now — or at least we’re hoping, if ever 
spring should actually formally and officially arrive in this 
province not just by date, but also by the climate indicating that 
spring is here. 
 
Visitation to the parks is up for the provincial parks. We 
understand that it is also up for the regional parks and we do 
know that visitation to the urban parks — which are a new part 
of Saskatchewan Environment — that visitation to the urban 
parks and special places is also up. 
 
I would like to inform you that 35 per cent of the visitation of 
the west side parks — of Cypress Hills and Saskatchewan 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

 

Landing, for instance — are people who are from Alberta. And 
in Meadow Lake, over 50 per cent of the visitors who go to the 
Meadow Lake Provincial Park are Albertans. 
 
So we are clearly getting our share of people coming, at least 
from Alberta eastward. And we do have as well a very 
aggressive and extensive billboard campaign underway in 
Alberta to attract people to come to Saskatchewan to visit our 
parks. 
 
And we also have a very active and very successful working 
relationship with Tourism Saskatchewan, so that we are doing a 
lot of things to attract more out-of-province and out-of-country 
visitors to our Saskatchewan parks, whether they are provincial, 
regional, or urban. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, just one final question: can 
you give me an idea of what it costs for your billboard 
campaign in Alberta and outside of this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Madam Member, you were asking . . . you 
wanted the cost of the billboard campaign in Alberta to the 
penny. 
 
Well we have an . . . we’ve expanded the billboard program this 
year and that is thanks to the co-operative arrangement that I 
referred to earlier with Tourism Saskatchewan and the Canadian 
Tourism Commission. 
 
So to the penny, Madam Member, Tourism Saskatchewan is 
contributing $10,000 to the billboard campaign in Alberta, the 
Canadian Tourism Commission contributes $8,000, and 
Saskatchewan Parks under Saskatchewan Environment 
contributes $10,000. So it’s a total program of $28,000 to 
convince Albertans that our parks are prettier than theirs and 
they should come here. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good 
afternoon, Madam Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Madam Minister, if I could I’d like to spend just a few minutes 
on portions of the budget dealing with forest fire operations. 
Perhaps you could confirm for me that last year the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund was set at $40 million, I believe. And could 
you also provide the current balance of the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — As I believe the member from Carrot River 
is aware, the Forest Fire Contingency Fund is alive and well, 
and we’re hoping that we don’t have to spend it at all. We are 
hoping and I’m sure that all people in Saskatchewan are not 
only hoping but praying daily for great amounts of 
precipitation, particularly now as we’re waiting for the forest 
floor to green up. It’s particularly important that we pray for 
rain. 
 
The Forest Fire Contingency Fund, when it was originally 
established, was established with a total of $40 million in it. 
Last year we spent six . . . we drew down $6 million from that 
contingency fund to fight escaped fires. 
 
Now maybe I shouldn’t have said to fight escaped fires, because 
probably there was a little bit that was used for regular 

operation as well to prevent some fires as well. But we drew 
down the funds last year by $6 million from the original fund of 
$40 million. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
did you indicate that you drew it down by 6 million or 4 million 
— 6 million. And what amount was it drawn down by the year 
prior? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — We just established it last year. We 
established it at $40 million and drew it down by $6 million last 
year. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, 
Madam Minister, you’ve actually just identified one of the areas 
of concern that I had in that in fact two years ago the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund was identified in the budget at $50 million. 
And then there were in fact charges against it. You’re quite 
correct in suggesting that the legislation, however, was only 
passed last year. 
 
So if you could please once again give me an indication as to 
what the total amount spent from the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund has been since it was originally established and the $50 
million was identified as being set aside two years ago? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise the member for 
Carrot River that two years ago there was not a special fund, the 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund. So there was $50 million in that, 
but that was an appropriated amount — it was not a special 
fund — and so the unexpended money that had been 
appropriated for forest fires was returned to the General 
Revenue Fund at the end of the year. 
 
We don’t have the exact numbers here with us today, but we 
believe that we spent around 3 to $4 million out of that $50 
million in 2000 to 2001. But last year was the first time that we 
had the special fund actually set up as a special fund and it was 
set up with an amount of $40 million. And last year out of that 
$40 million we spent $6 million on forest fires. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam 
Minister. So then if I understand this correctly, last year you 
drew down the Forest Fire Contingency Fund by approximately 
$6 million. Then under other forest fire operations, there were 
expenditures of approximately $35 million. So total forest 
fire-related kind of expenditures would be in the area of $41 
million. Am I correct, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well you’re sort of correct. You’re 
lowballing on the numbers actually. The note I have is rather 
than $35 million, it’s $36.6 million in the base fire budget for 
2002-03. And there will be, when you add up the money that is 
in the Forest Fire Contingency Fund, in excess of $60 million 
available to fight fires. 
 
Again, I want to make the point that it is imperative that we 
hope and pray for good precipitation all across this province 
because this is the time when the forest is particularly at risk. 
And so we have people on a daily basis watching to see if there 
are any fires that are out of control. 
 
We expect though that if the precipitation that we received very 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

briefly this morning in the form of snow here in Regina is 
matched by a healthier dose of snow up in northern 
Saskatchewan that hopefully we can keep on top of the fire 
situation and we won’t have any out-of-control fires. 
 
But, again, that’s . . . that perhaps may be a bit of a vain hope. 
Every year there are fires that do get away on us, but in forest 
fires, just like in other things, you have to hope and pray a lot. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
guess what I’m trying to understand here is that we’ve got an 
expenditure of approximately 36 million last year under the 
forest fire operation side. You’ve indicated we’ve drawn down 
the Forest Fire Contingency Fund by approximately $6 million. 
And I guess the question is, is that the total of monies expended 
on firefighting last year? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I hope I’m going to be giving you the 
numbers that you’re looking for. Our fixed budget last year for 
forest firefighting was $26.861 million. And our expenses for 
fire management and forest protection was $26.861 million. So 
that comes in right exactly on budget. 
 
Last year we budgeted for small fires — those are fires under 
100 hectare — we budgeted $8 million. In point of fact though, 
we expended $15.594 million, so there was an overexpenditure 
of $7.594 million. It’s important to keep that number in mind as 
you try to track and figure out where I’m going to land with the 
$6 million drawdown from the Forest Fire Contingency Fund at 
the end of it. 
 
The large fires, we had a contingency of the 40 million, the 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund; what we spent was $6 million. 
And we had recoverable costs, though, of $1 million from the 
forest fires. So the direct costs for Saskatchewan for fighting the 
fires last year was $48.5 million. 
 
And I hope that’s clear, but I’ll answer any more questions if 
it’s not. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well I think 
we’re getting there, Madam Minister. 
 
The question that I have then, given the numbers that you’ve 
just provided, what is the additional $7.2 million being 
requested for in supplementary estimates? And why would that 
not simply have been charged against the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise the member that all 
fires, like all people, are not created equal. And we budget it 
and account for it in different ways. 
 
It’s important to note that last year we had, in total, 857 fire 
starts in the province of Saskatchewan. I find that quite an 
amazing figure. 
 
But the $7.2 million that you’re referring to is money that is 
used to fight small fires. And then there is also $8 million that 
we budgeted for the small fires. So in total, as I had said, the 
expenses to fight small fires last year came to $15.594 million. 

So that left us with an over-expenditure of $7.594 million. 
 
The Forest Fire Contingency Fund is used to fight large fires. 
So the $6 million expenditure from last year was to fight some 
of those larger fires that got away on us. We had last year 
between 400 and 450 small fires. 
 
And you know so much of fighting fires depends on where they 
strike, how many strike in a day, how quickly we can get to 
them. That’s why we have a basic fixed budget in forest 
firefighting of $26.86 million. That’s to do the fire preparedness 
— to get the staff ready and hired and trained properly, to set up 
all the equipment and things that they might need to be able to 
be nimble and flexible to get out there and fight those fires 
while they’re still small so that they don’t get away on us and 
we end up with a major loss of a very valuable natural resource. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam 
Minister. Perhaps for those folks watching out there who may 
have some difficulty getting their head around why you would 
be paying for a large fire versus a small fire differently and out 
of different funds, perhaps you could explain how it is that it 
was determined that the Forest Fire Contingency Fund would 
only pay for large or escaped fires. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Basically what we do is we budget a base 
of fixed costs that we know on a year-to-year basis we’re going 
to have. We know unfortunately that there are going to be some 
forest fires. 
 
Actually I probably shouldn’t say unfortunately because we 
also know that a certain amount of fire in a forest is healthy and 
helps to maintain a good, healthy ecosystem, helps to crack 
open the pine seeds and so forth. 
 
We wouldn’t want to get in the situation where they were in, in 
the northern United States a couple of years ago, where they 
had a lot of fires raging out of control because Smokey the Bear 
had done such an excellent job of suppressing all those fires that 
the, basically, the forest floor wasn’t cleaned off and then you 
ended up with an old forest that just got out of control. 
 
So basically we know we’re going to have a certain amount of 
fires each and every year. So therefore we budget a fixed base 
of cost and as I said that’s the $26.86 million that we budget. 
 
We know that it’s very difficult to predict what the costs will be 
of those large, escaped fires and that’s why last year we moved 
to set up this contingency fund that would be there to fight the 
fires if, heaven forbid, we would have major fire incidents that 
had gotten away on us. 
 
Our basic emphasis though, always, is on fire prevention and 
suppression on a timely basis. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Just on a 
follow-up to this, Madam Minister. I understand that in your 
forest fire planning that sometimes, you know, you reach a 
point where the season comes . . . kind of comes to an end, so to 
speak, in the forest fire season. 
 
I’m wondering how many fires were left throughout the winter 
to be taken up . . . to be put out, so to speak, after the season . . . 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

 

after the new budget came in effective April 1? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would wish that the fires quit at a certain 
point, but actually they don’t, and that’s one of the unique 
challenges that we have with forest fire suppression. 
 
Come the wintertime you think, well, here comes a lot of snow 
and everything and it gets really cold and the fires are doused 
by the snow. In point of fact, what happens sometimes — and 
depending on where the fire is — the fire can basically go 
underground into the peat and then it would flare up in the 
spring. 
 
And I’m told that we, right now, are managing about 12 of 
those kinds of fires right today; that there’s about a dozen fires 
that were smouldering throughout the winter and have now 
flared up and we’re working on them. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam. Mr. Chair, to the minister: 
then if your department knows that these fires are in existence 
and they’re in a state of significant control because of, because 
of the climate, does not your department see then a sense of 
prudency to be able to attack these fires in the early winter — 
late fall or early winter — when it would be much easier to 
douse them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m laughing a little because it is so 
obvious what the answer is. But I guess not having had the 
opportunity yet to go up to a fire line and see how they’re 
managing this, it didn’t immediately occur to me. 
 
But as you know, to put out a fire it requires water. Water does 
a curious thing in the winter in Saskatchewan — water freezes. 
So what happens is basically the fires get started and then they 
get underground into the peat. Last year we had a very long fire 
season. We had active fire starts right up until the end of 
October. 
 
The fire will then get underground and it will burn up to a 
certain point and then it’ll flare up when it comes to a dead tree 
trunk or whatever. The only way to stop this is to flood the area. 
But it’s very difficult to flood an area with water in November, 
December, January, when, if you got that water in the plane and 
you’re busy flying around, you’ve likely got a great big ice 
cube there. 
 
So that’s why we have to be very vigilant in the early spring 
and watch as we see the ground melting as the snow goes away. 
Then we try to get out there and get on top of these fires that 
were not completely suppressed from the last fall. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — . . . if you will, and then that is used to in 
fact fund a lot of . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Could the member start again 
because I believe Hansard wasn’t picking up the question. So if 
you could start at the beginning. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, with 
respect to the reforestation portion of the budget, Madam 
Minister, could you explain exactly how the funding for 
reforestation works in the province. I understand that the 
forestry companies are in fact charged a levy, a surcharge and 

then that is used for a lot of the reforestation activities. 
 
But is that the entire budget? And does that money just simply 
flow through the department or does the department fund a 
portion of the reforestation activities directly? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m sorry I’ve taken so long to be able to 
answer your question, but I hope that in my answer I’ve got at 
what the question is behind the question. And so if you will 
bear with me I want to give you the whole load in terms of 
reforestation. 
 
Now industry, as you know, pays reforestation fees. And that 
money goes into trust funds. When they do the reforestation, 
they take the money out of the trust fund and they plant the 
trees. Now quite often the companies incur . . . the costs that the 
companies incur to reforest land is more than is available in the 
trust funds, but the companies of course have a legal obligation 
to replant and they do do that. So that’s one answer. 
 
But we do know that there was a time — in the hopefully very, 
very distant past and never to be repeated again in this province 
— there was a time when the trees were not . . . when the forest 
was not adequately restocked, when adequate reforestation 
didn’t occur. 
 
So we have money in our budget to replant where the land 
wasn’t sufficiently restocked. And the most obvious example of 
that is actually, I believe, probably either within your own 
riding or close to it. And that’s of course the Pasquia/Porcupine 
forest on the east side. We have an obligation to Weyerhaeuser 
under the forestry management agreement to do the planting 
there and the department budgets for it and does do that 
planting. 
 
Now if I’m following what I think you’re asking, on page 43 
under vote 26, the subprogram of reforestation, I note — as 
indeed you have noted — that on the line on reforestation for 
2001-02, the money budgeted was $5.342 million. And for this 
year, estimated for the year 2002-03, we have estimated that we 
will spend on reforestation $3.842 million. That looks like 
there’s going to be a shortfall of $2 million, and that there will 
be significantly less trees being planted. We are not though 
compromising the principle of the protection of the forests 
long-term health. That’s a fundamental and ongoing principle 
that we hold very dearly in Saskatchewan Environment. 
 
That $2 million is a contract portion between Saskatchewan 
Environment and SaskPower and it’s for tree planting in the 
northern forest in exchange for carbon credits. So by agreement 
with SaskPower — indeed I believe they probably asked for it 
— we’re spreading the expenditure out for the reforestation, 
that $2 million, over four years rather than doing it all at once in 
this particular year. 
 
The work will still be done. The reforestation will go ahead but 
it will be spread out over four years rather than happening all 
this year. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was wondering 
perhaps, Madam Minister, if you could be a little more specific 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

in terms of the areas where that money is being spent and you 
indicated the northern forest fringe I believe. But would that be 
more in the Pasquia/Porcupine FMA (forest management 
agreement), the Prince Albert FMA, like where . . . in what 
areas are you spending the bulk of that money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The bulk of the money will be spent in the 
Pasquia/Porcupine area. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam 
Minister. You referenced the trust funds that the monies are 
deposited into when they are collected from the forestry 
companies for the reforestation fees. 
 
Do, first of all, all of the forestry companies including some of 
the smaller contractors, smaller sawmill operators, and through 
to the larger companies, do they all pay the same reforestation 
fee, the same amount? And who manages the trust funds once 
the monies are deposited into those trust funds? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — What I would like to say to you in response 
to your question, to the member from Carrot River, no one will 
be excluded from the reforestation effort that is going on in the 
province. 
 
We have trust funds set up for all the large companies already 
and we are in the process right now of setting up trust funds for 
the smaller operators. What we’re anticipating is that the 
Saskatchewan Forest Centre will likely be managing those trust 
funds on behalf of all the smaller operators. 
 
But basically, the reforestation fee is volume related. And it is 
important to note that no one is excluded and no one is exempt 
from this reforestation fee. 
 
It is important that we manage our forests as a renewable 
resource. That means that when people chop down the trees, we 
have to be able to plant anew so that we can have new trees 
growing. So we have this reforestation fee. 
 
We will set up probably an umbrella trust account for the 
smaller operators and we anticipate that it will likely be 
managed through the Saskatchewan Forest Centre in Prince 
Albert. 
 
But no one is exempt. If you chop down a tree, the expectation 
in Saskatchewan is that there will be a tree planted that will 
grow to replace that tree. This is a valuable renewable resource 
that we have in Saskatchewan. We intend to manage it properly. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
does that mean then that a company like Carrier Lumber, for 
example, that only has access to private wood, that they will be 
paying that fee as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well I apologize if I’ve misled you in my 
answer, because we really have no authority on private land. I 
assumed when you were asking the question about reforestation 
that you were talking about public lands. 
 
I mean, we have I think it’s 93 million hectare . . . or 93 million 
acres that . . . of Crown land in northern Saskatchewan that 
we’re managing, so there is very little private land ownership in 

northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So I apologize if I gave you the impression that we would have 
a reforestation fee for Carrier Lumber. They get their lumber off 
private land, so we have no authority there. 
 
But we certainly wouldn’t mind using some moral suasion, 
because of course it really is important. If you chop down a 
tree, you should be looking to replace that tree. Trees are a very 
valuable resource in Saskatchewan, and as we consider the 
implications and ramifications of Kyoto, and the possibility of 
carbon sinks, these trees are even more important than they 
were before when we just looked at them as a means of 
providing two-by-fours so that we could build houses. They are 
also very valuable in maintaining the planet’s ecosystem. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
one of the issues that I followed up with your predecessor on a 
somewhat regular basis was the issue of wood waste within 
both of the FMAs, and as you will probably recall . . . wood 
waste. 
 
As you will probably recall, a couple of years ago there was a 
very serious issue when a permit was given by your department 
to the forestry companies, and they were allowed to leave the 
4-inch tops in the bush as opposed to the 3, and huge volumes 
of waste accumulated very quickly. 
 
I understand that there have been some measures put in place to 
try and eliminate that problem, but as you well know, in any 
forestry operation there is always going to be a certain degree of 
waste of some kind. And I know in the community of Hudson 
Bay, it’s an issue that a lot of people are very, very concerned 
about. 
 
And I guess the question that I’ve asked of me most often is, 
okay, if this wood is simply going to be left in the bush to rot, 
for all intents and purposes, why can’t someone locally go in 
and gather it for firewood, use it for making post rails, doing 
something with it? A lot of people are very concerned about the 
amount of waste that there is, and I think it bothers them to a 
great degree that this resource just simply ends up, ends up 
rotting away. 
 
And I have a letter here that I’ll actually forward to you, 
Madam Minister, but it’s from a couple who expressed this 
particular concern. And they, in fact, have been going out into a 
lot of this areas where there is waste and getting . . . collecting 
firewood and . . . But it seems that at every point, there’s an 
attempt to thwart their activities to salvage this waste. And I 
know that a lot of this has to do with the various arrangements 
in terms of the companies, and the land that they work on and 
that they have available, and their right to that particular area. 
 
But I guess the . . . As well as forwarding this particular letter 
on to you, Madam Minister, the question I would have is, would 
it not be in everyone’s best interest perhaps to sit down with the 
Weyerhaeusers, the other companies operating within the 
province, and suggest that at some point after they have been 
through an area and all that remains is the waste, that it might 
be in the best interests of everyone to have . . . to give the 
communities the ability to be able to go into these areas and 
salvage this — be it for firewood, fence post rails, any number 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

 

of purposes? 
 
And I give the government some credit for having made an 
effort — and the previous minister — for having made an effort 
in terms of reducing the volume of waste that there was being 
left in the bush. Because at one point, it was, it was, it was 
horrendous, the amount of waste that was being left. 
 
But I think we could probably look after a lot of what there is 
still even just as a result of regular logging operations or regular 
operations in the bush. We could do a lot to clean even that up. 
And I was just wondering, Madam Minister, what are your 
thoughts on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to thank the member from 
Carrot River for providing me the letter from his constituents 
and I would like to assure you that we will follow this up, the 
specifics of the letter, very actively and we will respond to these 
people from Hudson Bay. 
 
But I think just now, since you’ve raised it, that I should give a 
general response because obviously we want to have — and I 
want to emphasis this — we need orderly management of the 
forest. It is a very valuable renewable natural resource that we 
have. 
 
As you were talking about salvage operations and so forth, I 
was reminded of the four R’s of conservation. And you’re going 
to do exactly the same thing that I did. Everybody always can 
get the first three and then we go like, duh, what is the fourth 
one? But there is reduction and then recycling, reuse, and 
recover, I believe, is the fourth one. But it’s important that we 
keep pushing on all four of those R’s for proper conservation. 
 
We are continuing to tighten up the requirements, the cutting 
requirements within the FMAs, so that the larger companies are 
taking smaller wood and leaving less waste. So we continue our 
efforts in terms of the reduction aspect there. It is important to 
note that FMA holders have the legal right to the wood that is in 
their FMA. We respect their right; we feel that we have a 
mutual legal obligation with them. 
 
So we work with the FMA holders to encourage them to work 
with local communities, with local small-business people in the 
area to harvest some salvage that is left over, but we want first 
of all to reduce any waste. But we do encourage the larger 
companies to — where there is salvage that could be used for 
firewood, could be used for fence posts, or even some limited 
furniture making — that we want to see the wood properly 
used. We don’t want it to rot on the forest floor. 
 
I would point out that your question is a very timely one. It was 
only last Friday at 4 o’clock in the afternoon — no, 3 o’clock in 
the afternoon — that I sat down with Steve Smith of 
Weyerhaeuser to discuss this very issue. 
 
So Weyerhaeuser, like the province of Saskatchewan, is 
concerned about reducing wood waste. And where there is 
waste due to the large lumbering operations, we then encourage 
those companies to work with the local communities to ensure 
that the wood doesn’t rot and that it can be used appropriately 
— but bearing in mind that the FMA holder is the one that has 
the legal right to the wood. 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. 
You’re quite correct about the legal right to the wood. But at the 
end of the day, Madam Minister, it’s your department that does 
issue the permits, the licences, and signs the agreements, and I 
think that ultimately that’s where the responsibility lies. And I 
think certainly that would, if nothing else, it would give you 
some negotiating leverage in terms of being able to approach 
these companies and perhaps suggest alternatives 
 
And it’s interesting that the people that get the most upset about 
this waste are the people who actually earn a living from the 
industry themselves in that they know and understand — and I 
always refer to as a case of point to Hudson Bay — they know 
and understand that if they don’t look after the resource and 
they don’t respect it, they aren’t going to be able to continue to 
earn a living. 
 
So it really bothers these people in the local communities that 
this wood is being wasted to this degree. And it, as I say, at one 
point it was in absolutely massive amounts. I certainly 
appreciate your recognition that it’s an issue and that it does 
need to be addressed. And if that can be by the community in 
any form, then I think that’s what should be done. 
 
But one of the things that we’re still dealing with, particularly 
in my area, is the piles of wood waste from a couple of years 
ago when it accumulated so rapidly. And something that’s 
become quite controversial is the burning of this waste. 
 
Could you tell me what the department’s position is on the 
burning of some of the large piles of this waste in the bush. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well the member brings up a very 
interesting point and an interesting conundrum. Because there is 
no doubt that as time has gone by, we have, all of us, this whole 
society — the companies, the government, the local 
communities — have become much more sophisticated in terms 
of how we approach the forest and the management of it. 
 
And as I said earlier in my response, it is important that we 
reduce as much as possible the wood waste. And so we work 
with the companies to have them change their timber practices 
so that there is less wood waste. But unfortunately it used to be, 
in days gone by, that there was a fair amount of wood waste 
that was accumulated. 
 
So that wood, of course, has been . . . Those trees have been 
chopped down; they’re there. It is waste. They have no 
commercial value. We, like you, are heartsick about that but we 
have to deal with the issue. We would not allow burning until 
and unless conditions allowed for it because we wouldn’t want 
to burn a pile of wasted wood and then have it get off and 
become an escaped fire. 
 
Basically right now we do have the ability with Weyerhaeuser 
at the P.A. (Prince Albert) mill to use accumulated wood waste 
for cogeneration. And so we’re taking care of that particular 
problem at that site. That doesn’t answer the question though, 
that you would have for Hudson Bay. 
 
I should also point out, though, that we are very mindful of air 
quality in this province and are doing some fairly important 
studies to look at air quality, particulates, dust in the air, and so 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

forth. Because one of the strengths and beauties of 
Saskatchewan is that we do have an abundance of clean air. We 
don’t have a lot of smog and we certainly wouldn’t want to be 
creating the smog from wood waste either. 
 
But you’ve put your finger on a very important issue that we are 
looking at and trying to find some solution to. Again I want to 
emphasize that we do feel it’s important to work with local 
communities as much as possible and to respect and to listen to 
and hear the wisdom of local people who, as you very correctly 
point out, live with this situation on a daily basis. And it is in 
their own best interests that the forests are properly managed. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. 
If I could just switch topics completely here for a second. 
 
I received an e-mail a while ago from a gentleman who is 
suggesting that there is going to be a pilot project established by 
the department at Buffalo Pound, and that this pilot project is 
going to involve establishing a lakeshore use fee, and that that 
will be used to finance cleanup and address other environmental 
issues. 
 
Now is there in fact a pilot project, Madam Minister, at Buffalo 
Pound that involves the collection or the establishment of a new 
fee with respect to these kinds of issues? And if so, is there any 
intent to . . . what is the purpose of that fee and what is the 
future intent with respect to that fee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — With respect to your question about 
Buffalo Pound, it’s important to note there is a resort village 
there and they would be ultimately the people who would be 
making the decision if there were to be any kind of fee like 
you’re talking about. It is being examined and there have been 
no final conclusions reached as of yet. 
 
There’s a land use plan that’s being discussed for Buffalo 
Pound, and it would not be Saskatchewan Environment that 
would be implementing this shore cleanup fee if it were put in 
place. That would be a question that would be . . . something 
that would be being levied by the resort village at Buffalo 
Pound. 
 
If you would like further information, though, I can certainly 
undertake to get an additional answer to you. Or if you would 
like to table the e-mail that you’ve received, I would have my 
department officials communicate directly with the person who 
has sent the e-mail and we will get a very specific response 
detailing authority and responsibility. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you for that response, Madam 
Minister. I think that the understanding of the individual was 
that this was perhaps going to be a fee levied by your 
department but I think your answer explains that. And if this is 
something that’s going to be levelled at the municipal level, 
then obviously a person has a concern with that, that’s where 
they’ll have to direct their concerns. 
 
But with respect to fees in general, when we asked the written 
question no. 38 — a while ago, you’ll recall — with respect to 
fees and fee increases, you did indicate that there would be no 

change in revenue taken in. And you did in fact provide a fairly 
detailed schedule of revenues from all of the different fees 
charged by your department. 
 
However, those were all global numbers and you did not in fact 
indicate whether there would be fee increases or decreases 
inside of those total revenue numbers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Okay, I’m not going to give you a one 
word response on this one because I don’t want to get in 
trouble. But it’s a little complicated. Some of the fees go up on 
adjustments of . . . as volumes increase and so forth. So there’s 
built into some of the fees is a natural growth that’s 
formulaic-based. But overall, one could say generally that there 
are no fee increases but you will notice that the . . . there’s no 
change in the revenue that comes to Saskatchewan 
Environment. 
 
What we have determined, though, is that there are certain fees 
for which GST (goods and services tax) is payable. And so we 
will be levying GST and remitting that appropriately. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So, 
Madam Minister, then you can assure us that there are going to 
be no increases in hunting licenses, fishing licenses — those 
kinds of things this year — over the course of the, over the 
course of the year in any of those? Or park fees or any, any of 
those direct fees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise the member opposite 
that the situation with respect to hunting license fees and fishing 
fees and so forth is so stable that we’ve actually sent out the 
hunting and angling guides with the picture of the former 
minister on them. So it’s a very pretty picture of the member 
from Athabasca, but we thought that since he was so adamant 
that we not increase the fees that we would keep his photo in 
the hunters’ and anglers’ guides this year. 
 
Actually what we were doing was making sure that . . . anyway. 
 
But there were no rate or service fee increases for this fiscal 
year. I did mention the GST issue and also talked . . . I tried to 
indicate that there are some volume-based increases. But those 
are, those are, those are based on a formula. But just overall 
generally, what you paid for your fishing licence last year is 
what you’re going to pay for it this year. 
 
And I hope you don’t do as I did. I bought my fishing licence 
last year, used it once, and then went home and laundered it. 
And so it came out just in little bits of paper and I didn’t feel 
that I could go back and fish any more even though I had paid 
for a full season’s worth of fishing because it was just a bunch 
of little scraps of paper that came out of the washing machine. 
 
Now, now we get into fishing tales. Have to tell you, I was very 
pleased last summer to go up north and go fishing. And I am the 
world’s lousiest fisher. I caught an awful lot of stuff. What I 
caught was a lot of weeds. 
 
And I actually did hook one fish — little, itty-bitty guy — and 
as I was trying to decide if I would reel it in or not, my good 
friend from Athabasca said, oh I’ll take it off the hook for you. 
And he reached over and . . . this guy knows catch-and-release 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

 

really well because before I was able to decide if I wanted to 
have that fish to take it home to fry for dinner, the fish had got 
away from the member from Athabasca and it was back in the 
water where it belonged. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
well as we are all aware, the revenue from some of those fees 
we’ve just been discussing — particularly the hunting and 
fishing licences — a percentage of those revenues are 
ultimately supposed to end up in the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund. 
 
And I guess, Madam Minister, we’ve certainly had a 
wide-ranging discussion on the use of the surplus by your 
government this year and the way that you are now funding 
certain other entities that were formerly funded directly by the 
department, and the fact that revenue from those fees going to 
the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund will now actually be 
funding 18 civil service positions as well that were formerly 
funded directly by the department. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, the Provincial Auditor has suggested 
that he will be taking a look at the use of those funds and the 
surplus from that fund in order to determine the . . . in order to 
determine if the law, the criteria for the fund is being followed. 
 
Madam Minister, do you support the Provincial Auditor 
examining the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Members, I would like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to the Assembly this afternoon a 
couple of individuals from my constituency. First of all, I’d like 
to introduce Justice Halderman who has come to Melfort, I 
believe, a couple years ago and is a Provincial Court judge I 
believe. And the reason that I’m not real sure about this is I can 
quite happily report that we haven’t had the opportunity to have 
any kind of professional relationship over these two years. 
 
But Justice Halderman is here today with his daughter Amy 
watching the proceedings of the House and I’d ask all members 
to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment 

Vote 26 
 

Subvote (ER01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you. I would like to also welcome 
Justice Halderman and Amy here. And I hope that we are 

providing sufficient answers and entertainment for you to keep 
you glued to your seat here. 
 
Now I said jokingly, finally you were asking me a question 
about the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. I enjoyed 
answering the questions during question period and I enjoyed 
answering the questions that the members of the steering 
committee put to me when I met with them a couple of weeks 
ago to discuss the specifics of how we are funding — for this 
year only — the 17.8 staff positions and what they will be 
doing. 
 
And you ask me whether or not I support the auditor in his 
examination of our use of the Fish and Wildlife Development 
Fund. Not only do I support the auditor in that endeavour, I 
would expect that the auditor would be looking at how we are 
accounting for these funds. This is a normal procedure and 
normal practice for auditors. This is what we expect them to do, 
so . . . And I am sure that when the auditor reports you will find 
that, yes, indeed, we are properly using these funds. 
 
I would like to refer the member opposite to The Natural 
Resources Act, a consolidation from 1993. And if you could 
turn to section 20 of The Natural Resources Act, that section is 
subtitled the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund and is the 
legal authority under which the fund was created. If you then 
turn to subsection 26 . . . 20(6), you will find detailed there, 
from points (a) through to (i), what the minister may use the 
assets of the fund for. If you would like, I could certainly read 
into the record what they can and cannot be used for. Okay? 
 
If you would . . . I’ll give you the whole load then. Here comes 
section 20 of The Natural Resources Act, and I think, if you 
follow it through, you will see that we are properly accounting 
for and expending money in the Fish and Wildlife Development 
Fund. 
 
Certainly when I met with the members of the steering 
committee, they . . . their concerns and fears were allayed when 
we sat down and took them through the very detailed specifics 
of what is happening in the fund. 
 
Before I read it, I do want to emphasize that this use of the 
accumulated surplus in the Fish and Wildlife Development 
Fund is for this year and this year only. Next year, it will revert 
to normal practices. But section 20(6) reads: 
 

The minister may use the assets of the fund for: 
 
(a) the acquisition, by purchase, lease or otherwise, of any 
area of land or any rights with respect to land that the 
minister considers to be suitable for fish or wildlife related 
purposes; 

 
That would be, for instance, purchase of land, conservation, 
easements and so forth. 
 
Section (b) reads: 
 

The minister may use the assets of the fund for: 
 
the acquisition, by purchase, lease or otherwise, of any 
equipment or materials or the retention of any services (I 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

underline that: the retention of any services) that the 
minister considers necessary to restore degraded fish 
populations or fish habitat, to create new fishing 
opportunities or to manage fish habitat or wildlife habitat; 

 
(16:30) 
 
I’ve already mentioned in response to questions from the side 
opposite in the House, during question period, that there are fish 
hatcheries for instance that are funded through the Fish and 
Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
Clause (c) reads that the assets of the fund may be used for: 
 

the development and management for fish or wildlife 
related purposes of any land mentioned in clause (a), or any 
other land controlled by the Crown in the right of 
Saskatchewan, in any manner that the minister considers 
advisable; 

 
And of course, what the minister considers advisable is 
activities that help to enhance the very valuable natural 
resources that we have in terms of our fish and wildlife. 
 
Section (d) reads that the assets of the funds may be used for: 
 

the design, development and operation of facilities to 
enhance fish habitat and fishing opportunities; 
 

There you get the activities that are used: the fish hatchery; the 
hydro-acoustics stuff — that’s a fancy name for the fish-finders, 
the sonic thingamajiggies that tell you where the fish are 
swimming around, that give poor fisher . . . fishers like me a 
better than even chance against those poor little fish. But it still 
doesn’t work. 
 
Section (e): 
 

the acquisition of fish for fish stocking projects; 
 

We’ve obviously got to buy some fish to be able to stock. 
 
Section (f) reads that the assets of the funds may be used for: 
 

the provision of assistance, on any terms and conditions 
that the minister considers advisable, to conservation 
groups for the development, operation or maintenance of 
locally sponsored fish enhancement or wildlife 
enhancement projects; 

 
That would include protection enhancement activities; the 
RANs (representative area network); the conservation 
agreements with Ducks Unlimited, Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, Nature Conservancy of Canada, and the Rocky 
Mountain Elk Foundation. 
 
So we work very closely with those four groups to be able to 
lever funds so that we can get as many acres of land as possible 
that will be used for conservation purposes. 
 
Section (g) relates to using the funds for: 
 

the provision of information, by way of promotional, 

educational or other activities, related to stimulating and 
encouraging public knowledge and awareness of fish and 
wildlife and of projects financed by the fund related to fish 
and wildlife; 

 
This one is key, I would say to the member from Carrot River, 
because we do hunter education activities through there, 
ensuring that people are going to be using their firearms in a 
responsible manner and ensuring that the woods are safe when 
the hunters are out there. 
 
Section (h) reads that the funds may be used for: 
 

the assessment or evaluation of any waters in Saskatchewan 
for their fish or fish habitat potential or any land for its 
wildlife or wildlife habitat potential. 

 
So the member for Moosomin was asking earlier, before we 
started these formal proceedings, about antelope. This is where 
we would for instance find the money to do aerial surveys to 
determine how many antelope there were, or to be looking in 
different areas to see how many deer there are, to be having our 
regional ecologists do the good and fine work that they do. 
 
Finally, the final subsection in section 20 relating to the use of 
the funds reads that the assets of the funds may be used for: 
 

(i) the payment to a rural municipality of a sum of money 
in lieu of taxes respecting provincial lands within the 
municipality that were acquired through the fund. 

 
And that, I would say, is where the Municipal Habitat 
Conservation Fund comes in, so that we are paying a grant in 
lieu to the municipalities so that when land is set aside through 
working with Ducks Unlimited or the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, when land is set aside, the municipalities don’t see 
this as a loss because we are . . . we’ve set aside a fixed amount 
to pay a grant in lieu of taxes each and every year. 
 
And that fund, the Municipal Habitat Conservation Fund 
currently holds $2 million and that use is restricted by 
minister’s order. So the money is there to pay the taxes. 
 
I hope that I haven’t bored you with my extremely long answer. 
But in point of fact we welcome and we expect the auditor’s 
scrutiny of the use of the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. 
 
And we firmly believe that everything we are doing is in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act and we look forward 
to this House receiving a report from the auditor on this topic 
next year. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Thank you, Madam 
Minister, and thank your officials. And I look forward to further 
discussion in the days and weeks ahead. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
move considerable progress on the Department of Environment 
estimates, and if we could move to the Public Service. 
 

General Revenue Fund 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

 

Public Service Commission 
Vote 33 

 
Subvote (PS01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the minister responsible to 
introduce her officials; and if she wishes, make a brief 
statement. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today 
is Wynne Young to my left, the Chair of the Public Service 
Commission; and to her left, Lorraine Von Hagen, manager of 
corporate services; directly behind me, Clare Isman, executive 
director, human resource development; and beside Clare, Rick 
McKillop, executive director of employee relations. 
 
And we’re pleased to be before the legislature today in 
estimates to answer the questions of the opposition. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I also wanted to 
welcome the officials here today. And the first question is that, 
your government has been talking about reducing staff and 
making for a smaller, smarter government, and I see in this 
particular department you’ve decreased the staffing from 133.7 
to 117.9. What particular area within the department was 
affected by this downsizing of staff? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, thank you for the question. I can 
be very specific on that. In the administration area there was a 
reduction of 8; in human resource, information services 1.5; 
employee relations, 3.5; human resource development, 4; and 
there was one increase in the Aboriginal internship and 
management development program, an increase of 1.2. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Ms. Minister. Can you tell us or 
give us the details here today of how these reductions 
manifested itself within the other government departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, without getting into specifics 
right away, I can say that certainly the direction that all 
departments were given was to not affect front-line service 
delivery and to draw the reductions from administrative, HR 
(human resources), and other areas like that. And certainly to 
have the priority of keeping front-line public service delivery 
intact. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I haven’t to 
date received the global numbers from your department. Would 
those be made available fairly shortly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We believe that the numbers will all be 
available May 17. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Taking into 
account the existing vacancies, how much was saved by the 
government during the time frame in which there was a freeze 
on hiring? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This is a difficult question to answer, 
mostly from the . . . It’s not impossible to answer but difficult to 
answer from the point of view that some positions . . . some 
departments have vacancies that were just in the process of 
being filled. So they were delayed in filling . . . 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Sorry. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the speaker so if we could just please to come 
to order and have some decorum. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, we’d have to be very specific 
what question we’re answering because some vacancies would 
have been vacant just in the normal course of things and 
weren’t necessarily directed by the direction to freeze. The 
vacancies that weren’t filled because of the freeze direction, 
only the individual department managers would actually know 
which ones were vacant anyway and which ones were 
particularly held vacant because of a freeze that they would 
have normally staffed because there’s always a bit of a vacancy 
level running in government. 
 
Now I guess the important thing to know there is that 
departments spent in the previous budget year based on their 
budget for that year. Now they have new budget figures and 
now they will have to live within the new budget figures. So the 
degree to which they’ve reduced from the spending last year to 
the spending that they’ve got this year would be the saving, if 
you want to put it that way. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I realize that it 
would be very difficult for you to have those numbers with you 
right here today, but can you provide us fairly shortly with a list 
in each department as to how many positions were reduced, 
how many of these positions were vacant at the time, and how 
long that they were vacant? And I will look forward to that list, 
perhaps within a week or so? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — If the member would accept that staff 
would contact her in order to be very clear what the question is 
before we send people off to gather information because there’s 
a lot of wrinkles around vacancy, part time, short term. There’s 
a whole range so we want to be real clear what the question is 
before we send people off to get the answer. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — That would be satisfactory, Madam 
Minister. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
and to your officials, welcome. Madam Minister, during the 
time that there was the freeze on hiring and filling vacancies, I 
know that there were a number of different departments had 
different itinerary bookings, conventions outside of 
Saskatchewan, and travel outside of the province, and actually 
had fares booked and places booked that they were supposed to 
attend. And I understand that there was a lot of cancellation had 
to take place. 
 
Is your department aware of these cancellations and the costs 
that would be involved in this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That would be Finance that would have 
those kind of details. We’re strictly the human resource part of 
it, not the other expenditures. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Since the hiring 
freeze has been lifted, how many employees have been hired, 
either to fill vacancies or new positions? 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2002 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Since April, 57 positions have been 
advertised and not yet filled. And the kind of positions, there 
would be things like social worker, aircraft maintenance 
engineer, laboratory technologist, equipment operator, lab 
technician, parental care attendant, just to give you some 
examples. 
 
But the advertising resumed and 57 have been advertised since 
April. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Fifty-seven advertised positions, but how 
many of those have been filled? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Forty-seven of those have been filled. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Do you foresee a need to advertise or to hire 
any more in the next near future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The departments, once their budgets 
are set, and as they have been set at the lower level with the 
reductions that were announced by the Premier, then that is 
their budget to work with. So that’s their budget for the whole 
year. We don’t analyze positions on a day-by-day basis. Once 
you’ve got your budget, then you’re expected to work within 
that. 
 
Now if we were to find part way through the year that we had to 
make further adjustments, then we would make that decision 
then. But at the moment the budgets that we’re here discussing 
today are the budgets that have been approved for them for the 
coming year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. With the 
recent government reorganization, how many positions 
disappeared in terms of deputy ministers, assistant deputy 
ministers, and upper management? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We were just clearing up whether we 
actually had that information. And because the deputy to the 
Premier is responsible for the upper level of deputies and 
management, we could sort of count in our heads and say, well, 
this department is changed and whatnot. But it would be more 
appropriate to ask those questions of that very high upper 
management level in the Executive Council estimates. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Okay. Last year we saw a major increase in 
the public service positions. How many of these new people 
hired last year lost their jobs as a result of the overall reduction 
and government reorganization? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — 15.3 of the increase last year was for 
the Aboriginal internship program and all of those are still in 
place. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Okay. When you had mentioned that you 
weren’t responsible for knowing the numbers of the assistant 
deputy ministers and deputy ministers and so on, what level is 
your department responsible for? Where is the cut off of where 
they are not responsible to know the staffing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The difference is between whether 
positions are order in council or within the classified service of 
the public service. So we’re responsible for the large body of 

hiring in the public service, but orders in council are done by 
the deputy to the Premier, which is Executive Council. 
 
Now we could obtain the numbers for you, but we don’t 
actually have them right now today. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and we would 
very much appreciate those numbers in the future. 
 
How many students this year will be hired under the summer 
student program and how does that compare with the numbers 
that were hired last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The reason I was taking a minute there 
was there’s two separate programs. Well there’s actually three 
areas because there’s a centennial, there’s the hiring the Crowns 
do, and then there’s the regular summer government hiring. So 
there’s actually three separate categories of student hiring. 
 
The centennial jobs are the ones targeted particularly at career 
development. The other jobs would be more your . . . your more 
typical summer job. And then the ones with the Crowns we 
don’t directly get involved with. 
 
But from the centennial, last year the centennial was 1,516 and 
government, other government jobs for students were 531 for a 
total of 2,047. And for the centennial summer student program 
this year there’s . . . for the total program it’s 1,350, and for 
government generally, six hundred and . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, that’s minus the 240 . . . It’s 400, just a 
little over 400. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell 
us how these students are paid? Where does the money come 
from that makes the payroll for the students? Does it come from 
out of your department or from other departments, or where 
does the money come from? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, there’s two ways they’re paid. For 
a regular government department it comes completely out of 
their budget, and then for a department that’s hiring under the 
centennial program there’s the 40 per cent matching and they 
find the rest within their own budget. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The reduction 
in the number of students hired, was that by design because you 
have chosen to cut back on that program? Or are there other 
reasons of why there’s less students hired this year than last 
year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s strictly a budgetary measure. The 
fact of the matter is is that lots more people would like to hire 
lots more students if there was lots more support. But this is 
what we feel we could afford this year. 
 
And certainly it’s a flexible program and everybody anticipates 
a pickup in economies right across Canada and we should be 
able to expand that again as things improve. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I know that 
I’m hearing it in my office and I’m wondering if your office 
also got phone calls with people, in particular businesses, 
complaining that the restriction on the summer job program was 



April 29, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

 

only for government and government related departments and 
that there wasn’t a student program available for the business 
owners. 
 
Have you been hearing that and have you taken it into 
consideration to broaden that program to include businesses? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s really two issues there. One of 
them that . . . is that government in Saskatchewan, NGOs 
(non-governmental organization), parks, etc., are all large 
public service organizations that are all in the process of having 
a lot of their older staff retire. So one of the purposes of this 
program is succession planning where you’re preparing a new 
group of people to take over the leadership roles in all these 
various public sector organizations. 
 
The other part of it is that the federal government already 
provides a fairly substantial private sector program. So our goal 
was not to duplicate what the federal government was doing but 
instead to fill a need in the private sector for career related jobs 
related to what the students are studying at university. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That’s all the 
questions that I’ll have for today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 


