















































Hansard: April 24, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 965 
 April 24, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the government’s 
shoddy treatment of the Saskatchewan snowmobile industry. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincially owned trails; and obtain 
funding for this through the sale of provincially owned 
grooming equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown 
land and provincial parks, and the attachment of trail 
permits to snowmobile registration. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are over a dozen petitions here and 
they are signed by citizens of Dodsland, Kindersley, Regina, 
Saskatoon, Christopher Lake, Regina, Birch Hills, Murray 
Point, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the increase in 
long-term care fees. And the prayer on the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Humboldt and Bruno. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are concerned 
about the increases in the long-term care rates. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Lintlaw 
and Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens from across this province 
concerned about the exorbitant fee increase for long-term care 
services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the communities of Wadena, Margo, and Kuroki. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned with fee 
increases for long-term care. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Rose Valley and Weyburn, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition from citizens that are deeply 
concerned over this government’s treatment of senior citizens. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Kelvington and 
Nut Mountain. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good communities 
of Weyburn and McTaggart. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens on the issue of long-term care fees. The 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the communities of 
Leroy, Endeavour, and Preeceville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens who wish to halt crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Findlater, Craik, Bethune, and 
Holdfast. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increase in long-term care 
home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From citizens from Wadena, Kuroki, Rama, and Lintlaw. Thank 
you. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
again stand today with a petition about people that are upset 
about the deplorable state of Highway No. 15. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And yet again, the petitioners are from all over the province, 
showing how well-travelled this highway is. It’s signed by 
people from Nokomis, Kelliher, Blaine Lake, Regina, Young, 
Simpson, Semans, Imperial, and Three Hills, Alberta. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I reside today to present 
another petition on behalf of constituents concerned about the 
massive fee increases for long-term care. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Cupar and Southey, and I might add that the 
majority of them are seniors. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding our senior 
increases, or long-term care increases on seniors. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out . . . 

 
Oh, this is the crop insurance one. Sorry, this one’s regarding 
crop insurance. I have so many petitions, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t 
know which one I was grabbing. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Chitek Lake, from Victoire, from Parkside, Shell Lake, and 
Shellbrook. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by farmers of Saskatchewan concerned about the 
increases in crop insurance fees. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Luseland and 
Unity. 
 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional 
papers no. 7, 23, 24, 31, and 59. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: regarding the Dorsey report on 
the workmen’s compensation board, when will the 
government respond to the recommendations contained in 
the report? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, 
three individuals seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — Jonna 
Kaipainen, Maelys Varillon, and Darryl Walls. 
 
Jonna is from Finland. She’s an exchange student who came to 
Chaplin in September. She’s a grade 11 student and she is on 
Chaplin’s silver honour roll. She’ll be leaving us in July. And 
later in life, Jonna would like to go into medicine, and at this 
time in her life she sees herself working in Third World 
countries. 
 
Maelys is from France. She came to us in January to Chaplin, 
and she’ll be leaving in July as well. Maelys is also on the silver 
honour roll at Chaplin School and would like to become a judge 
later in life. 
 
Both young ladies came to Canada through the student travel 
schools program, STS, Mr. Speaker. They’re both avid skiers 
and made a trip to Banff in February with the STS program. 
 
The girls are accompanied by Mr. Darryl Walls, a retired 
teacher at Chaplin and a recipient of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Award for sport, culture, and recreation in the year 
2000 and is still very involved with Encounters with Canada. 
 
I’m told that both girls are very popular in the Chaplin School 
and in the entire community. And I hope that all members will 
extend these three individuals a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Humboldt Music Festival Rose Bowl Award 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
congratulate Kristen Theissing, the recipient of the Humboldt 
Music Festival Rose Bowl Award. This award is given to a 
competitor that has shown outstanding talent in musicianship in 
the festival. 
 

Kristen is a 17-year-old grade 12 student at Humboldt 
Collegiate. She began singing lessons when she was eight years 
old and last year while in grade 11 Kristen decided to begin 
piano lessons. 
 
After only one year of study she is already at a grade 4 piano 
level. Kristen is also studying theory and will be writing her 
grade 2 exam this spring. 
 
Kristen has entered classes in the Humboldt Music Festival both 
as a pianist and a vocalist, winning various awards and 
scholarships over the years. She has been a member of her 
church choir and a soloist for various functions. 
 
Kristen is an extremely dedicated young woman and works hard 
at her music studies and she will graduate from high school this 
spring and plans to pursue a music career at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Kristen is a very worthy recipient of the 2002 Rose Bowl 
Award and I ask all members to join me in congratulating her 
on this achievement. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Minister of Agriculture Seeks Federal Aid 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, now that everyone recognizes, 
except perhaps the members opposite, that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers cannot afford to compete with the combined 
treasuries of the United States and European Union, we want to 
recognize the work of our Minister of Agriculture as he goes to 
Edmonton to bring the concerns of our farmers and their 
families to the forefront with his federal counterparts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all reports indicate that this could be another year 
of drought. And although the warm temperatures are better than 
our winters, the long summer days are painful reminder of the 
problems that continue to plague and hinder the lives of many 
rural and farming families. 
 
Our Minister of Agriculture will be meeting with Mr. Vanclief 
to add his voice to the chorus of the farm lobbyists for the $1.3 
billion in bridge funding, also known as trade injury relief, to 
help all Canadian farmers who are suffering from low grain 
prices caused by massive international subsidies. 
 
This crisis has caused farm organizations, producers, and 
provincial ministers from across the country to agree that 
subsidies of American and European farmers are completely 
unfair and totally distort the market against Canadian producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I respectfully ask that all members of this 
legislature use whatever tools at their disposal to assist the 
Minister of Agriculture. We want to remember what is 
important here is the survival of our farming families and of our 
province, not partisan politics. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Wednesday, 
April 24 all across North America businesses large and small 
will be honouring some of their companies’ most important 
people. Today is Administrative Professionals Day, Mr. 
Speaker, and all members of the House recognize those among 
us who day in and day out do their best to make our lives and 
our work that much better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on both sides of the House know the 
vital role that administrative professionals play in our 
day-to-day lives. We know, Mr. Speaker, that without them our 
offices would definitely not run as smoothly as they should. 
 
It’s more than phones, letters, faxes, reports, mailing, and filing, 
Mr. Speaker. Our administrative professionals are the first voice 
that people hear when they call our offices. And they’re the first 
face people see when they walk in. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 
our administrative professionals are essential in establishing a 
working relationship with constituents, colleagues, and outside 
contacts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time on behalf of the members on this side 
of the House, I’d like to recognize all those who are back in our 
constituency offices. We appreciate your hard work and 
dedication. 
 
Also on behalf of the members of this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, a special thank you to our three administrative 
professionals — Leanne, Joanne, and Mavis — who work in 
our caucus office. These three special women are always 
willing to lend a hand and are only too happy to help out in 
whatever way they can. 
 
Also at this time, Mr. Speaker, a special hello and get well wish 
is extended to Mavis — you are continually in our thoughts and 
prayers, and we’re looking forward to seeing you soon. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with my 
colleague across the way in recognizing the very important 
work that our administrative professionals perform for us on a 
daily basis. 
 
As you well know, this particular day used to be called 
Secretaries Day. But we all know that secretaries do far more 
than purely secretarial tasks. And that’s why a changing 
profession deserved a change in name; a new name that more 
accurately reflects the demands placed on administrative 
professionals. 
 
During the information age, Mr. Speaker, administrative 
professionals are doing more and more for all of us. They are 
becoming our information managers. Behind every successful 
office, there is an efficient unit of administrative support staff 
making those of us fortunate enough to have support look good. 
Administrative professionals go that extra mile to make our 
offices run smoothly. 
 
And while we’re thankful for the support of our administrative 

professionals every day, we do not often acknowledge just how 
much they contribute to the efficient running of our office. 
Today is the day when we can openly and officially express our 
gratitude to these professionals. Today we also acknowledge the 
teamwork that is essential and that no one person is more 
important than another. It takes a concerted effort for things to 
run smoothly in any office. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I wish to express our 
gratitude and appreciation for the work of our . . . all of our CAs 
(constituency assistant) and for the work of our caucus office 
administrative professionals — Gail, Jannet, Margaret, and 
Jean. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Win Drama Awards 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Drama is an integral 
part of our culture and first exposure to drama productions 
usually occurs at the school level. Today I rise to acknowledge 
two schools in the Kelvington-Wadena constituency who 
recently competed in regional drama festivals. 
 
Wadena presented And Then There Was One at the Yorkton 
Regional Drama Festival while Porcupine Plain presented 
Amber Waves at the Prince Albert Drama Festival. While 
neither won best overall production, individuals from each 
production were recognized for their own personal skills. 
 
From Wadena, Baron Zarowny won top acting award, Kevin 
Nakrieko received honourable mention and certificate of merit 
for acting, and technical certificates of merit went to Jessica 
Harding for costumes, Jason Kuras for sound, Jena Tweidt and 
Jessie Hultin for props. 
 
Porcupine Plain won the runner-up for best technical 
production, Blane Langdon won certificate of merit for acting, 
Stacey Lutz won certificate of merit for stage management, and 
Anton Farber won certificate of merit for technical 
management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these may very well be our next generation of 
actors and actresses and technical producers. I would ask the 
legislature to join with me in congratulating these students and 
wish them well in future competitions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Speech by the Member for Rosthern 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, former Ontario Premier 
Bob Rae once said of the once relevant Joe Clark that: 
 

Being attacked by Joe Clark is like being savaged by a dead 
sheep. 

 
I was reminded of the quote last night during the fourth — or 
was it the fifth — hour of the member from Rosthern’s shall we 
say slightly repetitious tirade against everything that lives, 
breathes, walks, talks, waves, flies, buys, sings, and regenerates 
in Saskatchewan. What a performance, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — In honour of yesterday’s Canada Book 
Day here is a dyspeptic part of a sour poem for the member to 
make into a sampler for his wall: 
 

The old cow, the old cow she is dead; 
It sleeps well, the horned head. 
We poor lads, ‘tis our turn now 
To hear such tunes as killed the cow. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, one gets the impression that the member isn’t 
happy. 
 
So my question is: if he’s so miserable and if he thinks his 
personal misery should lead to a non-confidence vote in the 
government, why did not he and his colleagues allow last 
night’s motion to come to a vote? 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, if things are so bad, why don’t the 
public opinion polls reflect it? Could it be, Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder, that member . . . members opposite are peddling snake 
oil, completely rejected by the people who do live here and like 
it; who do work here and are proud of it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jolene McIvor’s Curling Accomplishments 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’d like to take this opportunity to talk about a 
remarkable constituent of mine from Davidson, Jolene McIvor 
and her curling teammates, Teejay Surik, Janelle Lemon, and 
Maegan Strueby. Jolene’s remarkable junior women’s curling 
team excelled in their sport this past winter, winning the 
Saskatchewan Junior Women’s Championship in Nipawin on 
December 31. This was McIvor’s last shot at the junior 
championship, having turned 20 last year. 
 
Previous attempts at the championship came close, but this year 
they curled very well together as a team and success was finally 
achieved. The McIvor team travelled to the Canadian junior 
women’s curling finals in Summerside, PEI (Prince Edward 
Island) held during the week of January 19 to 27, 2002. 
 
All through the week, the team curled very well together with 
McIvor providing calm leadership and steady shots, making it 
through to the semi-final round against the home team from 
Prince Edward Island. 
 
They had a hard fought game against this team and ended up 
losing in the final moments. However, they emerged with the 
bronze medal for the province of Saskatchewan, an 
accomplishment very worthy of note in this House. 
 
Jolene is the daughter of Perry and Ronna McIvor of Davidson. 
Curling has always been the family sport with Jolene often 
curling with the three sisters under the expert instruction of 
their experienced curling parents. 
 
The McIvor family has over the years been strong supporters of 
the Davidson Curling Club . . . (inaudible) . . . medal and bring 

the Saskatchewan junior women playdowns to Davidson a 
couple of years ago. 
 
Jolene is a second-year University of Saskatchewan student 
who presently curls out of the Nutana Curling Club in 
Saskatoon. I am very confident that Jolene will succeed at the 
adult level of the women’s curling. 
 
With that, I would ask that all the members join me in 
congratulating Jolene McIvor and her teammates on the 
remarkable accomplishment this past winter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Long-Term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. People across 
Saskatchewan are talking about the NDP’s attack on long-term 
care residents through exorbitant fee increases. 
 
The letters, petitions, phone calls, and e-mails to our offices are 
increasing daily as people begin to realize that the NDP plan to 
go after 90 per cent of a long-term care resident’s income. 
 
The NDP have tried to present this fee increase as only 
affecting the wealthy or seniors with an annual income of over 
$50,000. But according to the NDP, even a senior living at the 
poverty line is considered wealthy because they too will see 
their long-term care fees increase rather dramatically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps is the minister and the Department of 
Health taking to notify existing long-term care residents and the 
Saskatchewan public in general exactly how the fee increases 
are going to affect them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first thing I 
would like to say is that the member opposite and all of his 
colleagues refer to letters on a daily basis. I have not received 
those letters that they have mentioned in the House and I would 
ask them to send those forward to us. So I would ask them to do 
that. 
 
The other point, Mr. Speaker, is that the health districts across 
the province have in various ways informed their members. In 
Regina Health District for example, letters went out a couple of 
weeks ago, at least now, to all of the people who are long-term 
care residents to explain what the changes would mean. It went 
to their families so they could look at it and discuss the various 
questions. 
 
This is the plan for the whole province, that this kind of 
information would be provided because that’s what needs to be 
done. And it’s gone out in most places already. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
participated in a radio open-line show this morning. And a man 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

called in who had an elderly relative in long-term care. He said 
he had seen the minister on television saying the only people 
who were going to see their long-term fees go up would be 
seniors whose annual income was greater than $50,000 a year. 
He was unaware that the fee increase actually starts at an annual 
income of less than $12,000. 
 
There was also a call from a family member of another 
long-term care resident who said they were already subsidizing 
their loved one’s care by paying for their drug and incidental 
costs and they were wondering how on earth they were going to 
be able to afford any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s just not long-term care residents who are 
looking for information about the fee increases. Mr. Speaker, I 
understand that the minister will be circulating information to 
long-term care residents, but how are the rest of the public of 
Saskatchewan going to be informed about the specific rate 
increases for long-term care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve mentioned last 
week about where people can contact if they have very specific 
questions. And they can contact people in the department; they 
can contact people in the health districts. There is general 
information that’s gone out and there will continue to be more 
information. 
 
The other thing is to remind everybody is these fee increases 
take place October 1 of this year. That’s a number of months 
away and the information will go out to people so that they can 
look at that. 
 
I want to remind everybody that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
are contributing $337 million — this is taxes we collect — $10 
million more than last year. And what we are doing is we’re 
covering about 74 per cent of all of the costs of long-term care. 
 
I ask the members opposite, where are they going to find that 
money that’s there, and what are they going to do . . . what’s 
their proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, seniors and retirees who are 
planning to finance for their later years, family members who 
are looking after loved ones who may need some long-term care 
in the immediate future, and all Saskatchewan people are 
looking for information as to how this fee increase may affect 
them or affect their family members and their futures. 
 
They want to know exactly how the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) is going to raid the bank accounts so they can figure out 
if there’s any possible way to plan their future so they can avoid 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it ironic that the NDP will advertise and pay 
for huge billboards making sure people don’t stick knives in 
toasters, and yet they can’t properly inform the people of this 
province about what this exorbitant fee increase is going to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister would like to 
think that this is a great informed decision that this government 
is making. What they’re doing is raiding seniors’ bank 
accounts, and they should be held accountable for it and explain 
it to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the obstacles that we 
have to overcome is the kind of misinformation that comes 
from those people. And what the difficulty is that they pick 
little pieces and don’t provide the total picture. 
 
I encourage people to contact their health districts or the 
Department of Health to get the accurate information, and the 
kind of information that will allow them to make the plans that 
they need to make. 
 
What we plan to do is provide this province with a good health 
care system as it relates to all the different aspects. What we 
have is a challenge around the budgets that we have for this 
particular year, and the years to come. And we need to make 
sure that we look carefully at the effective use of all of the 
dollars that we have. 
 
That is part of our long-term plan, and we’re going to continue 
to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Gaming Agreement with First Nations 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of 
Gaming. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — My question is for the minister of Gaming. 
The newspaper headlines this morning suggest that a new 
25-year gaming agreement between the NDP government and 
the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) is ready 
to be announced, maybe within days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole issue of gaming in Saskatchewan 
received intense scrutiny after the financial scandal at SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) and there are still 
questions surrounding how gaming was conducted by SIGA 
and the SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority). 
 
The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) have concluded 
their investigation into SIGA and turned the results over to the 
Justice department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP agree to sign a new gaming 
agreement before the Justice department announces whether or 
not charges will be laid as a result of the RCMP investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
respond to that member’s question. It allows me to reiterate 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

 

again what happened and what the government and FSIN and 
SIGA did in a partnership to make sure that any wrongdoings 
that had been discovered were overcome. 
 
When those problems are overcome . . . And I don’t think, Mr. 
Speaker, that the members opposite should be raising police 
investigations and anything to do with that. I’d prefer that not 
necessarily be part of negotiations that are going on in good 
faith with SIGA, who has met some very high benchmarks set 
by the Provincial Auditor, commended by the Provincial 
Auditor and, Mr. Speaker, we are negotiating in good faith with 
our friends and our partners, First Nations people. And when 
the deal is completed and agreed to, it will be announced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, there are still so many 
unanswered questions about what was going on at SIGA during 
the tenure of Dutch Lerat and about how much the NDP 
government knew about it. Yet the NDP intend to sign a new 
25-year agreement to allow SIGA to expand gambling. Is a 
25-year agreement in the best interests of people of this 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will be by far the longest agreement of its 
kind in Canada. Can any of us say that the conditions for 
gaming in the province today will be the same in 25 years? 
Certainly not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP locking the people of this 
province into a 25-year gaming agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, because of the turnaround at 
SIGA we agreed to go back to the table and continue our 
negotiations. We knew there was an investigation ongoing, Mr. 
Speaker, but after SIGA had met the benchmarks that were set, 
we felt, in all good faith, that we had some competent people 
replace the CEO (chief executive officer), members of the 
board. 
 
And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, members opposite were 
present when Ed Bellegarde, the CEO of SIGA — and I believe 
the member from Humboldt was there as well — was recently 
presented with a Display of Excellence award, Mr. Speaker, 
from the Canadian gaming industry for demonstrating 
extraordinary contributions within the casino industry. Mr. 
Speaker, these are the kind of people now that serve on the 
board that we are negotiating with in good faith. 
 
I recognize that the members opposite perhaps are not interested 
in assisting First Nations in economic development and 
economic employment opportunities, Mr. Speaker. But we, on 
this side, are. It’s important to this whole province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, just a few years ago — and 
members from the government side of the House who represent 
Saskatoon will know this — the people of Saskatoon rejected 
the idea of a casino in a city-wide plebiscite. And it is reported 
that this new 25-year agreement would give SIGA the 

permission to build a casino on the east side of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government signing a new gaming 
agreement that will include a Saskatoon casino when they know 
full well that the people of Saskatoon do not want one? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
where the member gets her information. We continue to 
negotiate in good faith with First Nations people, with SIGA, 
on these very issues. 
 
Now let me just remind the members here and the people, I’m 
very proud of the fact that Mr. Bellegarde, that I just spoke 
about, since he was appointed CEO in July, 2000 and . . . or 
2001, pardon me, since that time he has realigned priorities, cut 
operating costs, and doubled the net profits. This national 
recognition that he received is proof of the progress that has 
been made by SIGA. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if people are reading the media comments 
from ministers from Alberta and Manitoba, they are saying 
Saskatchewan is the leader in assisting First Nations in creating 
economic activity and development and employment for First 
Nations. We have the template. They are going to follow our 
lead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
The Premier’s NDP government is about to sign a new 25-year 
gaming agreement with the FSIN in spite of the fact that the 
Justice department is considering laying charges in the SIGA 
scandal; in spite of the fact that this would tie the province 
down for 25 years; in spite of the fact that the people of 
Saskatoon, a city he now represents as the MLA (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) for Riversdale, have officially 
rejected a new casino development; and in spite of the fact that 
as an opposition member of the legislature, the Premier 
protested loudly against the introduction and expansion of 
gambling in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of all this, how can the Premier now sign 
and support a new 25-year gaming agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Rosthern scowls and points at our Premier. He should be 
scowling and pointing at his leader, the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, who, I will quote, in a speech he gave 
to First Nations Assembly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I 
think the pointing a finger should be at the Leader of the 
Opposition, from members in his own caucus, because what he 
said was he believes: 
 

. . . the financial success of the Saskatchewan Indian 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

Gaming Authority is one of the great and largely untold 
business success stories in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also remind the member that the casino, if 
there’s a casino in Saskatoon, it will be at the will of the people 
in that community. I would also have another quote from the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . I am impressed with the direct and business-like 
approach both SIGA and the FSIN have taken in addressing 
the governance challenges that arose in 2001. 
 
I recognize the importance of getting a new agreement 
signed as soon as possible . . . 

 
We are co-operating and bargaining in good faith with our 
partners, the First Nations people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Assets from Saskatchewan 
Valley Potato Corporation 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know only the 
NDP could lose money growing potatoes and they lost a lot of 
it. Now we learn . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. Order. The 
member start over, please. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Only the NDP could 
lose money growing potatoes and they lost a lot of it. Now we 
learn they’re losing $5 million on the sale of the potato sheds. 
That makes a loss of $28 million that we know of so far. And 
the minister in charge has called it a success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is the Minister of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). Has the minister 
learned his lesson? When is the NDP going to stop gambling 
taxpayers’ dollars on money-losing business ventures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And to the member, he will know that we have been very clear 
about getting out of the potato industry. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve sold quite a number of the buildings already and what he 
will see in the financial statements for the coming year, this 
year 2002, in fact, is a profit above and beyond what we had 
projected earlier on. 
 
So in fact there will be revenue that will flow back in to the CIC 
dividends as a result of the sale of these buildings, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s all right, but not only 
did the NDP lose $20 million in this venture, they almost 
single-handedly destroyed the potato industry in my area. It’s 
only now starting to recover and some of the businesses will 
never recover from the millions of dollars they lost when the 
NDP potato corporation went bankrupt. Yet the minister in 
charge is still calling it a success. 

Mr. Speaker, they lost millions of taxpayers’ dollars, they 
wrecked the potato industry, and they left millions of dollars in 
unpaid bills. At the very least, will the minister admit this is a 
terrible mistake and will he apologize to the people who are 
hurt by this NDP disaster? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member says that we killed the potato industry, Mr. Speaker. 
Are there things we could of done better? Absolutely there are, 
and we learn from every investment, Mr. Speaker. We learn 
from every investment. 
 
All I know, Mr. Speaker, is that when we started there were 200 
acres of potatoes grown out there — 200 acres. Now there’s 
10,000, Mr. Speaker. And there’s a good industry out there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I remind the people of Saskatchewan, who was it that 
invested the hundreds of millions of dollars in the infrastructure 
in the first place, Mr. Speaker? Who was it? Some of those 
folks over there should know the answer to that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — You know, Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about 
priorities. You know this year the NDP is attacking 
Saskatchewan seniors by taking 90 per cent of their income. 
And how much money will the NDP get from the attack on 
seniors? About $7 million — $7 million, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
one-quarter of the amount the NDP lost on its potato disaster. 
 
And now, who’s end up paying for it? Saskatchewan seniors. 
The NDP is now taking their life savings to pay for its stupid 
decisions like this one. Where is the NDP priorities? Why do 
they have millions of dollars to blow on potatoes but no money 
for Saskatchewan seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as one of the 
members said on this side, there they go sprouting 
misinformation again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said in my last answer, Mr. Speaker, that there 
are things that we learn from every investment. But, Mr. 
Speaker, having said that, is that member now saying that 
nothing should . . . we should do nothing in respect to assisting 
producers in trying to diversify our economy, particularly in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, an area where they themselves 
invested, along with the federal government, tens and hundreds 
of millions of dollars in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. Nearly 
$200 million by way of irrigation infrastructure. 
 
I think that we have a stronger industry, an industry that will 
succeed over the years to come, and it’s now in the hands of the 
private sector that I’m sure will do a good job of growing that 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

 

Justice: as the chief law enforcement officer in our province I 
would like to ask him if a final decision has been made as to 
whether there will be charges, if any, in the SIGA matter. And 
if no final decision has yet been made, does he consider it 
advisable to enter into an agreement which cannot be reviewed 
for a full generation, prior to that process being completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I thought the 
member was paying attention a little earlier when I indicated we 
were aware that the investigation was under way. Justice is still 
looking at the results of some of the police investigations. 
That’s another matter. 
 
We are negotiating in good faith with SIGA, who has met very 
high standards that were met and applauded by the Provincial 
Auditor, Mr. Speaker. They have made every effort to ensure 
good accountability in every respect in those areas where there 
were some problems. Those have been overcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we were going to ongoing never do any 
negotiations because of certain police investigations, we could 
be not accomplishing any business in this province for a long 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The community casinos have been establishing 
community development corporations in order that First 
Nations leaders can sit down with other community groups and 
other community leaders in the host communities in order to 
decide the best use of casino profits for community 
development and community undertakings and social projects 
in those communities. 
 
My question to the gaming minister is whether those 
community development corporations will be protected in the 
new 25-year-long agreement, or will the use of casino profits be 
strictly and solely the purview of SIGA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, we’ve been 
negotiating in good faith. I have a great deal of respect and 
commend the members on both negotiating teams for their 
efforts. And when they have agreed, come to an agreement we 
will let the public, the member opposite, and everybody know 
what that agreement will be, Mr. Speaker. And it will be a good 
one. 
 
I’m not prepared to discuss the contents of any agreements in 
this House or in public until it’s done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Crown Investment Corporation’s Investment Strategy 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Crown Investments. He has many times told us that this 
province is pursuing an investment strategy which is different 
than any other jurisdiction in North America. 
 
He has told us that this investment strategy of investing around 
the world is in order that wealth and investment can pour into 

Saskatchewan, creating wealth, investment, and employment in 
this province. 
 
My question for the Minister of Crown Investments: if we are 
doing something different than everybody else, and we are right 
and everybody else is wrong, why is the economy of the other 
provinces and states in North America growing and ours is 
contracting? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be pleased to answer on behalf of the government. 
 
I think members on the opposition side will be, at some point in 
time, forced to agree with the reality of the circumstances of 
2001, the drought and the impact on the productivity and the 
value of the produce that came as a result of what we do in 
agriculture. 
 
One day they will have to agree with the economists, the people 
in StatsCanada, Saskatchewan Trends Monitor, and other 
economists who have looked at the circumstance and who 
clearly understand the retraction of our economy in 2001 was 
based on agriculture. 
 
Now if members opposite care to ignore the fact that 2001 was 
a difficult year, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if they can 
recognize the fact that our GDP (gross domestic product) 
contracted in 2001, will they, all of them, stand up in this House 
and at least recognize eight previous years of successive GDP 
growth leading this province as being . . . this country as being 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment Services Corporation 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been told that the LAND 
(Land Titles Automated Network Development) project, which 
we still haven’t got up and running in this province, we are 
flogging around the globe at total travel costs of $187,000, I 
believe. 
 
Now this is such a good system that we believe we can market 
around the world. And of course if we haven’t, it’s certainly not 
through lack of effort on the part of our officials and 
government. 
 
Now my question for the government is simply this. The fact 
that we have some system superior to everybody else in the 
world — even though we can’t get it operating — the fact we 
have something superior to everybody else in the world, the rest 
of the world has failed to understand that, in spite of the money 
we have invested in flying all over the globe meeting them. 
 
Now what is the problem with the rest of the world? How is it 
that we are so much smarter than everybody else? Does the 
government think that everybody else in the world is suffering 
from a lower IQ (intelligence quotient)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Let me remind the member that the 
LAND (Land Titles Automated Network Development) system 
is working, that it has cut the cost for house transactions for the 
vast majority of citizens of the province about a half, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let me just read a little ad, Mr. Speaker, from The Globe and 
Mail, indeed from all the newspapers across Canada, an ad from 
Microsoft, which describes the LAND Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in this way. Mr. 
Speaker, it says, ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) are now industry leaders in LAND information 
systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I was given the choice between, if I was given 
the choice between listening to the member opposite or Bill 
Gates, I’d pick Bill Gates every time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse me, why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
my colleagues for giving me leave to introduce and welcome 
the president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, Mr. Mike Badham, and a number of city mayors 
that have joined us this afternoon with whom I’ll be meeting 
shortly after question period. 
 
So I would ask all members to kindly welcome some of our 
leaders of our communities throughout this great province of 
ours. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to welcome the mayors of some of Saskatchewan’s finest cities 
to the Assembly. I see Mayor Perry from Estevan, Mayor 
DeVos from Yorkton, Mayor Madden from Saskatoon, Mayor 
Schlosser from Weyburn, Mayor Korte from Humboldt, and 
also Mike Badham from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) is with them. 
 
We welcome you to the Assembly. We have met many times 
with the mayors. We look forward to meeting and working with 
them, as they represent their citizens in an expert fashion here in 
Saskatchewan. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Coronation 
Park on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asking for leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank colleagues in the legislature. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 
legislature, it’s my pleasure to introduce a acquaintance of mine 
whom I’ve known for a long time. He’s an honorary 
north-ender in that he taught school, actually taught social 
studies at Robert Usher for quite a number of years up until he 
retired. Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to help me in 
welcoming Fred Steininger to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington on a 
point of order. 
 

POINTS OF ORDER 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my point of order is that the member for Regina Victoria during 
members’ statements used terms derogatory to the members of 
the opposition in referring to them as snake oil salesmen. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask that the member apologize and withdraw 
his remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw North on the 
point of order only. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, as is always the case in 
ruling on the use of language in the House, it’s context that 
determines whether it’s in or out of order. I suspect, Mr. 
Speaker . . . or I suggest, I should say, that you will want to 
refer the Hansard to recognize the context and I think that, Mr. 
Speaker, you will find that the use of the phrase that the hon. 
member for Victoria used was entirely in order. 
 
If the hon. members are feeling a little bit guilty about tags that 
they may have to wear, that’s their problem, Mr. Speaker, not 
the problem of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, please. 
 
First of all, I thank members for raising this to my . . . bringing 
this to my attention at this time. And I would like — both 
members — and I would like to make a comment on it. 
 
I had the opportunity to double-check the precedents once 
again, and in the case of the wording mentioned by the member 
for Regina Victoria, I see no precedent. 
 
However when I look at the context of the statement made by 
the member for Regina Victoria — the statement, peddling 
snake oil salesman — and I compare it to a statement made 
later, from the member from Melfort-Tisdale raiding bank 
accounts, I find that both — although they were quite colourful 
figures of speech, probably could be categorized as 
colloquialism — that the more important thing here is perhaps 
the effect it has on the House as a whole. And there probably 
are statements like this and other statements that members could 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

 

bring up repeatedly on points of order. 
 
I’m very hesitant to rule on statements of this nature because 
they’re very borderline. Under one condition they may be out of 
order and another condition they may not be out of order. So 
instead of ruling, I would just ask members to consider the 
effects of their words and their phrases, and particularly the 
tone that they use when they make these statements. 
 
Now if, on the other hand, a member at this time wishes to 
withdraw their remark or any one of the remarks that were 
made, I would give him the opportunity or her the opportunity 
to do so. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would wish to 
withdraw the comments I made about raiding bank accounts. I 
think that it certainly underscores the deep concern we have for 
the level of money that’s being taken and certainly I would 
withdraw that. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, I think 
you’ve just provided opportunity for members to withdraw 
remarks and it’s out of order for members to then proceed to 
debate. And I would encourage that members of the House 
follow the direction you’ve given, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Speaker: — I appreciate the member’s gesture and I 
accept it as a withdrawal. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, on a point of 
order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington on a 
point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On another 
point of order, during question period the member for Meadow 
Lake, the Minister of CIC, referred to the member from Arm 
River’s comments as, sprouting misinformation, Mr. Speaker 
— one of those words that is in the book as not being permitted, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while sprouting is welcome in Saskatchewan, the reference 
to a member’s statements as misinformation is unparliamentary, 
Mr. Speaker. I ask that he apologize and withdraw the remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Members of the 
Assembly, members of the Assembly, members of the 
Assembly . . . Order. 
 
I just ask members not to get carried away. Not to get carried 
away with these things. I would categorize the remarks just 
quoted about spouting misinformation about equal to the 
comment, stupid decision. And if one person brings the remark, 
another person tends to counter it. 
 
I ask members just to kind of settle down on this and accept 
each other’s flaws once in a while. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Before orders of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day? Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave of the 
Assembly to move two motions regarding membership to the 
standing committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move, 
seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the names of Ms. Doreen Hamilton, Ms. Colleen 
Jones be substituted for those of . . . 

 
An Hon. Member: — Carolyn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Or Carolyn Jones. Carolyn Jones. 
Do you want to trade it? 
 

. . . be substituted for those of Mr. Mark Wartman and Ms. 
Deb Higgins on a list of members comprising the Standing 
Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 
And if I could read the second motion in? That the names . . . 
One at a time, do you want? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I’ll do the first one as moved. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Members on Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I also move, seconded 
by the member from Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the names (I’m going to be careful with the names on 
this one) the names of Mr. Warren McCall, Ms. Pat 
Atkinson, and Mr. Keith Goulet be substituted for those of 
Ms. Deb Higgins, Ms. Carolyn Jones, and Mr. Mark 
Wartman on a list of members comprising the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(14:30) 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I would 
like to table two documents from the office of the Provincial 
Auditor. One is the report to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan and the 2001 financial statements of CIC Crown 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

Corporations and related entities dated April 2002. 
 
And the second is a report to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan on the financial statements of Crown agencies 
for years ending in the 2001 calendar year, dated April 2002 as 
well. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased 
this afternoon to stand and table a written response to question 
no. 136. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 136 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Act 
Loi sur les ordonnances alimentairies interterritoriales 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
today to rise to move second reading of The Inter-jurisdictional 
Support Orders Act. 
 
The proposed Act streamlines the process by which support 
orders are obtained, varied, and enforced in cases where the 
parties live in different jurisdictions. 
 
It does this firstly by replacing the current two-stage hearing 
process for obtaining a maintenance order with a single hearing 
process. Saskatchewan residents seeking to establish or vary 
support obligations will no longer have to have their evidence 
reviewed by a court here before it’s sent to the respondent’s 
jurisdiction. 
 
Instead the claimant will prepare a support application package 
that will be sent directly to the reciprocating jurisdiction, where 
a court hearing will be held based on the evidence supplied by 
the claimant and the respondent. 
 
In cases where the court is faced with conflicting evidence from 
the two parties, or needs further information from the party in 
the other province, the Act will allow the court to obtain the 
further evidence it requires by telephone. 
 
The second major change will eliminate the ability of 
respondents to oppose registration of Canadian support orders. 
This means that if a support order made in Canada is sent here 
for enforcement, or sent from here to another province or 
territory, enforcement of the order can commence immediately. 
 
The old Act required that maintenance enforcement personally 
serve the payor with 30-days notice before enforcement could 
begin. 
 
Respondents will continue to be able to apply to set aside 
registration of foreign maintenance orders. And this change 
does not affect the ability of respondents to apply to the court to 
change the amount of maintenance payable if their 

circumstances change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this updated legislation for inter-jurisdictional 
enforcement of maintenance orders is compatible with the new 
system recently adopted in the United States, and it will reduce 
delays and costs for parties in obtaining and enforcing 
maintenance orders. This new model will work most efficiently 
when all of the provinces and territories have implemented it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the Premiers’ Conference in August 2001, the 
leaders of all of the provinces and territories agreed to pass this 
legislation before their next conference in August 2002. 
Saskatchewan will be the fifth jurisdiction to introduce this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act 
respecting Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders and making 
consequential amendments to certain Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise on this Bill today. 
 
Inter-jurisdictional maintenance orders have been a problem 
over the years where someone who has a maintenance order 
applied against them simply moves to another province to try 
and either avoid or defer the payments of their maintenance. 
 
This is not appropriate, Mr. Speaker. It’s wrong. It harms the 
children involved and punishes the children rather than 
providing them with any assistance. 
 
It has always been a problem when that parent has moved out 
that is paying the maintenance orders. Or when the spouse that 
has the children has moved and tries to maintain the reception 
of those maintenance orders, it causes a great deal of difficulty. 
 
I would hope that this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
provides for a two-way street on this issue; that maintenance 
orders in Saskatchewan would be enforced in other jurisdictions 
just as maintenance orders in other jurisdictions would be 
enforced in Saskatchewan. 
 
It always seems to run into a great deal of difficulty, and 
hopefully, this piece of legislation will go a long ways to 
alleviate that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In that sense, I believe that we think that this is a good piece of 
legislation, but it is a fairly comprehensive piece of legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, and needs time to be gone over to ensure that it is 
in fact providing the support to children that it seems to indicate 
that it does to ensure that this is a two-way street, Mr. Speaker; 
that enforcement orders from Saskatchewan will be valid in 
other jurisdictions, just as those maintenance orders from other 
jurisdictions will be valid in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to give time to review this Bill, to give the stakeholders in 
this area an opportunity to review it and ensure that it meets the 
necessary requirements, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 
modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 15 is one 
of those Bills where instead of providing leadership, 
government is just following what’s exactly been happening in 
the judicial system. 
 
It’s a situation that has been there for a long time and I guess in 
order to clear it up and so there’s no misconception that what is 
actually happening in the judicial system and what the law 
happens to be about that are on the same page. Unfortunately 
this seems to be somewhat indicative of this particular 
government that it very often follows rather than leads. 
 
What Bill No. 15 is about specifically, Mr. Speaker, is that 
under the present situation in a mediation process that takes 
place that are conducted by a judge, any of the information 
that’s there, there’s protection on that. 
 
Also what has happened in the past, statements made during 
that mediation, as I said, are protected. Also this amendment 
will extend that same protection to pretrial hearings. Now that 
in a fact . . . in fact has been the case in Saskatchewan for quite 
a number of years. But it has in fact been the case, but it hasn’t 
been that fact in law. And so what Bill No. 15 does, The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, is to put those two things in 
line so they dovetail with one another. 
 
And we have contacted some of the legal societies about this 
particular Bill, how they feel about it. There’s no concern on 
any level about Bill No. 15. We have no concern about it. No 
concerns have been raised to us. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re prepared to move Bill No. 15 to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 16 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 16 — The 
Independent Officers’ Remuneration (Amendment) Act, 
2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 16 deals 
with an issue that’s moderately new to the province — and I 
mean moderately in the span of time that we very often deal 
with — and it deals with a number of independent officers of 
the legislature, the Children’s Advocate, the Provincial 
Ombudsman, and the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
These people, their remuneration in the past numbers of years, 
has had a rather circuitous route that it’s gone through. And 

recommendations have been made; those have gone to the 
Board of Internal Economy. And most of us from one time or 
another have sat on the particular board when we’ve dealt with 
these particular issues, particularly what should the salaries be. 
 
And it’s always a contentious issue because some of these 
particular officers are almost in a growth industry. Some of 
those jobs can grow, and if they want to they can enlarge their 
own sphere of influence and the job gets bigger, and then they 
can come back and say, well we need more pay. And it becomes 
then the job of the Board of Internal Economy to assess that. 
 
And it’s somewhat awkward, when we’ve had these three 
individual positions, these three independent officers, and we 
look at what each one’s doing, and we juggle with the numbers. 
Different boards will have different opinions on different times 
and dates as to what should happen with that particular pay. 
 
So in accordance with that, Bill No. 16, Mr. Speaker, proposes 
that the Children’s Advocate, the Provincial Ombudsman, have 
their salaries linked to the average of all deputy ministers’ 
salaries as at April 1 every year; while the Chief Electoral 
Officer’s salary is at the maximum of the senior executive range 
2. 
 
What this does, Mr. Speaker, is set that up in a solid sort of way 
so these individuals know where their salary’s going to be; it’s 
not going to be at the whim of that particular committee. And 
also, there’s no opportunity for them particularly to say, well 
I’ve done a better job than any of the other two, therefore my 
salary should rise above theirs. It’s a fixed sort of thing that 
relates to, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the average of all deputy 
ministers’ salaries as of April 1 every year. 
 
And I think that removes some of the difficulties that have been 
there in the past, some of the discussions that have taken place 
at the Board of Internal Economy, and as I said also at the start, 
it removes the opportunity for some of these individuals to 
decide that this is a growth industry and they can you know 
create some positive salaries for themselves. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we had recommendation on the 
committee that made a recommendation for Bill No. 16. We 
were in agreement with those recommendations. We have no 
reason to oppose this Bill and therefore we recommend that it 
go to Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 5 – The 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment Act, 
2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure to 
enter into the debate on this Bill. Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals 
with changes to the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission. It makes some amendments to the 
existing Act that deals with the apprenticeship program and 
training of skilled workers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

And I think we have looked at the Bill, we agree with most of 
the changes; we certainly have some questions, Mr. Speaker, 
that we can deal with at a later time. I just might outline a 
couple of points that we have some questions with, Mr. 
Speaker, with regards to this amendment. 
 
This amendment allows for representatives of employers and 
employees to be appointed to the commission as part of the 
process rather than the actual employer and employee, and we 
certainly think that there is merit in that provision, Mr. Speaker, 
provided that it’s an unbiased process; that both the employer 
and employee are governed by the same set of rules and 
regulations as far as the selection of their representatives and so 
on. We certainly don’t have a problem with that. 
 
However if the regulations are set up in such a fashion that it 
influences the employer over the employer’s rights, or vice 
versa, Mr. Speaker, well we certainly would have a problem 
with that. So that’s a concern that we need to . . . needs to be 
addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s an area of compulsory trades and talks, and the 
amendments talk about only qualified people are eligible for 
apprenticeship and those sorts of things. There may be a hint of 
forced unionization. We feel that it’s only a slight possibility 
that that may be there and what we want to be assured of, Mr. 
Speaker, that that, in fact, is not one of the underlying purposes 
of this amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amendment also talks about ensuring that there is an 
appropriate ratio of apprentices to journeymens in the various 
trades and that certainly is a worthy goal, Mr. Speaker. 
However simply to make this amendment and state that 
objective is one thing. 
 
On the other hand, the training institutions — whether it be 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) or private colleges or regional colleges and all 
those people in skills training, in the skills training area, Mr. 
Speaker — they need the tools to be able to in fact provide the 
training spaces for the apprentice. And at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m told that there are a number of trades where spaces 
for apprentices to gain the formal education part of their 
apprenticeship at SIAST or . . . that there is a shortage of spaces 
and that there is in fact a very long waiting list. 
 
And this certainly is not satisfactory, Mr. Speaker. And we 
certainly don’t see that with the small increase to 
post-secondary education training institutions that that situation 
will be rectified in the near future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having said that though, there are . . . as I said, I 
think most of these committees can be addressed . . . questions 
can be addressed in Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, however, I think before we get there, it 
would be incumbent upon me to outline some of our concerns, 
further concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the problems that, with the apprenticeship 
program, that exist that this Bill tries to address, perhaps could 
be addressed in another fashion. 
 

The amendment says that there is a provision made in the Act to 
allow a probationary period in the apprenticeship process, 
which then gives young people and also those people who are 
seeking retraining and entering a new trade, it gives them an 
opportunity to try this new occupation, I suppose, become part 
of the process without having to go through the whole process 
and then find out at the end of the day that they no longer . . . 
really don’t like the occupation they’ve chosen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s perhaps another tool that this 
government could use to help with that problem, with that 
situation and that is expanding the work experience program in 
our schools. We’ve met on a number of occasions with the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board who has 
suggested that there’s a real need for this type of a program in 
our high schools, to give the high school students some work 
experience and exposure to various operations and those sorts 
of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the estimates and we hear 
what the Minister of Learning has to say, to this point in time, 
we certainly haven’t heard any new emphasis on the work 
experience program in our high schools, Mr. Speaker. And we 
certainly would promote or would suggest that the Minister of 
Learning and his department look at that whole area. 
 
And the way the program works now, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
work experience program is pretty well left up to the initiative 
of teachers and principals in our high schools. And most of the 
time, from at least the bit of experience that I have had . . . And 
I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that I have had a couple of high 
school students do work experience in my constituency office. 
And I certainly found that to be a very rewarding experience 
and I . . . from the feedback that I had from the young students 
that spent time with myself and my constituency assistant, they 
seem to feel that it certainly was a rewarding experience. 
 
And in fact, we may have some future politicians come out of 
that experience, Mr. Speaker. It wouldn’t surprise me. There 
was one or two of the students who were keenly interested in 
what we do as MLAs and expressed a real interest. 
 
They weren’t . . . They really didn’t take a whole lot of interest 
in the mundane work that our constituency assistants do as far 
as the filing and just managing the paper flow in our offices, but 
when it came to the political side of things and the whole area 
of governance and so on . . . One student in particular was 
keenly interested and I believe this student has gone on and has 
enrolled in one of our universities and is looking at studying 
political science and that sort of thing. 
 
But coming back to that whole area of skills training and work 
experience, Mr. Speaker, as I said, it’s been my experience that 
most of the time it’s left to the initiative of one of the teachers 
in the schools, particularly in the small schools in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you have a teacher who has the time and has some of the 
background information and has the co-operation of the 
community to set up a program, it seems to be very successful. 
 
But on the other hand, if you have a teacher who doesn’t have a 
lot of support and doesn’t have . . . as I said most of the teachers 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

 

don’t have time to really do all the background work that’s 
necessary, Mr. Speaker, then the program is not very effective. 
 
Quite often what will happen is this young person, high school 
student, may get a placement at a local business. The local 
business person doesn’t have the background information to 
really know what’s expected of them so they just use them as 
some unpaid labour to sweep the floors, and cart out the boxes, 
and perhaps clean out a cooler, and that sort of thing. 
 
And really the students are . . . it really leaves a bitter taste in 
the students’ mouths and they really . . . the next time work 
experience comes along they don’t participate in the program. 
 
But on the other hand, if it’s a well-run program — as I 
indicated in our own situation, we did have the one student who 
was keenly interested, and I’ve heard from some of his 
classmates and from students in other communities in my 
constituency — they find it very valuable. 
 
And this all ties in, Mr. Speaker, to this whole area of giving 
future workers in our labour force some prior experience as to 
what their occupation may be like. And there is a real need, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province to grow the capacity, the training 
capacity, and increase the number of skilled workers that we 
have in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We take industries like Doepker, who are looking frantically for 
skilled welders and other trades people and they just can’t find 
them. They have a market out there, they have the wherewith 
. . . the raw resources but they lack one thing, and that’s a 
skilled workforce — people who can do the intricate type of 
welding and fabrication, Mr. Speaker, that they require, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also some . . . a need for this additional 
training, Mr. Speaker, and this . . . these amendments pay some 
lip service to that, but we really need to increase the training 
capacity. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to move a superseding 
motion that we adjourn debate . . . I’d like to move a 
superseding motion that we go to adjourned debates. 
 

That this Assembly and the people of . . . 
 
. . . item no. 6: 
 

That this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan have 
lost confidence in the current Premier and cabinet. 

 
And that’ll be moved . . . seconded by the member from Swift 
Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 14:58 until 15:06. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 23 
 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 

Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Toth Wakefield 
Stewart Elhard Eagles 
McMorris D’Autremont Bakken 
Wall Brkich Weekes 
Harpauer Hart Allchurch 
Peters Hillson  
 

Nays — 28 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Melenchuk 
Sonntag Osika Lorjé 
Kasperski Goulet Van Mulligen 
Prebble Belanger Crofford 
Axworthy Nilson Junor 
Hamilton Harper Forbes 
Jones Higgins Trew 
Wartman Thomson Yates 
McCall   
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to speak on Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act. 
 
As we know, in today’s economy apprenticeship is very 
important in all trades and we need to encourage and set in 
regulation the conditions to allow people to become 
journeymen in their trades and in their areas of expertise and 
allow the people that are trained in those areas to bring young 
people and other people along into that industry and into that 
trade so that they work into our labour force. 
 
It’s imperative that we pursue this goal and with all people of 
Saskatchewan but particularly the young Native people that 
need to be trained into jobs that we hope that will be there in the 
future. And, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, it’s imperative that 
young people and people that are coming out of other industries 
that do not necessarily have the skills and training to date, be 
allowed to get into the industries and the jobs that may come up 
into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Melville on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to the 
member from the opposition speaking, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank you, colleague. I would like to introduce a friend of mine, 
Mr. Wally Oucharek, who is here and brought a number of art 
students, grade 12 art students from Melville to the Assembly 
here this afternoon. And I’m told that they wanted to see a little 
bit of action of government and this legislature. Please help me 
welcome them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Act brings up a number 
of questions. 
 
In the Bill it talks about who is to sit on the various boards from 
the employer point of view and the employees’ side of the 
equation. And I believe it’s important that there’s fair 
representation is placed on boards at all times and so that 
everyone’s views are taken to account when decisions are made. 
And in particularly where we designate people to go into 
training into apprenticeship courses and to make sure that the 
employee or potential future employees of a particular trade is 
trained in the right job category for the jobs. 
 
And as we know in today’s economy, the jobs change many 
times. There’s new technologies coming along at all times and 
so people need to be upgraded and trained throughout their 
career. It’s becoming a more and more important aspect of this 
economy . . . modern economy that we live in, that the 
employees and the employers work together to have training in 
place so that the jobs are filled and we have an efficient 
industry. And be very competitive not only in Canada but in a 
global view around the world, so that we are productive and 
able to increase jobs and bring profits into this province to 
broaden the tax base and to grow Saskatchewan so that there is 
more opportunity for the future children of this province. 
 
This commission that is going to be set up talks about, 
administer the skills training benefit to apprentices and 
tradespersons. There is a need for rules and regulations so that 
all the stakeholders in particular trades and industries know 
what the rules and regulations are and that there’s no surprises 
when someone goes into a course or a plan so that they do come 
through the training period and are fully trained in that 
profession. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the problem Saskatchewan has 
today is that we don’t have enough job opportunities. And even 
though we train people for all sorts of jobs and industries, we 
have to make sure that in our society that there is jobs for these 
people when they come out of their training and out of their 
apprenticeship programs. 
 
(15:15) 
 
We don’t want to . . . Number one, we don’t want people to be 
trained and leave to other provinces. We want to keep our 
young people here in this province and develop and grow 
industries and businesses in this province so that it’s for the 
benefit of the whole province by broadening our tax base and 
having more higher-paid employees in this province which 
broadens our tax base and ultimately brings more revenue into 
the government’s coffers so we can afford very important parts 
of government services as health care and education and so on. 
 

And it’s also very important that we set up programs and 
courses that people will stay in. We don’t want to have people 
going into apprenticeship courses only to find out that they drop 
out later and really a waste of their time and the time of the 
training facilities and costly to everyone concerned. And as I 
mentioned, that it’s very important that we work on those many 
details. 
 
We don’t have any particular problem with Bill No. 5, but we 
will be asking a number of questions in the committee once it 
goes to committee. And we would like to speak to the 
stakeholders involved and just clarify a number of the items in 
the Bill to make sure that the rules and regulations in place . . . 
that this Bill brings into place does produce the desired results 
of benefiting the young people of this province and also the 
business sector of this province so that we have highly trained 
individuals going into the new businesses and industries that are 
growing and changing in development. 
 
So at this time, I’d just like to say again that we will let this Bill 
pass into committee. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister responsible for Sask 
Water to introduce his officials and, if he wishes, make a brief 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just 
wanted to introduce, to my immediate right Stuart Kramer who 
is the president of Sask Water Corporation. And to my back 
right is Greg Argue who’s the director of the corporate 
communication, policy, and planning. Directly behind me is 
Terry Hymers who is a corporate controller. And to the extreme 
right of course we have Wayne Dybvig who is the 
vice-president of water resource and infrastructure 
management. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, I’d like to point out to some folks 
that may be watching back home, the purpose of the Committee 
of Finance is to allow the opposition to go through the budgets 
of each of the different departments line by line and to question 
the minister on a wide variety of activities within his portfolio. 
And that’s what the exercises of the Committee of Finance and 
the estimates. 
 
So that’s a part of my opening comments and to certainly point 
out that there’s much work ahead of us and I look forward to 
the questions of the opposition. Thank you. 
 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to welcome 
the minister here and thank him for his opening remarks. 
 
I want to welcome the officials here as the stewards and the 
masters of our vast waterways here in Saskatchewan. I know 
it’s not an easy job; it’s a big task you have to look after them 
considering the many issues that are before Sask Water — 
drought conditions that are facing our producers, and in the 
villages and town and cities this year, safe water issues, 
recreation. Many things you have to look after, and I’m glad the 
minister is . . . the statements he had made that he is willing to 
. . . like he’d said . . . the statements he’d made on going 
through the estimates which, I believe, is a good process. 
 
This is the third time I’ve did this, and each and every time I 
seem to have a different minister, so sometimes I wonder if this 
portfolio is a hot potato. 
 
With that remark I have to ask . . . I understand going through 
the estimates, that most of your assets were turned over to CIC 
in 2000. But I was wondering about . . . I know there were some 
issues on renting land yet with Sask Valley Potato Corporation 
that were still on the books in 2001. 
 
Could you give me any background information on your 
involvement — if you have any left — with Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation — anything that pertains to Sask Valley Potato 
Corp. and Sask Water and CIC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Just 
to point out that any and all of the assets of the potato 
corporation was transferred to CIC in June 2000. And the 
answer is no, that Sask Water has no more involvement with the 
potato corporation. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. I’m 
glad that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will be happy, and my 
constituents will be happy to see that Sask Water and, 
hopefully, the government is out of the potato growing industry 
and that it will thrive in the future. 
 
Now one of the many things I want to ask you questions in is I 
want to deal a little bit to start with, with Justice Laing’s report 
on North Battleford. In his report on the North Battleford 
drinking water issue, of which the NDP government was found 
mostly to blame, Justice Laing stated Sask Water to be 
converted into sort of a money-making water utility that will 
charge for whatever advice it gives in the area of delivering 
water and waste water treatment operations and consultation 
services. 
 
Can the minister please give the Assembly an update as to 
where this stands currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to point 
out that the legislation will be presented, of course, in the next 
several weeks, in the spring of 2002. And there we’ll begin to 
really define very clearly what Sask Water’s role in the future, 
in terms of us trying to put together a comprehensive water 
strategy for the province as a whole. 
 
Much of that work has been done, and as you’re probably are 
aware, there’s a transition process in place now. Legislation has 

to be drafted up and drawn up; it’s got to be passed. And what 
we hope happens is that at the conclusion of this session, that 
we’re able to pass the Act and then to proclaim the Act by the 
early fall so a lot of these things are able to be put in place. 
 
Sask Water will be certainly working with a number of 
communities. They will be sitting down with the communities 
and giving them some consulting services, some engineering 
services, and standing with the communities to also look at 
ways to source water; but more importantly, to make sure that 
some of the water services that we are going to help the 
communities look at, some of the solutions, is they want to 
make sure that these solutions are affordable. 
 
So Sask Water itself has a very well-defined role. And I think 
that’s the value of this total exercise is to make sure the roles 
and the responsibilities and the authority and certainly the 
support structure is in place, is very sound, is very 
comprehensive and it does deal with some of the specific 
challenges of the many sizes of communities that, you know, 
that we have, plus the many different type of challenges that 
some of these water systems may have. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This afternoon I 
met with some of the mayors from around Saskatchewan and 
also I’d met with SUMA on different occasions and they 
expressed basically the same thing you were saying there. 
 
They would like Sask Water’s role to be defined because right 
now it seems like it, when it comes under Water, nobody’s 
really sure on their safe water drinking whether it falls strictly 
under the Environment or is it dealing with Sask Water. And I 
take it this legislation is going to deal a little more with it. 
 
Can you give me any idea yet on the legislation, of how it’s 
progressing or what intends to be in this legislation? Can you 
give me anything at this particular time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Just 
to point out that we’ve had a meeting with SUMA. We’ve also 
had a meeting with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities). And at these meetings we’ve discussed with 
both SUMA and SARM some of the potential solutions and 
some of the strategies and some of the schedules that we hope 
to implement as a result of our water strategy. 
 
And I would point out that I mentioned several weeks, but 
sometimes in May we hope to have all the Acts drawn up. 
Legislatively there is some work that we have to do. But we 
anticipate that in May that we’ll be able to present this to the 
Assembly and hopefully have it passed by the end of June and 
of course proclaimed in the fall. 
 
I would point out that much of the three areas we’re focussing 
on certainly is to talk about the watershed stewardship concept. 
That’s going to be housed in the Environment portfolio as well 
as the rules and regulations. And the new minister of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) will 
be explaining those rules and regulations once she’s up in her 
estimates. 
 
(15:30) 
 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

I would point out as well that through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program that the minister 
that is responsible for government affairs will certainly present 
all those details during his estimates as well. 
 
But clearly, Sask Water’s new role is to be a solutions provider 
in which we will work with the communities, and the towns, 
and the villages, and many other interest groups out there, to try 
and find some affordable solutions. 
 
And certainly as you know, Sask Water has a number of 
technicians, they have engineers, they’ve got consultants, they 
have a number of people that are available on staff. We could 
also outsource some of this work. But the most important thing 
is that the communities stay in constant contact with Sask 
Water because there’s a lot of information, a lot of valuable 
expertise, and certainly a genuine effort to support and work 
with the communities, that Sask Water is willing to offer to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And again that has been made public on many occasions. So 
every bit of information we can get out to people is certainly 
very helpful. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
you’ve mentioned quite a few things there which is good. I 
know we talked to the towns and the villages and the cities 
there. I think you have been consulting with them, and they 
would like you to keep consulting with them with this new Act. 
We talked a little bit about that today with the mayors and that. 
 
One of the things that was brought up when I met with SUMA 
was the issue of small towns or villages. You talked about 
having numerous engineers, consultants, expertise in this area, 
which is good. A lot of the towns need somebody to come out 
there and basically to look at their water system and tell them 
what they need to be fixed. 
 
But what our concern was, and SUMA’s concern is, is a charge. 
A lot of these towns are operating on a very small budget. The 
only money they have budgeted maybe is just going to be able 
to fix that particular water problem. But if they have to turn 
around and pay Sask Water $5,000 in consultation fees, and 
they were planning to spend $10,000 on the water system, and 
you’ve taken half of it just to tell them what was wrong with it 
. . . 
 
I would urge you . . . And I’ll ask you right now, are you going 
to provide that service — since you have all the engineers and 
expertise there, numerous ones you’ve mentioned — will you 
provide that service to the towns and villages to go to their 
water systems, their sewage systems, or their water facilities 
and to look at there and tell them what they need, that has to be 
done, that you can do that to them for free of charge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And I think the question certainly will lead to more and more 
answers as to some of the solutions that many of these 
communities are asking for. 
 
And I would thank that member because the more information 
we’re able to present out there in the public about some of these 
challenges, the more we’re able to respond to them. And I think 

public awareness is a key, key factor in us determining how 
best to serve some of Saskatchewan’s needs and how best to 
address some of the water challenges that we all face. 
 
Communities, whether they’re smaller or larger communities, 
have traditionally always been the owners and operators and the 
providers of water to their citizens. So I think that role is clearly 
understood and accepted by all the parties. 
 
Now what we do in Sask Water to try and help the smaller 
communities, in reference to your question, I would 
characterize the answer in this fashion: that we’ve always 
maintained that about 65 to 70 per cent, give or take a few 
points, of the population in Saskatchewan is adequately served 
with fresh water . . . or with safe water. And certainly we got 
certified operators, and the list kind of goes on as to what a 
good support system that this 65 to 70 per cent of the 
population have. 
 
The last 15 per cent . . . or the 15 per cent are mostly farmers 
and farm families that have their own source of water — 
whether it’s a well system or some sort. They of course also 
have a support system in place. 
 
It’s the last 15 to 20 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan 
where we have to concentrate some of our work towards, and 
that last 15 to 20 per cent that we speak about are the smaller 
villages and the smaller hamlets. So when we get calls from 
them, we certainly correspond and we communicate with them. 
And the initial assessment of some of their systems, that of 
course Sask Water does at no cost. 
 
But what we want to be very, very careful of here is that while 
the support system is very important towards the smaller 
communities, what we want to do is to make sure that they 
know that the service is available from the private sector or 
from Sask Water. And regardless of who provides that service, 
when it starts being heavy technical advice, it starts being 
engineering drawings and so on and so forth, that these services 
are going to cost money. 
 
And what we’re trying to sit down with them is to find the least 
affordable . . . I meant, the best affordable option for their 
citizens. And it’s the numerous communities that range from 45 
people to 100 people, and often we will find that many of these 
smaller communities, once you go in there and do the initial 
assessment that there is quite a bit of work that has to be done. 
 
So I would say that the first point is that as soon as you call 
Sask Water, the meter doesn’t start to, you know, start to build 
up. The costs don’t start to be billed. The initial assessment is 
free, in the sense that we go out there and see what the 
challenges are, and then we begin to establish a relationship 
with that community. And then we can sit down and determine 
the best potable solution with fair water prices for the citizens 
of that particular community to be able to put that in place as 
quickly as we can. And there are a variety of options. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, yes, 
that’s kind of the answer I was looking for. And that’s . . . the 
point I was trying to get across is, yes, the towns or villages 
would like, like you say, the initial consultation to be free of 
charge. You know, once the work actually starts on the project, 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

 

they know that, yes, they’re going to have to buy the pumps and 
maybe do the . . . and once you get down to the drafting of the 
engineering drafts, the plans, yes, they will have to pay for 
them. 
 
What they were looking for was for you to come out and tell 
them, you know, free of charge, because that can also take some 
time. What are your different options, what would a pipeline 
roughly cost, the proximity of your closest pipeline, or how 
deep a well you might need, how much water would you need 
to supply 100 residents — things like that, what they’re looking 
for. 
 
So I hope that you keep that free of charge because the towns 
out there — and villages and bigger towns, bigger centres; it 
just isn’t small ones that when we’re talking towns, you know, 
anywhere from 2,000 to 10,000. I mean they’re all . . . their 
budgets are very tight and . . . but yet water with all of them is a 
big priority. So I thank you for that comment and I hope that 
you keep it that way. 
 
Talking about splitting up when you talk about charging a fee 
then . . . and also in the report here out of Moose Jaw saying 
that . . . Will you be doing . . . setting up a lot of the work 
yourselves, like being able to charge the work itself to put in a 
system in a town if they want one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for that question. 
What I want to point out as well, Mr. Chair, is that we are 
currently working with a lot of small communities and I think 
that number’s at 50. 
 
We are in partnership and constant consultation and 
communication and collaboration with the consulting engineers. 
And of course the options that many of these small 
communities have are clearly anybody’s options — whether 
they go to Sask Water, whether they go to the private sector. 
 
What Sask Water does not do, it does not compete with the 
private sector. On many occasions we’ll engage the private 
sector. And as I mentioned before, we have a very close 
relationship with them. We’ve often maintained that there’s a 
whole bunch of work that needs to be done. So there’s much 
work that could certainly be shared. 
 
And like anything else, what we want to do is to establish a 
relationship with these small communities. Because 
traditionally they have been responsible for the delivery of safe 
water to their citizens, we want to sit with them and see what 
options are available with them. And they have a choice — they 
can certainly go to Sask Water or the private sector. 
 
I think the most important thing is that, you also point out, is 
that some of these water systems need to be sustainable 
systems; that as much as we want to support the smaller 
communities, we also want to encourage them to have 
sustainable, self-sufficient water plants that meet all the 
guidelines and have the standard operators. And I can tell you 
that that’s the objective of many communities, is to operate 
their systems safely and independent of the government, and so 
on and so forth. 
 
So we’re down the same path in terms of our thinking. And we 

just want to encourage people to take a very active role when it 
comes to assessment and to improving on their water system 
but to also make sure that these systems are self-sufficient and 
they serve the people of their community for many years to 
come. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — With the new utility being split off, you’re also 
going to give irrigation to Sask Ag and Food. How is that 
progressing? What exactly, I guess, falls under your jurisdiction 
when it comes to irrigation? And what is going to be their new 
role with the irrigation end of it? And what are the changes 
going to be? 
 
Basically with the way I understand — just out of this report 
here — I can read you the news report that was done in Outlook 
here. Basically: 
 

These changes will involve: the current water irrigation 
department falling under Sask. Agriculture & Food; 
SaskWater’s utility operations department becoming a 
separate corporation; and the new treasury board being 
named the Sask. Watershed Authority, said a 
communications spokesperson for SaskWater. 

 
Can you give me some information on the irrigation, how that’s 
going to be turned over to Sask Ag and Food, and is that going 
to affect irrigators in my constituency and the irrigators, I guess, 
throughout the province, is my concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just to point out 
that we don’t anticipate any challenges for those folks that are 
currently involved with the irrigating aspects of Sask Water. 
 
I would point out that there is . . . the operation of the actual 
works itself, the delivery and the pumping, will certainly be 
operated by Sask Water. The irrigation services, the agronomics 
and the marketing and so on and so forth, that will come under 
the Sask Ag and Food. And Sask Ag and Food certainly can 
answer those questions if you have any specifics. 
 
But clearly in the operation of the works, the delivery and the 
pumping, that will still be retained under Sask Water. And 
again we don’t anticipate that there’d be any disruption in the 
current system that’s in place now, just a better system to serve 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
understand that basically you still will meter the water out, or 
Sask Ag and Food will have to apply to you for a number of 
feet of water that is to be irrigated on a certain area. You can 
correct me if I’m wrong on that. 
 
With the Lake Diefenbaker area . . . I’ve been there just about a 
week ago and the lake levels are probably the lowest since it 
was built. What’s happening there with irrigation? Is there 
going to be any change in the irrigators? Will they be cut back? 
Do you have any information on that right now that you can 
share with me and the irrigators in the area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Okay what’s going to happen — and 
again the details are certainly being worked on — is the general 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

direction we’re heading on this is that the approvals for water 
use will be sent to the Watershed Authority. And of course, 
Sask Water will actually be the delivery of that once the 
approval is gained. 
 
In reference to your question about Diefenbaker, I would point 
out that the effect on the irrigators should not be significant in 
the sense that the levels of Lake Diefenbaker are higher this 
year than they are in 2001. And Sask Water is fairly confident 
that they have enough water to meet their needs. 
 
There may be some slight increase in cost because you have to 
increase the lift from, you know, from the water source, so there 
may be some cost increase there. So what we’re trying to do 
again is to try and maintain those costs and keep them as low as 
possible. 
 
But clearly the rules and the regulations and the responsibility 
and the processes will all be well defined to as many people as 
possible to make sure they understand them. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, yes, 
I’m sure the irrigators will be happy to hear that. I know the 
only concern with some of them was basically some of them 
can’t get their pumps down into the lake when it’s at that lower 
level — just differently the way they had it set up. 
 
I know we’d worked on a case I think last year where a guy 
wanted to dig a little trench to his pump because his rails 
basically didn’t go out far enough any more. And I hope that 
you will accommodate any way you can the local irrigators in 
the area with being able to do that. 
 
One other question just dealing on Lake Diefenbaker: how is 
the snowpack doing and estimated water that’s going to be 
coming in later in June? Can you give me an update on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
would point out that in this year we anticipate that the water 
levels will be better than last year. Last year, as you may know, 
the water levels in Lake Diefenbaker were 4 metres below 
normal and this year they’ll be about two and a half metres 
below normal. So there is . . . we anticipate an increase in the 
lake level. 
 
And I’d also point out that the Alberta government does 
monitor the snowfall and the snowpack, and we have been 
getting information that there’s been an increase in the 
snowpack so that’s always good, positive news. It’s never a 
sound science, of course, but we anticipate that the water levels 
will be better this year than last year. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know my irrigators, 
if they believe to be true . . . I know that I’ve talked to a couple 
of them there and they swear that this is the lowest that lake has 
ever been and those are the people that have lived longest. So 
I’ve had a few phones calls and they’re worried about it. So I 
will pass Hansard onto them and we’ll see, I guess, when it 
comes times to irrigate if there’s any problems. 
 
With that I’d like to get back to Justice Laing’s report. I picked 
out a few items in there; it’s quite a book to read through. So 
I’m hoping you can give me some more information on it. 

In one paragraph there, in Justice Laing, he mentions a cabinet 
decision item, in which Sask Water is mentioned numerous 
times. He says in his findings, and I think it’s no. 48 and 49: 
 

That the responsibility for implementing the . . . (cabinet 
decision item) rests with three or more entities, with 
separate budgets, and separate priorities, is considered . . . 
(and it) is considered a serious weakness in the 
implementation strategy. 

 
Before I get to the second half of the findings, I would like to 
ask the minister for his thoughts on that finding. Does he agree 
with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think that the 
important progress that has been made to date, to talk about our 
direction we’re going as a government, is to certainly look at 
the three-pronged approach that we often speak about. 
 
And in terms of the increased rules and the regulations and the 
enforcement and all those particular aspects that we need to put 
a lot of emphasis on, the Minister of the Environment would 
certainly be in a position to respond more clearly and more 
eloquently on what is being done in that regard. 
 
And secondly, as well, with the Watershed Authority, when we 
talk about the protection of water at source, these are things that 
of course the Minister of the Environment will also speak about 
in terms of what their role is. And he’ll get into greater detail. 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan will be really 
impressed with the progress on not only the rules and 
regulations, but also the fact of the matter is the protection of 
the water at source. 
 
So this is from source to tap. It is a comprehensive strategy. 
And of course the final step of this whole effort is to look at the 
assistance to the community for delivering safe water to the 
many residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I go back to my earlier comment about the breakdown of 
the provincial population as a whole where, again, we say 70 to 
75 per cent of the population in our opinion is adequately 
served with a certified operator and generally safe water. And 
15 per cent, of course, have their own source of, you know, of 
well water, and so on and so forth. These are the families in the 
farm and farmers in general. It’s the last 15 to 20 per cent that 
we want to concentrate our efforts on. 
 
And again, the minister of Government Services will certainly 
speak about that during his estimates of some of the great 
progress being made to the CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program) program. The infrastructure program is, 
of course, a five-year program and he’ll give you all the details 
of some of the communities that have applied and some of the 
great work that has been done. 
 
And there’s a lot of success to be told in some of the stories. 
And we’ve always maintained that there’s been good progress 
made and greater progress is going to be made. And we always 
have to maintain diligence on this particular file because 
diligence is our greatest asset when it comes to the provision of 
safe water. 
 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

 

So I think the progress made to date is certainly going to prove 
to the Saskatchewan people that it is a good plan. There is a 
source to tap processes in place. There’s some good rules and 
regulations. There’s some good support. Responsibility is 
certainly there on the towns and villages as well, certification of 
operators. It is a very comprehensive strategy. 
 
So I think clearly that there are many lessons learned and many 
more to learn. But we would ask the people to be diligent and to 
be patient and to certainly do their part because absolutely 
everybody has a role, a responsibility. And we want to engage 
as many partners as we can on this and to be upfront and honest 
as well, to tell people if there is a challenge, they will hear 
about it. 
 
And certainly that strategy has worked well. And many people 
and many leaders at SUMA and SARM agree that 
communication, progress, and certainly understanding what . . . 
who does what is so very important for us to build on to ensure 
safe quality water for the people of Saskatchewan on a 
long-term basis. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, also 
just want to make one more comment on Justice Laing’s report 
here. In finding no. 49, he states that: 
 

CDI does not identify what its monitoring and compliance 
program will consist of to conduct inspections on (the) 
municipal/public water facilities. To the extent (of) the 
monitoring and compliance program is intended to “ensure 
a comprehensive water quality program at all facilities,” the 
financial resources committed to the program to date will 
not accomplish this. 

 
My question I guess to the minister is: do you concur with the 
finding by Justice Laing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question, 
Mr. Chairman. What I would point out, that there are going to 
be regulations that are going to be enhanced. The Minister of 
the Environment, as I mentioned before, has all the details, the 
specifics, and I can tell you that there is a fairly comprehensive 
package there. 
 
Without question the rules and regulations are a very important 
tool. And as I mentioned before, the Minister of the 
Environment during her estimates will explain in great detail 
and with great eloquence some of the questions that you may 
have around some of the rules and regulations that need to be 
tightened up. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I’m looking 
at the Estimates book and it indicates under subvote (SW02), 
that description there, part of Sask Water Corporation’s 
responsibilities are to provide technical assistance to rural 
residents to improve water supply and treatment methods and 
support erosion controls and so on. 
 
Now I guess my question is . . . To you, Mr. Minister, the first 
question is: what role and what responsibilities does Sask Water 
have to small rural communities? There’s a number of rural 
communities who are experiencing some real serious challenges 
with water; some of them have . . . just don’t have any water. 

And I have such a community in my constituency. 
 
But I wonder if you could just very briefly outline what role 
Sask Water plays in these situations and what type of services, 
and if there is any financial assistance that Sask Water has for 
these communities. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
think the most important thing is to tell the small communities 
in your constituencies to contact Sask Water. What we do is we 
constantly want to be in contact and in constant communication 
with many of the 15 to 20 per cent that I often make reference 
to. 
 
And what Sask Water will do is that the moment you call Sask 
Water, you know, the meter doesn’t start ticking away. We have 
a lot of consultation processes. In fact, we mentioned earlier, 
we’ve met with and are working with 50 communities now. 
And we do an initial assessment of some of their plants — kind 
of a walk-through evaluation if you will, of some of their 
operations, no matter what size that these communities are. 
 
And following that, once the work becomes more 
comprehensive — and I’m talking about the drawings and 
engineering and so on and so forth — then obviously that goes 
to the next level where we’re establishing a relationship, a 
business relationship, and of course, those tend to cost money. 
 
So I would point out that not only would we do a walk-through, 
but analysis of options. We will determine some of the best and 
lowest cost solutions. 
 
And that is the crux of some of the challenges that we’ll face in 
Sask Water, and as a province as a whole, is that when you 
mention many communities and villages, some of them have 
very small systems, some of them have outdated systems, some 
of them don’t even have any water. The drought system 
certainly has had a adverse effect on some of our progress that 
we have been making in the province. I spoke about it earlier. 
 
So there’s no question that there are a wide range of issues. And 
what we don’t want to do, is we don’t want to stick our head in 
the sand and pretend this problem doesn’t exist. We want to 
take this problem head on; we want to work with the small 
communities. 
 
And what the small communities have to know as well, is that 
we’ll certainly be there for the initial assessment, but at the end 
of the day if there’s a relationship, a business relationship 
established, then we are in essence acting as a service provider. 
And of course that’s when, you know, when fees are certainly 
talked about. 
 
As I mentioned earlier to your associate, that the option that 
some of the communities have to go . . . or could go through is 
the private sector or through Sask Water. 
 
But if I had a message to the small communities, I would say 
get your water tested often. I would ask the people to make sure 
their water is tested. I’d ask the small communities to look at 
advice, whether it’s from the private sector or from Sask Water. 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

I would ask them to be diligent in some of the things you do 
with the testing and with certification of their operators. I would 
ask them to be prepared to look at financing through the 
municipal services board. I’d look at . . . I’d ask them to be 
patient to the infrastructure program. 
 
I’d ask them to play a very large role because at the end of the 
day, these systems are owned and operated by these 
communities. And what we want to do is to make sure they’re 
operated legally and they operate with as much support as 
possible, not to the point that they’re dependent on government 
grants on a constant basis, but to a point where they are able to 
continue to afford their system and to upgrade it to make sure 
that safe water is being delivered at a fair price to the residents 
of, you know, their community. 
 
And this would be the specific challenge and certainly Sask 
Water could look at some of these options and explain some of 
these options to them. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have a 
small community in my constituency; it’s the village of Elfros. 
You may have heard of this. I’ve talked to you briefly about it. 
 
This is a community of approximately 160 residents. They have 
some real serious water challenges in their community. And I’ll 
briefly outline the experience that they have had in the last, oh, 
eight, nine months. 
 
Prior to August of last year they depended on surface water for 
their supply of water to their village. They had a pipeline from a 
dam into their water treatment centre in their village and it 
served the community fairly well over quite a number of years. 
But due to last year’s drought the residents of the village could 
see that that water supply wasn’t going to last — in fact it was 
going dry. 
 
So they took some action. They hired a well driller, put a new 
well in, in the area not too far from the dam, and they were 
assured that this well would have ample supply of water for a 
long time. And in fact it turned out to be pretty good quality 
water. 
 
I can remember seeing the headlines in the local paper, Elfros 
has all kinds of water or something to that effect. 
 
Well unfortunately, Mr. Minister, in late February or early 
March that well went dry. Obviously it probably was just a 
pocket of water; it wasn’t a dependable aquifer or whatever. I 
don’t know if they really know why it went dry, but it went dry 
and there was no water, so they were faced with the problem of 
supplying water to their residents. 
 
And so they hired a local contractor to haul water and that was 
costing them about $1,000 a day to haul water. And this wasn’t 
potable water. They issued . . . the town council issued a 
boil-water advisory to all their citizens immediately. 
 
Then they were in a desperate situation. I believe they did talk 
to Sask Water and they said that they did get some advice. I 
don’t know the extent of it. It sounded as if it was some very 
preliminary advice and so on. But they decided they’d search 
for water in that area because the pipeline was there. 

They drilled a well but there was . . . or drilled a test hole but 
there was no water. They went down 400 feet, hit bedrock. So 
they moved the drilling rig into their . . . into, near to town. And 
they drilled a number of test holes — some had some water, 
they did a bit of a pump test, but not dependable. And I believe 
they drilled approximately in total about five or six test holes 
until they finally found what they thought was a good supply of 
water. They pump tested it for a period of time. It seemed to 
produce about 50 gallons per minute, I’m told. 
 
So what they did is to . . . And in the meantime they’re hauling 
this water at $1,000 a day, which for a community of 160 
people, you can imagine if you’re hauling for a few weeks 
that’s going to, you know, could very quickly break that 
community. So they were quite happy that they’d hit this supply 
of water. 
 
So what they did is they . . . when they did the test hole, they 
cased it, they pump tested it, and then they ran an overground 
line to their water treatment plant and continued to advise their 
residents that they had to boil their water because they hadn’t 
had the tests back. 
 
Well I got a phone call from the mayor yesterday, Mr. Minister, 
and that well has gone dry. So they’re back, I believe today, 
hauling water again. And in the meantime, the village has sent 
your colleagues, the Minister of Government Relations, a letter 
outlining their expenditures. And I’ll just briefly summarize 
them for you, Mr. Minister: 
 
The expenditures — and this letter was dated April 12 and I am 
certain that they have since then have spent more money on 
securing a supply of water for their community — but the 
expenditures to April 12 that they incurred in this latest 
go-round of well drilling and water hauling total about almost 
$60,000, just . . . 59,800-and-some dollars. 
 
The expenditures or the amount of money that this small village 
spent on drilling the well and all the associated costs last 
summer, they spent a little over $30,000. They received a 
$1,400 grant from PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration). I believe the RM (rural municipality) came on 
board and somehow they were able to work it so that they 
received a small grant. So they had a net cost of over 29,000. 
 
So to sum it all up, this community of 163 people — I believe, 
is the official population of this community — they spent, in the 
last eight or nine months $80,000 and they’re not done and they 
don’t have a supply of water. And what they are asking, Mr. 
Minister, is: what more can they do? Has Sask Water got some 
capabilities first of all, I guess, to find a reliable supply and help 
them with that, and is there any assistance available through 
Sask Water to these people? What can you do for the people of 
Elfros, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And exactly what I would say is that, you know to the 
community, that we certainly understand their frustration. As 
you mention time and time again, there’s a number of 
communities that have trouble with safe water and some 
communities that don’t have any water. And that certainly, you 
know, is a good analysis of some of the challenges that we face. 
 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

 

I would point out that Sask Water will contact them again. And 
we’ll re-establish a working relationship in the sense that the 
meter doesn’t start to tick from day one and we’ll start looking 
at options for the community. And certainly the provincial 
government is very concerned with their challenges and that we 
will stand beside them and look at various options. 
 
I will point out that in some of the other sectors — and we’re 
not suggesting this in any way — some areas have looked at 
regional pipelines, waterlines, and other people have looked at 
various other kinds of potential sources of water. And these 
options, Sask Water has much information as to what other 
communities are doing. 
 
So if I had a message to Elfros, I would say we would make 
contact with Elfros. We would share with them some of the 
examples. For example, Hague, as you may or may not know, is 
currently looking and working with Sask Water to look at 
tapping into the Saskatoon water system. So these are options. 
It may not be an option for Elfros. But the first thing to do is to 
reconnect and to assure the people of Elfros that their concerns 
are certainly understood by the province and we’ll work with 
them very closely. 
 
And the Municipal Affairs minister, Government Services 
minister will certainly talk in greater detail about some of the 
funding that you talked about when you talk about 
infrastructure. I don’t have those details but he will. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Junor: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
recognize in the west gallery 35 students from Hugh Cairns 
grade 4 class. And with them is teachers Mr. Arthurs, Mrs. 
Miller Racicot. Mr. Slater, Mr. Walters, Mr. Yaworski, Ms. 
Miller, Ms. Berquist, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Young, and Mr. Udchic 
are also along as chaperones. 
 
I’d like to welcome them to the Assembly today and I look 
forward to meeting with them later for a picture and a chat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW0l) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I guess what 
I would ask on behalf of the residents of Elfros is, does Sask 
Water have technical expertise within the corporation that could 
assist this community in suggesting sites that may have a supply 
of water for them as far as drilling of future wells and that sort 
of thing? What technical expertise does the corporation have in 

that whole area, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer would be yes, we do have 
engineers that are very adept at finding different water sources. 
And as well, we can also draw on the private sector that may be 
of valuable assistance in this regard. 
 
So I would point out that absolutely Sask Water does have some 
staff members and resources to assist in this effort. And all I 
would ask is that they contact us or we’ll contact them and 
we’ll establish this communication effort. And to also point out 
that we would work with them to find the most affordable and 
reliable source of water. So we’ll go down that path together. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You indicated in some 
of your answers to my questions that initially when you do the 
assessment and initially talk to a community that there’s no 
charge for that. 
 
I suppose what the people of Elfros and I would like to know is, 
when does the meter start? When do you turn the meter on? 
When do you start charging for these services, and what type of 
services are, I guess, chargeable services and what type of 
information is provided to a community without . . . at no 
charge? 
 
Because as you can realize, Mr. Minister, this small community 
has spent a tremendous amount of money on water and they’re 
going to have to spend a whole lot more. And I suppose they 
. . . and what they are asking is, they’re asking for any help that 
they possibly can get from whatever department of government 
or from where . . . from whoever. Because they are really up 
against it, Mr. Minister. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And I will point out to the village of Elfros that Sask Water will 
be very clear as to when the billing will begin. And as I 
mentioned, whatever we’re able to offer in assistance without 
billing, we certainly will. But the relationship will be 
established between Sask Water and Elfros and they will have a 
clear understanding as to when the billing procedures begin. 
 
And I would point out — I’m not sure this is my last question 
— but I will thank the opposition members for their questions 
and also thank the officials for their information and their 
presence here and again encourage you all to continue forward 
in the public awareness that is necessary on this file. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, you are right; 
that is the last question for today. I want to thank you and the 
officials. You’ve been very open and I look forward to having 
some more debate about some more budget items here I have. 
So till next time, see you then and thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I move that the committee rise and report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just report progress. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Report progress. 
 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Government Relations and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (GR01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations and ask him to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to you, and 
to my colleagues here in the legislature, I’m pleased to 
introduce Mr. Brent Cotter, deputy minister of Government 
Relations and Aboriginal Affairs; Larry Steeves, on my 
immediate left, who is the associate deputy minister of 
municipal relations; John Edwards, who is the executive 
director of policy development; Russ Krywulak, at my far left, 
who is at grants administration and provincial municipal 
relations; Doug Morcom, behind me, who is grants 
administration; and Marj Abel, who is the director of finance 
and administration. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I imagine that the minister 
can anticipate some of the questions I may have for him this 
afternoon. He was here earlier when we were doing estimates 
with the Sask Water Corporation, and I think, Mr. Minister, I 
will continue on that line of questioning with the village of 
Elfros. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a number of other questions dealing with 
other areas, but seeing that this is current, we may as well deal 
with this area first. 
 
But first of all, Mr. Minister, I would like to welcome your 
officials here, and I’m sure they will be able to provide you 
with the assistance you require to answer some of these 
questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, the . . . you are, I’m sure, familiar with the 
situation in Elfros. I explained it earlier, but I could just briefly 
summarize it for your officials. This is a community who could 
see that they were running out . . . going to run out of water. 
They depended for quite a number of years on surface water to 
supply their village of 160-some people. 
 
So last summer they felt it was necessary, and in fact was very 
necessary, because the dam was running, quickly running out of 
water due to last year’s drought. 
 
So they hired a well driller and drilled a new well in the general 
area of the where the dam was located and they thought that 
they had an excellent supply of water. It was good quality 
water, and the pump testing and so on that the well driller did 
indicated that it was a good producing well. And so they did the 
necessary hookups and those sorts of things to a cost of 
approximately $30,000 to drill the well, make the necessary . . . 
do the necessary work to hook this new well into the water 
supply. 
 
And the residents were very, very happy. It was a fairly costly 
venture for the small community but they felt that they had a 
good, secure supply of water. 
 
Unfortunately, that proved not to be correct. In either late 

February or early March, I believe it was early March, the well 
went dry. And so they were . . . the town council, village 
council was faced with this huge problem of supplying water to 
the residents so they contracted . . . contacted a local contractor 
and that contractor started hauling water, I’m told, 18 to 24 
hours a day. They were making a 40-mile round trip to haul this 
water. The water was . . . they didn’t have time to test it; they 
were getting it from a well. But they didn’t know whether it was 
safe for drinking so they immediately issued a boil-water 
advisory to the residents. 
 
And this was costing them approximately $1,000 a day is what 
it averaged out to. And they . . . then they had no other choice; 
they got another driller in and started drilling holes in the 
ground to find a supply of water. And they drilled about six or 
seven test holes, and some they cased and pump tested them 
because there was an indication, the E-lock showed there was 
water there, but not a satisfactory supply. 
 
So finally by, I believe it was the sixth hole, they hit what they 
thought was a reliable supply of water. The well was developed, 
pump tested. I believe it pumped out at least 50 gallons a 
minute — and the village requirements are about 30 gallons a 
minute — so it was certainly ample, more than an ample for 
their village. 
 
And they proceeded to hook this into their water treatment plant 
by an above-ground pipeline and their costs for all of this . . . 
these expenditures in the month of March and April came to 
about $60,000. Well they’ve incurred more costs since. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, yesterday I received a call from the mayor 
of Elfros saying that their new well is dry. And they are really 
up against it. They’ve spent at least $80,000. It’ll be more 
because they . . . I believe they are starting to haul water again 
today. They don’t know where to look for water. 
 
The minister responsible for Sask Water said that the . . . that 
his Sask Water could supply him with some technical advice as 
far as locating a possible supply of . . . a future supply of water. 
But in the meantime they’re going to have to incur this cost of 
$1,000 a day to supply water to their residents. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, they’re really up against it. They don’t know 
where to turn. The mayor said, is there someone out there that 
can help us because this is going to break this community. And 
they have a little bit of a reserve, money in reserve, but I don’t 
know if it’s enough to cover the existing bills. 
 
They did send you a letter, Mr. Minister, dated April 12 in 
which they outlined their expenditures and asked for some help. 
And I might just read the closing paragraph of that letter. It 
comes from their administrator: 
 

The main concern of the Village is the health and safety of 
the residents with the wish to promote a continued good life 
style for some of the people in this wonderful country. 

 
And that’s, and that’s their concern. Mr. Minister, what answers 
have you got for the people of Elfros? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I sincerely thank the 
member for that question. And he echoes a concern that . . . a 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

 

genuine concern that he shares on behalf of his constituents, as 
do many members on both sides of the House that . . . whose 
communities, small communities, face similar situations 
unfortunately for a variety of reasons. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I would . . . I want to genuinely respond to 
those concerns on behalf of Elfros and Arran and a number of 
communities who find themselves in a situation where they 
require financial assistance; they require some type of support. 
 
Before I do that, I hope the hon. member will oblige me by just 
giving a brief overview as a result of some of our . . . the 
changes within government. I just want to make a statement in 
advance of responding to some of the specific concerns just to 
tell you that, as the province has embarked on a new direction, 
there have been numerous changes. And while the department 
structures have changed I just want to . . . want it on record here 
today, Mr. Chairman, that the commitment to the municipal 
sector continues to remain strong. 
 
The reorganization within Government Relations will make 
government work better, be more focused and efficient on those 
issues that are affecting our municipal governments. We’ve 
taken common programs and services, Mr. Chairman, and 
combined them into new organizations that we feel have . . . 
will have a natural fit and can easily be accessible by all people 
that have issues specifically of concern to those areas. 
 
As one department responsible for government relations and 
Aboriginal affairs, we have an opportunity to focus more 
clearly on the relationship between our Aboriginal, municipal, 
provincial, and federal governments, and those relationships. 
This is an opportunity to bring a broad policy perspective to 
issues such as legislation, funding, and, very importantly, 
infrastructure. 
 
We will be working on building a very strong and positive 
working relationship among all four government sectors. Our 
priority will be to consult with the municipal sector about the 
information and the tools that they require to provide services to 
their communities. We will be reviewing on an ongoing basis 
our organization’s structure and we will be consulting with 
SUMA, SARM, and others, to receive feedback on the 
effectiveness of its service delivery and to explore options for 
improvement within the context of available resources. 
 
I believe, with co-operation and sound vision, we will be able to 
continue the work of the municipal sector and provide the tools 
necessary to meet the needs of all of the residents. All 
departments, Mr. Chairman, will continue to work together and 
collaborate on matters of shared interest like environmental and 
municipal issues, public safety, and other areas. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, in response to the member’s concern with 
respect to the community of Elfros, I know this is not going to 
be the answer that the member wants to hear and not the answer 
that communities like to hear as well. However I must point out, 
and in our discussions with a number of communities on similar 
issues, that it’s the municipalities that are in fact responsible for 
ensuring that they have safe drinking water. The financial 
support for addressing the safe drinking water needs of our 
citizens needs to come from a variety of sources, and this is 
where we need to rely on the co-operative efforts of all our 

communities working in partnership, working in conjunction 
with one another, working together with our neighbours. 
 
(16:30) 
 
There needs to be, and this has come to the forefront and I 
believe is recognized more so than ever because of certain 
events that have occurred, there needs to be fair pricing of water 
to reflect the costs of providing safe drinking water. That’s one 
of the issues that needs to be addressed. There needs to be 
support from the federal and provincial governments to help 
pay for these infrastructure costs that are desperately needed in 
a lot of communities. There’s no disagreement about that. Both 
the federal and provincial governments have provided support 
and guidance to local governments through a variety of ways. 
And I believe . . . Well I know that the Minister of Sask Water 
was here and discussed some of the various ways in which Sask 
Water is very diligently attempting to offer advice, support, and 
assistance to those communities that have come looking for 
help. But it must be recognized that grants from the federal and 
provincial governments can be part of the solution. But even 
those resources are scarce and limited. 
 
In 2001-2002, funding was provided for 42 water supply 
projects and 16 waste water projects through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program and the 
Centenary Fund. In response once again to the increased need 
for community infrastructure funds for water and waste water 
projects, this year’s Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program has increased the proportion of funds directed to these 
types of projects and the type of projects that the member has 
brought to our attention. 
 
In this fiscal year, 2002-2003, funding has already been 
approved for water supply and waste water projects in 111 
communities, including 12 in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So when combined with the commitment from 2001-2002, the 
federal, provincial, and municipal contributions will result in 
more than $60 million having been invested and spent in 169 
communities throughout this great province of ours for water 
and waste water projects, during the initial two years of this 
particular program. 
 
So I guess, as I say, that’s probably not the answer, Mr. Chair, 
that the member was looking for. He was asking where they 
might turn for more money. Well there is an opportunity for 
that community, as with others, to go to the municipal financing 
board, but . . . and as well to apply for next year’s 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program for this type of a 
project. 
 
As I mentioned, federal/provincial funds are limited and are not 
the total answer for all the problems that are faced with the 
numerous communities throughout the province. The Municipal 
Financing Corporation is authorized to finance up to 50 per cent 
of the total authorized borrowing of a capital project, except for 
sewer and water projects which can be authorized for 100 per 
cent borrowing. With that approach, plus the application for 
help next year under the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program, that is one of the directions that those communities 
that need immediate help can follow. 
 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

Now there have been recent reports as you’ve seen, Mr. Chair, 
and as the members opposite have seen, where small 
communities faced with a shortage of water have gone to larger 
neighbouring communities. And I believe that that again is 
probably a direction that more communities will have to start 
looking at with respect to partnering with larger communities; 
working with Sask Water perhaps on some ideas and 
suggestions with respect to either piping in water or in fact 
hauling water — which is the case that a couple of communities 
have had to resort to. 
 
Those are the types of options that at this point in time the 
communities that find themselves in a situation have. One thing 
they can rely on, they can rely on people to listen to the types of 
concerns that they have and respond — whether it’s through 
Sask Water or communicating their concerns to this department, 
to SERM or Sask Water — for some type of assistance or at 
least a sounding board with some advice and/or suggestions as 
to how a community might proceed. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister certainly covered a fair bit 
of ground there and I picked up a couple of statements that I 
will respond to in a moment. Well in fact I’ll respond to one of 
them right now. He indicated that there’s the infrastructure 
program that communities can apply to. And in fact, the village 
of Elfros did apply. I have a copy of the letter dated April 9, 
2001 — which is your basic we’re sorry, there’s no money for 
you letter, that the community received. 
 
They applied specifically for water development and they were 
turned down. So I mean if the minister is saying go to the 
infrastructure program, well they did that, as many communities 
have. Some have got some money, a good number of other 
communities have got the standard no money letter, as Elfros 
did. 
 
The minister also took a moment to describe the reorganization 
of government and said that all of this reorganization was done 
so that government will work more efficiently, and that they 
would be able to respond to concerns of the citizens of this 
province in a more efficient manner. Well, Mr. Minister, I’m 
not so sure that your new plan is working that well. 
 
Your office received a letter from the village of Elfros dated 
April 12. I’m just going to quote a couple of paragraphs from 
that, in which they outline their situation and they provided you 
with a summary of expenditures that they’ve incurred since last 
summer. And the two paragraphs that I will quote is: 
 

Is there any possible way that government can help us? We 
have just implemented a boil-water advisory . . . 

 
And I said this, as I mentioned, this is dated April 12. Things 
have changed since that time: 

 
We have just implemented a boil-water advisory and are 
anxiously awaiting the results of the last well that did turn 
up some water. We have no idea as yet as to the (quantity 
and) quality and quantity. 

 
And I might just add, Mr. Minister, that since that time, that 
well too has gone dry: 
 

We are in a desperate situation. We have transferred our 
little bit of term money into the chequing account to pay for 
what has happened. At the moment, the well driller and the 
person hauling the water for the village are willing to wait 
to get at least partial payments. 

 
So you can see by this letter, Mr. Minister, that this village . . . 
these people are in a desperate situation. And as I said, they sent 
this letter off, it’s dated April 12. 
 
Earlier this . . . late last week, my office received a call from the 
village administrator and they were . . . they had said that they 
still hadn’t any reply from your office and they asked if we 
could see when they could expect a reply. 
 
When we made the inquiry, Mr. Minister, we were told that 
Elfros couldn’t . . . shouldn’t expect any reply from your office 
at all until April 29. Well, Mr. Minister, in a situation like this 
where there’s 160-some people don’t know whether they’re 
going to have any water the next day, I think that that is 
deplorable. I don’t think that’s, that’s more efficient. I don’t 
think that this new system is working, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I heard earlier, while you were making your reply, the 
Minister of Industry and Resources chirping from his seat, 
saying that, that the municipal finance . . . they can borrow all 
the money and that sort of thing. Well I think the people of 
Elfros would say we’re doing our part. They don’t expect the 
provincial government or any level of government to pay for 
100 per cent of the cost. 
 
But what they are . . . there are programs out there, they can’t 
access them. Everywhere they turn, they run into a stone . . . to 
a brick wall. 
 
And furthermore, if that Minister of Industry and Resources had 
done his job in the last couple of years to get this economy of 
this province percolating and growing, there would be more 
resources available to everyone to solve these problems, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
As a result, your government is managing a shrinking economy 
and people of Elfros and people in other situations are finding 
that there isn’t anybody out there that will lend a helping hand. 
And I don’t think that’s acceptable, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I would ask once again that you re-examine your situation 
and at least reply to their concerns and their letters in a timely 
fashion, Mr. Minister. Will you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In response to 
the question, I . . . There’s a letter dated April 12. I’m not sure 
why anybody would, you know, pre-empt the response by 
suggesting why there was a specific date that they would have 
to wait before they got a reply. I’m sorry; I’m confused about 
that. I’d like to know why they were told, don’t expect anything 
till April 29. 
 
Which is not inordinately lengthy, given . . . And I truly 
appreciate and respect on behalf of the community of Elfros, 
Mr. Chairman, what the member’s bringing forward. And he’s 
echoing, Mr. Chairman, similar concerns that many, many other 
communities have throughout the province. 



April 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

 

In that specific situation, with Elfros, they did in fact apply in 
the last fiscal year for the program but were denied because 
there were other communities that were rated as a higher 
priority for projects dealing with water and waste water 
projects. So it’s not a matter of an insensitive department or 
government that says, well tough beans, you’re out of luck. 
 
I just want to clarify that in 2002-2003 for example, Mr. 
Chairman, there were 445 applications received for this 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
 
Now that program, and I believe the member’s aware that it’s 
managed by a project review committee or management 
committee that is . . . that consists of people from the province, 
two from the province, two from the federal government, two 
people from SARM and from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). This is a committee that reviews 
and takes into serious account the situations that communities 
submit requesting assistance under this particular program. 
 
So you can imagine, when there’s only so big a pie and so many 
people want to share it, even if you cut it into the smallest 
slivers, you know eventually the pie is going to dissipate, 
disappear and there won’t be any, unfortunately, until the 
following year for those that did not have the urgency during 
their initial application, and later on did not apply for 
2002-2003 and then ran into a problem when the pie has already 
been divvied up for all those other communities that had critical 
priorities to address some of their projects. 
 
The Project Review Committee takes a look at all these 445 
applications and scrutinizes them closely, determining through 
criteria that they have set out for themselves — whatever those 
two provincial people, federal people, SARM and SUMA 
decide on — the criticality levels, if you wish, and then they 
determine here are the numbers that we can . . . Based on the 
dollar amounts being requested, we have to cut the number off 
at a certain place. But we’ll deal with those that are most 
critical, that we find most critical during the course of our 
review. So those are the ones that are recommended ultimately 
by the project review committee. 
 
And once those are all recommended and the money’s been 
allotted, then people like Elfros, unfortunately, those 
communities that after the fact find they have an immediate 
problem, they have to go to other initiatives. That’s the reality. 
 
And I might point out that . . . at the outset, as I said and it may 
sound harsh, that municipalities are responsible to ensure good 
quality, safe drinking water. And I commend . . . I’ve said it 
before in this House and publicly, I sincerely commend the 
leaders of the communities that take those responsibilities and 
they take them seriously, members on council. It’s not an easy 
task for those people in public office representing their citizens 
and their communities and meeting their responsibilities. I 
commend those that . . . 
 
And there are communities that — even prior to this type of a 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program coming into 
place, coming into being — took the initiative because they 
were faced with a situation that was critical to them, that they 
felt they needed to proceed with fixing, repairing, replacing 
their water infrastructure. 

However they did it is as a result of their own initiative. 
Whether they were fortunate enough to have reserves that they 
could dip into or whether they had to go to the Municipal 
Financing Corporation to assist them with a long-term loan at 
very reasonable interest rates — same as the borrowing rates for 
the province — and proceeded with upgrading or building, in 
some cases, state-of-the-art water treatment systems and 
infrastructure within their communities, now coming to me and 
saying, where’s some help for us? We fixed our situation and 
you’re telling us that there’s no help for us, but there is for 
people that are now in the same situation we were. 
 
(16:45) 
 
It’s not easy to be able to say well, I’m sorry, the program 
wasn’t in place at that time, and it’s not retroactive. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I guess what I’m saying, with all due respect to 
the member opposite and to the communities that are faced with 
these situations, the alternatives that may be available, and if 
there are alternatives that the Department of Government 
Relations or Sask Water or Environment I’m sure can offer or 
suggest, there are people there that certainly will. It’s not that 
folks are insensitive to the problems that exist out there. 
 
But it’s within the limits of the resources that are available and 
the program criteria that is not totally set . . . that criteria is not 
totally set by the province or by SARM or by SUMA. The 
federal government has some very serious, strict criteria that 
they have asked us to follow as well. 
 
However, having said that again, I need to say thanks to the 
federal government for allowing us to go to 74 per cent of the 
allotment of the funding for green water and waste water 
projects. Prior to this year it was 50 per cent and the rest for 
other projects and highways. 
 
So I know that’s not much consolation. I wish I could say yes, 
my letter . . . wait until the 29th, it’ll be payday and we’ll be 
able to, you know, send out some money. But I’m afraid that’s 
not available. 
 
But I would just encourage the community to apply next year. 
Consider some of the other alternatives, initiatives and . . . but 
apply for that program for their project for next year. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister, in his reply, outlined the 
situation that his government finds themselves in and certainly 
is sympathetic to the plight that the village of Elfros and other 
communities find themselves in and . . . but he also says, well, 
there’s just no more money — the pie isn’t big enough. 
 
And he also stated that it’s the village council, the municipal 
government that’s in place in these communities, it’s . . . they’re 
responsible to provide good, clean drinking water to their 
residents. And, in fact, their government is also saying that if 
those council members don’t do that, that we’re going to put 
you in jail. And they’re implementing these type of . . . this type 
of legislation later on in the session, I believe, Mr. Chair. 
 
Well it’s fine to just say, well the feds aren’t giving us enough 
money and our pie isn’t big enough and that’s all the money 
there is, apply again next year. There’s been a number of 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2002 

 

communities that have applied several years in succession and 
have been turned down. 
 
And I wonder if it ever dawns on that side of the House that 
maybe the solution to some of our problems is that we need a 
bigger pie. We need to grow this economy. We need to have 
more taxpayers so that we have more tax dollars so that we can 
fix some of the problems out there. 
 
And the unfortunate thing from this particular minister, Mr. 
Chair, is that that minister had an opportunity to force that 
government over there to implement the type of policies that 
would grow this province. 
 
But the minister and his colleague, they opted for the easy way 
out and now we find ourselves in this situation and the minister 
is . . . finds himself in the situation where he is apologizing for 
the shortcomings of his NDP colleagues, Mr. Minister. 
 
But having said that, that still doesn’t solve the problems that 
the people in the small communities find themselves. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, I think you should reconsider some 
of the decisions that your government has made in the past. We 
need to have a bigger pie. It’s not good enough to say to the 
mayor and the council of Elfros that look, it’s your 
responsibility to make sure your citizens don’t get sick from 
their drinking water; in fact, that there is water when they turn 
the tap on; and in fact, if you don’t do that, we’re going to send 
the long arm of the law after you. That’s not an acceptable 
answer, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I would encourage you when you’re sitting around that 
cabinet table to encourage your cabinet colleagues to get with 
the program and get this province growing and bring something 
to the people of this province that will generate the type of tax 
revenue that will solve these problems, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the outset of 
our deliberation of estimates for Government Relations and 
Aboriginal Affairs, I had anticipated by the questions from the 
member opposite that he was genuinely concerned about the 
problems that some of our smaller communities throughout the 
province face. 
 
Now, with the last question, I gather, it’s merely playing 
politics with serious situations that exist. I have responded to 
the situation that exists with the efforts that’s being made, and if 
there’s no genuine, sincere interest in what we are trying to do 
. . . I know the communities and the municipalities appreciate it 
very, very much. They don’t call us and criticize us for whether 
we are trying to do the very best we can or not. They recognize 
that we’re doing the very best we can. 
 
And the commitments that have been made for these kinds of 
programs, the federal-provincial contributions of $17 million in 
projects for last year and $98 million for the coming year. So 
I’m not just sure where the member is coming from as far as 
what programs should then he suggest, Mr. Chair, that this 
government cut in order to now fulfill what his playing politics 
should fulfill? I’m just not sure. 
 
I thought this was going to be a genuine concern that we 

recognize and appreciate throughout the province with small 
communities that need help, and we have offered the help the 
best we can. We’re available to help with advice and direction 
from each of the departments that may be involved in this type 
of a situation. It affects all our communities throughout the 
province. 
 
So I will continue to answer the questions that are asked 
pertinent to the department’s commitment to our communities 
and to our municipalities. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 
 


