















































Hansard: May 24, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1551 
 May 24, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan 
concerned about the condition of Highway No. 23 west from 
Junction 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Porcupine Plain, 
Weekes, and Hudson Bay. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition on behalf of people who are 
concerned about the cigarette laws: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that will make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be found in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Clair, 
Wadena, Regina, Kuroki, Choiceland, Yorkton. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned about the condition and 
capacity of the Avonlea dam. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconstruct and expand the Avonlea dam to meet current 
water supply demands, allow for sufficient water supply to 
accommodate proposed economic developments, and 
reduce flooding that has caused significant hardship in 
previous years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
community of Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to improve 
Highway 42: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 

constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Marquis and Keeler. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning my 
petition is in regards to the prescription drug plan in 
Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good people of 
Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increase in crop insurance 
premiums. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Battleford, Denholm, North 
Battleford, Sonningdale, and Maymont. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
petition today is from citizens concerned about Highway No. 
15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And all of the signatures today, Mr. Speaker, are from the town 
of Simpson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the tobacco 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

legislation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Mildred, and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7, 8, 11, 18, 23, 24, and 132. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to introduce to you and through you to the 
legislature today some very special guests, an important 
delegation that’s sitting in your gallery — the ambassador of 
Greece to Canada as well as the consul of Greece in Vancouver. 
And I’ll ask each to stand as I introduce them. 
 
First of all, His Excellency Leonibas Chrysanthopoulos, who is 
the Greek ambassador to Canada. And accompanying the 
ambassador is Mrs. Eleni Lianidou, consul of Greece in 
Vancouver. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the ambassador and his delegation arrived in 
Saskatchewan yesterday. He met with the Lieutenant Governor, 
yourself, officials from Environment regarding forest fire 
suppression, and with the president of the Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership regarding trade relationships. 
 
And I did have both the honour and the pleasure to host a 
luncheon for the ambassador and Mrs. Lianidou, and also Mrs. 
Demir was there, and our representative from protocol. And I 
had an opportunity to meet the executive of a very active Greek 
community in Regina who does a great deal of charitable work 
and donates to hospitals and other things. 
 
So I just urge all the members to join me in welcoming our 
special guests. And welcome to Your Excellency and Mrs. 
Lianidou. And thank you for coming to our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the official opposition, I also would like to 
welcome the delegation here, to the ambassador and Mrs. 
Lianidou. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure of visiting Greece and very much enjoy 

the country; although a short visit, I very much enjoyed it. And 
I can assure you, you have a very active Greek community here 
in Regina, and we have the distinct pleasure of meeting with 
them and enjoying their hospitality on a number of occasions. 
 
So again, I’d like to join the minister in welcoming our special 
guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 28 grade 7 students from Carrot River High 
School. 
 
They have been away from Carrot River for a couple of days 
now. I understand yesterday they were in Moose Jaw and 
they’re going to be spending the rest of the day here in Regina. 
And I’m hoping to have an opportunity to be able to meet with 
them a little later after question period. And I know that they 
will have lots of questions once they observe the proceedings 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also have a very special request from Stan Novogrodski, the 
reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of Moose Range, Mr. 
Speaker. He wanted me to say a special hello to Jina Bradshaw 
and to tell you that grandpa was really hoping that you were 
behaving yourself. 
 
So I look forward to meeting you a little later. And I would ask 
everyone to welcome these grade 7 students from Carrot River 
to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

SIAST Kelsey Students Graduate 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning and again this afternoon students at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
Kelsey Campus will be graduating. Two hundred thirty-four 
graduates will be attending the morning ceremony with an 
expected crowd of about 1,800 people attending. This afternoon 
about 1,500 people will watch 233 more Kelsey grads receive 
their diplomas or certificates. 
 
The Kelsey Campus is in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, so I 
am particularly pleased to announce to the Assembly that these 
Saskatchewan students have completed their studies, and to add 
our congratulations to those of their parents, friends, and 
faculty. 
 
I am even more pleased because, as we know, the vast majority 
of SIAST students find work almost immediately and the vast 
majority of these find work in Saskatchewan. This is the good 
news not only for these kids but for the future of our province. 
 
There is one other thing I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, about 
Kelsey. SIAST has four campuses in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose 
Jaw, and Prince Albert. Kelsey’s been providing full-time and 
part-time training in about 40 professions, technologies, and 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

 

trades since 1963. It and its programs have adapted with the 
times, and Kelsey remains a flagship of post-secondary 
learning. 
 
About 4,000 full-time students are enrolled in its programs 
annually, as well as about 700 in part-time programs and 11,000 
extension programs. More than 400 faculty and staff on campus 
provide instruction and contribute to the life and economy of 
my city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our best wishes go to these graduates as they take 
this important step in their professional lives. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Communities Assist in Fighting Archerwill Fires 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week many communities in Saskatchewan awoke not only to 
nerve-racking winds but to the smell of smoke in the air. The 
village of Archerwill in my constituency, population of 230, not 
only survived as they fought four separate fires and saved the 
property and lives of their neighbours, but they stand proudly as 
an example of how working together bonds a community 
together. 
 
The fire marshal and a number of firefighters worked through 
three days and two long nights with the help of water bombers, 
helicopters, five-men crew from DNR (Department of Natural 
Resources), and many, many reinforcements from neighbouring 
towns and villages. Men and women from the communities of 
Rose Valley, Tisdale, Naicam, and Spalding pitched in to help 
the residents of Archerwill. Additional offers of help came from 
Kelvington and Porcupine Plain. Remember in the meantime 
each of these communities had fires of their own to contend 
with. 
 
I saw the fire myself Tuesday as I sat in the smoke in the yard 
of a family as they watched the fire leaping towards their 
property. The grandmother said, I worked all my life to build 
this place and I’m not leaving; please don’t let it burn. 
 
I was totally overwhelmed seeing all those volunteer 
firefighters work together without one word of complaint or 
acknowledgement that they were taking unpaid time off work, 
that their seeding equipment was shut down, and that their 
normal day-to-day activities were put on hold as they helped to 
contain the blaze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the workers at the site told me that there 
were over 50 farm trucks with water tanks in the back at the 
scene. The seniors from Archerwill were taken to the hall in 
Rose Valley where the community ladies fed them and stayed 
with them till they could return to their own homes. 
 
On Wednesday the firefighters from Spalding arrived not only 
with equipment and personnel but they brought food that the 
ladies in Spalding had prepared for the whole crew. 
 
Mr. Speaker, living in rural Saskatchewan has many challenges 
— so many so that city people often ask, why do you stay 
there? Why don’t you move into the city where you have all the 
amenities? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the amenities that help us in rural 
Saskatchewan can’t be found in a mall or in a theatre or in a 
park. They are found within the hearts of people who know that 
their neighbours are their friends, that know that there can be no 
line in the sand, and there’s no limit to what you’ll give when 
your friends need help. 
 
The RM administrator of Barrier Valley told me that disasters 
tend to pull people together. I know that’s true. I also know that 
through the heat of the fire and the anxiety in the hearts of 
volunteer firefighters, there’s a happiness and reaffirmation in 
the fact that lending your neighbours a helping hand just feels 
good and it gives value to your own life. 
 
So on behalf of all the members, I offer congratulations and a 
big thank you to all the volunteer firefighters in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Edge Entertainment 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in my 
constituency is a company that has in the last five years grown 
by — get this, Mr. Speaker — by 5,253 per cent. How’s that for 
growing Saskatchewan? 
 
Edge Entertainment and President David Doerksen are the 
creators of the recent thriller films, Dead Even and Black Light, 
and of family films, Summer of the Monkees and The 
Impossible Elephant. And my family and I have seen Summer 
of the Monkees, Mr. Speaker, and it’s good. What’s more, it’s 
good and it was shot in Saskatoon. If you want proof that the 
film industry is thriving in our province, look no further. 
 
Edge Entertainment was recently named the 15th fastest 
growing firm in Canada by PROFIT, The Magazine for 
Canadian Entrepreneurs. The magazine looks at revenue 
growth over the past five years. Edge went from $121,237 in 
1996 to almost $6.5 million last year — hence the 5,000 
percentage number. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to mention one more fact about this 
remarkable company and its remarkable achievement. To what 
does President Doerksen attribute their growth? First of course 
to really hard work and to good planning. Also he says building 
a relationship with the banks has been crucial and the 
involvement of the province of Saskatchewan two years ago 
made a huge difference. Now thanks to their success, banks are 
approaching them. 
 
(10:15) 
 
I’m sure all members and I congratulate President David 
Doerksen and Edge Entertainment for their continued success 
into the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Great Canadian Geography Challenge 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

today to recognize a grade 9 student at the Estevan 
Comprehensive School. Toby Henneberg arrived home from 
Ottawa on Tuesday, May 21. Toby had been in our nation’s 
capital to compete in the annual Great Canadian Geography 
Challenge. This was his second trip to the national finals. 
 
Toby said he finished in 11th or 12th position in the 
competition that pitted the best geography and history students 
across Canada against one another for the title. The top 10 
finishers advanced to the finals. So Toby did very well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As this contest is only open to students in grade 7 to 9, Toby 
will not be eligible to compete next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating this 
bright young man. Estevan and area are very proud of your 
accomplishments, Toby. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Joël Fafard Band 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Joël Fafard Band 
has advanced to CBC’s (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
national music contest, The Great Canadian Music Dream. 
 
From among 900 entries in Alberta, Manitoba, Northwest 
Territories, and BC (British Columbia), the Joël Fafard Band 
has been chosen as one of 15 performers that’s made the cut 
and is now moving on to the next level of competition. 
 
Fafard and his band include drummer Jody Mario; keyboardist 
Jeff McLeod, who incidentally lives in the great constituency of 
Regina Coronation Park; bass player Darcy Jonstone. This crew 
is going to take a break from the studio to travel to Edmonton 
for the live auditions of the CBC contest which is held 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Quoting from the bio of Joël Fafard, I quote: 
 

A fiery blend of urban and rural music that is forging a new 
voice for the prairies. Fafard’s music is world class, but his 
heart and home are deeply rooted in his home, 
Saskatchewan’s Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
The Joël Fafard Band’s latest CD, “Head Smashed In”, is a 
rich, spontaneous blend of folk, pop and blues; a musical 
brew of Fafard’s roots. From Canada to New Zealand, 
Fafard developed his craft travelling the world (and) 
performing his eclectic verse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the House to join with me 
in congratulating all members of the Joël Fafard Band for their 
accomplishments and wishing them the very best of luck in the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Fundraising Event 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
privilege to rise in the Assembly today to tell my colleagues 

about a huge event last night in the city of Saskatoon. Not only 
can the Saskatchewan Party and its leader fill a room in 
Calgary, we can do the same thing in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Last night’s leader’s dinner was held and over 
700 people attended. People from all walks of life in Saskatoon 
came out to hear our leader, the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, spread the word about the Saskatchewan 
Party’s plan to grow the province by 100,000 people in 10 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the largest event of its kind for the 
Saskatchewan Party in the city of Saskatoon, and our support in 
the city continues to grow and grow impressively, something 
I’m sure the members opposite are quite nervous about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the Premier charges $25 to hold functions to 
speak about the myriad of problems facing his NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government, the Saskatchewan Party fills a 
room with over 700 in Saskatoon; residents who paid $125 each 
to hear our positive message of hope and optimism. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while we continue to pack rooms in Alberta 
and bring money back to Saskatchewan to help beat the NDP, 
we will also continue to hold jammed-to-capacity dinners in 
Saskatchewan and let people know that it’s time for a change. 
It’s time for a change in government, time to boot out the NDP 
and usher in a bright new future. It’s time to grow 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police Gala Event 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I have something truly 
positive to report to the House. As a 25-year veteran of the 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police, I am pleased to inform the 
House, Mr. Speaker, this weekend Regina is home to a gala 
event. 
 
This Saturday marks the annual RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) charity ball held at the academy’s historic drill 
hall. Instead of perspiration from marching, there’ll be 
perspiration from dancing. This gala event is an evening of 
friendship, fine dining, and entertainment for a worthwhile 
cause. 
 
This year the RCMP have chosen to host the event with the 
proceeds being received by the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing Services Inc., a provincial charity dedicated to 
providing services to enhance the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan citizens across the province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the proceeds will be used directly to 
support the Foster Pride in Our Youth program. Often in this 
House we ask if there is anything more important in this 
province than our youth. Well the Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard 
of Hearing Services Inc. has taken this to heart with this 
program. 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

 

The Foster Pride in Our Youth program empowers young 
people to overcome challenges and barriers they face in their 
daily living at school and at home. The youth learn to take pride 
in their independence, allowing them to become equal and 
active participants in the community. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in commending the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police and Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of 
Hearing Services Inc. for this event and for the service both 
provided to Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Role of Privacy Commissioner 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Last week the Saskatchewan Party asked the Privacy 
Commissioner to conduct a review of all government 
departments, agencies, and Crown corporations to evaluate the 
current safeguards protecting the privacy of confidential 
information and make recommendations for improvements. 
 
The Privacy Commissioner has indicated he will not conduct 
such a review partly because the province has launched its own 
investigation, partly because there’s an ongoing RCMP 
investigation, and partly because the Privacy Commissioner 
says he doesn’t have the authority to conduct a real 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would the NDP pass a privacy legislation that 
doesn’t give the Privacy Commissioner the ability to conduct an 
effective investigation into the misuse of confidential 
information by the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I think all members know, the Privacy Commissioner, Mr. 
Gerrand, is a lawyer with the utmost integrity and respect of his 
colleagues and of people in this House, and indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, across the province. 
 
Mr. Gerrand has chosen to await the results of the RCMP 
investigation and to await the independent review which the 
government has ordered. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that 
the decision of the Privacy Commissioner, the fact that Mr. 
Gerrand is a person of utmost integrity, requires us to accept his 
judgment and to await the reviews so that he can then make his 
decision. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The issue is that 
this NDP government, Mr. Speaker, has muzzled a man of 
integrity. That’s the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s request for an 
investigation into the release of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our request for an 
investigation into the release of confidential personal 
information by government employees, the Privacy 
Commissioner said he could not effectively carry out an 
investigation because The Privacy Act didn’t give him the 
authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the same thing, the same thing he said about 
the NDP’s conflict of interest legislation earlier this year after 
the former NDP Agriculture minister, Eric Upshall, got off on a 
technicality, Mr. Speaker, even though he clearly broke 
provincial conflict of interest laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP amend its flawed privacy legislation 
to give the Privacy Commissioner the authority to effectively 
investigate any future unauthorized release of private and 
confidential information by the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would, if I may, advise the member to be careful about casting 
aspersions about the integrity of Mr. Gerrand. 
 
He has . . . Mr. Speaker, he’s made his decision based upon 
what he considers the best process to follow. It’s important not 
to have too many investigations taking place all at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important to ensure that the work 
done by the RCMP and the work done by the forensic audit, 
Mr. Speaker, is available to the Privacy Commissioner so that 
he can make conclusions based upon the facts. 
 
And I think the member second-guessing the Privacy 
Commissioner, an independent officer of this court, is not the 
appropriate course to follow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the minister responsible for Workers’ 
Compensation Board. According to its 2001 annual report, the 
WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) lost a whopping $55 
million last year. On top of that the WCB was forced to make 
an actuary adjustment of $69 million. And just to round things 
out, the WCB took a page from the NDP government’s bag of 
fiscal tricks by draining its $49 million injury fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s how things went in the first year with 
former NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) John 
Solomon as the Chair of WCB. 
 
My question to the minister is this: what happened? How could 
John Solomon mismanage the WCB so badly that it lost $55 
million in a single year? And why was the WCB forced to make 
a $69 million actuary adjustment last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in case the member 
opposite hasn’t noticed when he says what happened last year, 
there was a near collapse in investment markets across . . . and 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

around the world. So in case he hasn’t noticed that had a great 
effect on the revenue . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — So, Mr. Speaker, in case the member 
didn’t notice, there was a drop in markets worldwide last year 
and this in fact affected the revenues of the WCB here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Workers’ Compensation system in 
Saskatchewan system is fully funded and still has a surplus of 
$50 million, and we still have the second lowest rates across 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the minister 
should accept is the total incompetence of the new chairman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the WCB employs outside actuaries to value its 
future liabilities. In 2000, actuaries reported the present value of 
all WCB’s future liabilities at $599.926 million, and in 2001, 
these same auditors valued WCB’s future liabilities at $665.839 
million. Then they threw in a $3 million accounting adjustment 
for good measure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the massive difference in liabilities in just 
one year? What changes took place at the WCB that led the 
actuaries to make a huge $69 million adjustment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, every year an actuarial 
review is done on the Workers’ Compensation Board and an 
adjustment is made at the end of that year. By requirements of 
the Act, Mr. Speaker, WCB needs to remain 100 per cent 
funded. So the actuarial review is done yearly to make sure that 
that is accomplished and maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Workers’ Compensation Board is fully funded 
and still retains a surplus. Some of those surpluses have been 
drawn down to cover the shortfall for this year, but we still 
maintain the second lowest rates in the province’s rate across 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the actuaries didn’t change the 
last year at WCB. The methods they used to evaluate WCB’s 
liabilities didn’t change last year, but there was a massive $69 
million adjustment to WCB’s future liabilities. Why? 
 
And here’s another interesting change. Last year, WCB ran . . . 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I must be able to hear 
the question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And here’s another 
interesting change. Last year WCB ran a surplus of more than 
$40 million. But in 2001 WCB piled up an operating loss of 

more than $55 million. Mr. Speaker, what happened at WCB 
that triggered this 95 million nose-dive in WCB’s financial 
performance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
investment markets over the last year, and I hate to remind the 
members opposite, but September 11 — does that ring a bell 
maybe with them? Markets fell, investments . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously I hit 
a sore spot. They must have just looked at their mutual 
statements or their pension plan statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an article in The Globe and Mail, April 11 of this 
year, talks about Canada’s 100 largest pension funds lost money 
last year for the first time in at least 22 years. Mr. Speaker, in 
case the members opposite haven’t noticed, Saskatchewan is 
involved in world markets and these things do have an effect on 
companies and businesses in this province. 
 
The Saskatchewan WCB is fully funded, provides very good 
benefits and their rates are the second lowest in provinces right 
across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to remind the 
minister that the economies of North America and Canada have 
recovered since 9/11, everywhere but in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, according to the WCB’s 2000 annual . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, according to the WCB’s 2001 
annual report part of the reason for the massive losses this year 
was a huge increase in health care costs. In fact according to the 
WCB’s own report, health care expenses rose by a whopping 35 
per cent last year. And yet the WCB’s annual report also says 
they estimated annual increases in health care costs to be in the 
range of just 1.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is it that the WCB’s health care costs went up 
by 35 per cent last year when their own annual report projects 
health care costs increase of just 1.5 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the member 
from Redberry Lake talks about the markets recovering, I 
would just urge him that the annual report that was tabled a 
couple of weeks ago in this House went until December 31, 
2001, so when he wants to look for recoveries, he should look 
next year when I table the report then. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the WCB incurs a significant 
expense in the current year and a large ongoing liability for 
payment of claims to workers injured on or before the end of 
2001 calendar year. This is known as benefits liabilities. And in 
2001, WCB benefits liabilities went up by almost $70 million. 
Why? What policy changes, what changes in expenses resulted 
in such a massive increase in the future liabilities WCB 
incurred on its existing compensation claims? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, as part of the process that 
goes on annually at WCB, an actuarial review is done every 
year-end to make sure that the money is set aside to maintain 
benefits to injured workers into the future. That’s the way the 
WCB has been always run, Mr. Speaker. This adjustment 
comes yearly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we provide very good benefits here in 
Saskatchewan, provide very good rehab, vocational training, 
diagnostics for the injured workers here in Saskatchewan. Our 
Workers’ Compensation in Saskatchewan is fully funded and 
still retains a $50 million surplus. 
 
When you look at British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, they had a 
287-dollar-million shortfall . . . million-dollar shortfall last year. 
New Brunswick was around 36 million, Mr. Speaker. Our 
Workers’ Compensation Board, I repeat, is fully funded, still 
retains a surplus, and we have the second lowest rates across 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the WCB lost $55 million last 
year . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, members. Order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The WCB lost $55 
million last year. The WCB drained its 49 million injury fund 
last year. The WCB was forced to make a $69 million 
adjustment to its future liabilities last year. The WCB incurred a 
35 per cent increase in health care cost last year when they 
forecast an increase of just 1.5 per cent. In one word, Mr. 
Speaker, brutal. And now, thousands of businesses around 
Saskatchewan are wondering whether their WCB rates will be 
going up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister assure business owners across 
Saskatchewan that the NDP’s mismanagement of the WCB last 
year would not result in rate increases this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, same question, same 
answer. WCB in Saskatchewan is very well run. They’re 100 
per cent funded, have a $50 million surplus still in the reserve 
funds. Mr. Speaker, they provide excellent service to injured 
workers, competitive rates right across . . . some of the best 
rates across Canada and still maintain their 100 per cent funded 
status. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well since the 
minister hasn’t answered the first six questions, I do have one 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, if Mr. Solomon has been 
mismanaging funds at the WCB, how does the minister explain 
the difference in the health care costs from the estimated 1.5 per 
cent, which they estimated, to a whopping 35 per cent increase? 
Why such a difference? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first off I’d like to 
thank the member opposite for giving me the opportunity to be 
able to stand here and talk about how good of a job WCB is 
doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The Saskatchewan Workers’ 
Compensation here in Saskatchewan is fully funded with a $50 
million surplus in reserve funds. They have more than enough 
assets to cover injuries that are on their case files, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re the second lowest employer premiums in any of the 
provinces across Canada. And unlike other provinces, Mr. 
Speaker, we have not cut benefits to injured workers and 
programs to maintain those very good rates. Mr. Speaker, that is 
good management in anyone’s books. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for ethanol. 
 
Yesterday we raised concerns in this House about the 
government’s apparent intention to enter an exclusive deal for 
ethanol production in the province of Saskatchewan. The 
minister went outside the Assembly and said — get this, Mr. 
Speaker — he said, it was his preference that the government 
not sign an exclusive deal, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 
minister responsible said yesterday outside the House. 
 
Well just to update the minister. He should know that if it’s his 
preference the government not sign an exclusive deal with any 
company with respect to ethanol, then his preference should 
take priority over the preference of Frank Hart at the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, he’s the minister; Mr. Hart is the 
civil servant. 
 
So the question to the minister is this: if that’s his preference, if 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

that’s what he thinks the right thing to do is, will he stand in his 
place today, commit to go across the pond over to College 
Avenue, walk into Mr. Hart’s office and tell him there will be 
no exclusive deal with any company that would hurt the 
long-term prospects of the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite will lend me his ear for a moment . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — . . . I fully intend to explain how the 
process works. I am the minister responsible for ethanol 
development in this province. I do have a preference that we be 
able to negotiate with private sector investments . . . investors 
who come to this province who indicate their willingness to put 
capital . . . risk capital into what I believe to be a very good and 
positive economic development opportunity in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I will say to the member opposite as well, Mr. Speaker, I have 
met with Commercial Alcohols who have indicated that they’re 
in discussions with the community of Melville. They have been, 
contrary to what the member opposite said, in conversation with 
officials from Crown Investments Corporation, sir. 
 
I have met with Commercial Alcohols, and if they intend to 
come to this province and commit to an investment of ethanol 
development that will create an intensive livestock industry 
growth in this province, we welcome them here as well, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t answer the 
question. But he repeated, he repeated his position that it’s his 
preference — and he’s the minister responsible — it’s his 
preference that there be no exclusive deal with any US (United 
States) company. But apparently he, like the rest of the 
ministers over there, is afraid of Frank Hart and the officials 
over at the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again, this time though the question is for any 
of the ministers over there, is there any ministers on that side of 
the House that will stand up to Frank Hart and prevent an 
exclusive deal with any company that would hurt the long-term 
prospects of ethanol development in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to send the 
member from Swift Current home with some comfort for the 
weekend because I know this is a burning issue in his heart. My 
preference as minister responsible for ethanol development will 
prevail. And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, what will 
prevail is some sound, positive economic investment in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that we have the opportunity to 
attract the successful businessman, Mr. Pat Broe, who has been 
maligned by that member, who is a . . . (inaudible) . . . 

businessman, not only in the United States but here in 
Saskatchewan and in Manitoba. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this guy has a track record of 
very successful investments unlike the curator of the guitar 
museum from Swift Current, the economic development guru 
for the Saskatchewan Party, who can’t even manage $200,000 
of public funds in a little piddly museum in Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll side with Pat Broe any day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, every time this minister 
doesn’t have an answer for this Assembly and taxpayers, he 
gets personal. He kind of gets grumpy and he gets personal. 
He’s a . . . frankly, he’s quite an angry man, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think I can understand why he’s angry, Mr. Speaker. It goes 
back a long ways. 
 
He’s angry because he backed the wrong man in the NDP 
leadership race, Mr. Speaker. He’s still angry because as the 
House Leader he actually lost a vote on his own department 
estimates, if you can believe it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he’s angry . . . and he’s angry because he’s taken the good 
work of the member for Regina South on ethanol and made a 
mess of it in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why he’s angry. 
 
But all the personal attacks and all of the anger doesn’t cover 
the fact that we still don’t know conclusively what the position 
of the government is. So we’ll give him a chance to say it. Is it 
his position and the position of the NDP that there will be no 
exclusive deal with respect to ethanol production in the 
province of Saskatchewan with any company? Will he stand up 
to Frank Hart? Will he answer the question, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to give 
some comfort to the member opposite as well that I’m really not 
angry. What I am . . . what I am is I am displaying a 
considerable degree of frustration with that member and the 
reason is, sir, because people in his constituency and in the 
member from Shaunavon and in the member from Melville and 
in the member from Maple Creek and the member from Wood 
River — all of those people their constituents are coming 
together with the private sector companies saying, we want to 
create some job opportunities for people in our constituencies. 
We want to develop an ethanol industry. We want to develop 
our intensive livestock industry that’s tied to that and create 
jobs in Saskatchewan. We want to feed cattle here in this 
province. We want to build packing plants. 
 
And they come to this province and they come to the 
government and they say, will you work with us to make it 
happen? And, Mr. Speaker, we say yes. And who says no, Mr. 
Speaker? The same people who are representing the people who 
are coming to us saying, would you support us in putting this 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

 

industry together to make it grow, to make it work, to create 
jobs, to create wealth, to create profit for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not anger; it’s frustration that that member 
would every day stand up and play politics with economic 
development in rural Saskatchewan. That’s what it is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 
the Hon. Greg Selinger, who is sitting behind the bar on this 
side of the House. 
 
He is a former city councillor in the city of Winnipeg. He was 
born in Regina and raised in the Elphinstone area until age 12 
when he moved to Winnipeg. He is a university professor, a 
former city councillor, elected with the New Democratic Party 
in the last Manitoba election and was immediately appointed to 
be the Minister of Finance in Manitoba, and I believe now has 
delivered two or three budgets. 
 
He is a very distinguished person doing a very good job in the 
province of Manitoba. And I’d like all members to join with me 
in welcoming Mr. Selinger to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d like to have leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to 
introduce through you to all members of the legislature, Mr. 
Dave Chomiak, who is the Minister of Health in Manitoba. And 
Dave is a long-standing New Democrat but also he’s a great 
friend of Saskatchewan. 
 
He comes here regularly to visit with many people in this 
province who are his good friends. And we very much 
appreciate the kind advice and counsel that he’s given over the 
years to all of us on this side of the House. And we look 
forward to working with our colleagues from Manitoba for 
many, many years to come. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 54, The 

Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 55, The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Unparliamentary Language 
 

The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day I would 
like to bring an item to the attention of the members. I’ve had 
an opportunity to reflect upon a statement made in the House 
yesterday regarding the use of language and I want to bring it to 
the attention of members. 
 
But before I do that, I would like to refer members to 
Beauchesne's, 6th edition, page 151, the section 494 where it 
refers that: 
 

It is not unparliamentary temperately to criticize statements 
made by Members as being contrary to the facts; but no 
imputation of intentional false-hood is permissible. 

 
Moreover, back one page on page 149, section 491: 
 

The Speaker has consistently ruled that language used in 
the House should be temperate and worthy of the place in 
which it is spoken. 

 
I refer members to a statement made yesterday by the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote in which he mentioned that, and 
that I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan Party can stand in this House and 
misrepresent the truth. 

 
Members, the implication of that statement I believe is that, I 
interpret, that members are doing something dishonourable. 
And I think that our objective in the House here is to have 
debate which is passionate and a debate about the facts, without 
implying any type of improper action on the part of any 
member. 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

I’d like us to raise the bar and maintain the dignity of this 
Assembly. So I would simply ask at this time that the member 
not use that statement again and I ask others not to use it either. 
And I thank members in advance for their co-operation on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to your 
comments and respect to your ruling, I would withdraw those 
comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to stand on behalf of the government and respond to written 
question no. 203. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 203 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll convert for 
debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 204 is converted to debates returnable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Urban Municipal Administrators 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce Mr. Ken Kolb, who is our senior policy analyst, to 
assist me in responding to I know what will be some questions 
with a great deal of wisdom from members opposition. Thank 
you. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As I left the meeting 
last night I thought I wouldn’t have the opportunity to have you 
chair another meeting hopefully for another week. And lo and 
behold here you are again, Mr. Chair. So I welcome you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to welcome your official here today and 
probably not . . . really don’t have many problems with this 
Bill, probably a couple of dozen questions would suffice. 
 
Mr. Minister, the urban administrators, I believe, are quite 
happy with what’s in this Bill. But were there other things that 
they had asked you to change that aren’t addressed in here or 
did you address all of their concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m very pleased to 
respond to the hon. member that all of their concerns were 
taken into account and addressed when this Act was put 

together. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
UMAAS (Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association of 
Saskatchewan) discipline committee has been changed now to 
an ethics committee. Can you explain to me what the difference 
that will make and what changes from the old way to the new 
way this will include? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the changes will not create 
a significant change with respect to the responsibilities. It’s 
merely a change to update the committee to reflect what the 
current responsibilities . . . rather than a discipline committee an 
ethics committee was felt to be more appropriate by the 
administrators and I believe that’s probably . . . the language 
itself is . . . indicates ethics as opposed to disciplinary body. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister the 
only other question I really have on this Bill is, what it does 
now is it creates the ability for the administrators to create new 
classes for themselves. Can you maybe just give me the 
definitions of what the new classes are from what the old way 
was with the administrators’ classification? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, currently what they have is 
a standard and an advanced class of membership. And what 
they have asked for is to include an alumni — an honorary 
membership class for their association. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s all 
the questions we have at this time on this Bill and we would let 
it go at this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the member 
opposite for the questions with respect to this Bill. And again, 
as I pointed out earlier, this Bill will hopefully assist the 
administrators in their efficient and effective operation of their 
duties and responsibilities to their communities and to their 
citizens. So I want to thank the hon. member. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Tax Enforcement 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to report that 
Mr. Ken Kolb is very capably here to assist me in responding to 
the hon. members’ questions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, when 
was the last time this dollar amount was adjusted or changed? 
How long have we had that original amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the specific number of 
years I don’t have. I can certainly obtain that for the member. It 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

 

has been at least a decade, at least 10 years that this Act has 
been in effect under these conditions. And the need to update 
and change to make it easier for municipalities to function was 
the consideration. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and as you said 
— and that was my next question — if the municipalities had 
actually requested this change, did the municipalities also 
request that this go now . . . be moved from the floor of the 
legislature into regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, yes to the member. As a 
matter of fact, it was requested because of the . . . to move into 
regulations because of the assessments being every four years, 
it could expedite any changes with respect to tax enforcement 
issues. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I understand why the administrators and the 
municipalities were asking for that part of it to be changed. 
 
I have grave concerns when we take something out of the floor 
of the legislature and put it into regulation as I think as the 
member is well aware. We’ve all had concerns from time to 
time when something is taken out of the public eye and can be 
adjusted or changed with absolutely no one else knowing, but 
probably at the whim of the government, maybe unbeknown 
even to the administrators of the municipalities out there. What 
is your opinion, Mr. Minister, on that? 
 
I mean, I think people out there, if they understood how this 
actually works, at least when these changes come to the floor of 
the legislature we have the opportunity to debate them and in 
the final outcome probably the government will have its way as 
usual because of the numbers. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when something is taking off the floor of the 
legislature without the chance for debate and put into 
regulations — as we’ve seen a number of times before — I feel 
that democracy has lost a bit of its value and that things could 
be slid under the table. We can come back in next fall, Mr. 
Minister, and have had changes made to this exact piece of 
legislation, have had no debate on it, the municipalities 
themselves may have had . . . not wanted what has come with 
the changes and once again it’s done behind closed doors. What 
. . . where do you come on that, Mr. Minister? What is your 
feeling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that is an excellent 
question from the hon. member. I now want to assure the hon. 
member and this House that before any changes are made with 
respect to the Act, there will be consultation, direct consultation 
with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), the 
urban municipality association and the rural municipality 
association administrators before there are any changes. 
 
And as the member will appreciate, we will be looking for their 
support to any of these changes. And if there is objection to 
them, if there’s a need for debate, then it’ll occur at that time. 
There will not be any changes imposed without that 
consultation process. 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank 
you for those assurances. 
 
But as we’ve seen in the last number of years with ministers in 
municipal government, we’ve had I believe five in the last 
number of years — four, at least. And the next minister comes 
in has — you know, you’ve made that commitment to me today 
and I honestly believe that you’re sincere in that — but we can 
get a new minister in here with a new agenda, a new direction 
and we lose the ability and . . . the ability to debate the changes. 
 
And probably, you know, nine out of ten times we would agree 
with the changes that are being made, especially when the 
administrators and the municipalities are asking for them. But I 
guess if you’re getting the drift of what I’m saying, Mr. 
Minister — and I honestly believe you agree with that — that 
when that’s taken out of the possibility to debate changes, 
whether it’s going through as . . . The last Bill for an example. 
We agreed with the changes you made. We had also checked 
with the administrators and we had no problem with that. And 
my feeling is that’s how this place should work. 
 
But the minute we take possible changes to something like this 
and put them behind closed doors, I have a problem. And I 
think, to be honest with you, if the people of Saskatchewan 
could understand what was happening, they also would have 
problems, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I really have no problem with any other part of the Bill. I 
have no problem with the figure. But I want to make sure that 
we’re on the record today as opposing the way this is being 
done and putting . . . put into regulations, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the member’s 
comments and concerns as expressed on behalf of the people 
that will be affected or may be affected in the future by this 
legislation. 
 
I do want to point out the reason, the purpose of this 
amendment was to give the province the ability to address the 
needs of the municipalities in a timely and an expedient 
manner. If the value remains in the legislation, the Act would 
have to be opened and go through the legislative amendment 
process potentially each time that a reassessment occurs. 
 
So it is my hope that when it comes time to making any changes 
to values, that it will be as a result of approval, subsequent to 
consultations with the appropriate administrators, the people 
that do represent their communities and work on their behalf. 
That is a commitment I can give you that the consultation 
process will occur. And I refer to it as part of the due diligence 
in ensuring that our co-operative spirit and efforts with our 
municipal governments and our governance bodies are concrete 
and we work together for the mutual benefit of all the citizens. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I thank 
you for your reassurances. I just hope that future ministers will 
abide by that. 
 
Might be just a sideline to this, Mr. Minister, but it might be 
more reason to have fall sessions in this legislature. If we had a 
fall session and a spring session, we could bring everything 
back out of regulation, put it in front of the people because we 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

wouldn’t be holding them up for a year at a time. So something 
to keep in mind, Mr. Minister, while you’re on that side of the 
House. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Minister, you have heard our concerns. We 
would let this Bill pass on then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you. Once again, Mr. Chairman, I 
want to thank the member opposite for raising some valid 
concerns on behalf of the people of this province that he 
represents, and all the province. And again I would like to say it 
is my hope that by enacting this legislation it will be beneficial 
for those that accept the responsibility of governing and 
administering on behalf of the people of this province and their 
communities. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(11:15) 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right is 
Wayne McElree, the assistant deputy minister of Learning, and 
to my left is Doug Muir, the director of the Apprenticeship 
Commission. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, welcome to 
your officials that you have here with you today. We just have a 
number . . . a few questions that we have with regards to Bill 5. 
 
I guess probably my first question would be the . . . just the 
composition of the board that . . . of the commission. This 
amendment does make some changes to . . . will allow for some 
changes to the makeup of the board. I wonder if you could 
briefly explain how the current board members are appointed to 
the board and what’s envisioned with the amendments under 
this Bill as far as the composition of the board in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The 
composition of the board of course is based on a composition of 
12 members — six employer representatives and six employee. 
And what the Act does is it basically creates a provision where 
the employer group can be a person other than the . . . that 
employer. It can be a representative of that employer, and the 
same goes for the employee. 
 
So a situation would be that within that employer membership 
and with that employee membership, that particular employer 
group or employee group could indicate a representative other 
than an actual employer and employee. So it can be a 
representative that allows for obviously greater interaction in 
terms of the choice of their representative based on their 

knowledge and their ability to represent that employer or that 
employee group more effectively. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 
like to introduce to you and through you, members of the 
Legislative Assembly, two members of Alberta’s legislature 
who are here today with some interprovincial meetings that are 
taking place here in Regina. Pat Nelson, who is the Minister of 
Finance, is with us, and Gary Mar, who’s Alberta’s Minister of 
Health. 
 
I would want to say that I especially welcome Pat. Her and I 
served as Energy ministers concurrently for a number of years, 
found out that, in spite of some of our philosophical differences, 
some of the challenges that both Saskatchewan and Alberta face 
in terms of developing and growing our energy sector were very 
much similar, found out we’ve got much more in common than 
we have not in common. 
 
So welcome to Regina. Enjoy your work here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and on behalf of the 
official opposition we too would like to welcome the ministers 
from Alberta and hope that they have an interesting visit to our 
legislature. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, these representatives 
of the various employer/employee groups, how are they 
appointed? Are they nominated by the various groups or are 
they government appointed? I wonder if the minister could just 
explain the process for an individual becoming a member of the 
board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, each of 
the 20 members of the board are selected by the industry as a 
whole and they are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council. 
 
And just to give an idea of the membership of this board and the 
various groups that it represents. We have representatives from 
the construction sector employers, we have representatives from 
the construction sector employees; the ag sector employers and 
the ag sector employees; the construction sector employers and 
construction sector employees again. We have mining, 
manufacturing, maintenance sector employees and mining, 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

 

manufacturing, maintenance sector employers; mode of power 
mechanical repair, both sector employees and sector employees; 
tourism and hospitality service sector employees and 
employers. 
 
We have representatives from the First Nations people, from the 
Métis people, from northern Saskatchewan, from visible 
minorities, from women, a SIAST representative, and two 
representatives from the Department of Learning for a total of 
20 and that is the composition of the board. 
 
And what the amendment to the Act allows for is these groups 
to not just provide an actual employer/employee but a 
representative. And we feel that that will actually strengthen the 
quality of the board and allow it to do the good work that it 
does. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information. I 
wonder, Mr. Chair, if the minister could perhaps just give us an 
indication of what representation his department had from the 
employer/employees groups for the amendment where rather 
than an actual employer or an employee be the representatives 
that these groups could appoint a representative? Where did the 
pressure come from for this type . . . for this amendment, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. That was a 
request from industry. And what it would do, for example, is 
that if the employer sector in construction wished to have 
Manley McLoughlin represent them, for example, on the 
certification commission, then that would be allowed. Under the 
previous Act that wouldn’t be. 
 
So this is an opportunity for employers and employees to select 
and make recommendations to the people that they believe will 
bring the most to this board in terms of providing a voice and 
quality input with regard to the direction of the commission and 
how it does its work. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned that the 
representation came from industry and you gave an example of 
representation that perhaps came from the employers. Are you 
saying that most of the representation for this change came 
from the employer section or was it equally based on 
employee/employers? Could you give us some indication of 
approximately the number of requests for the change from the 
employee sector versus the employer sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. When I make 
the reference to industry, I’m referring to employers and 
employees who make up the industry as a whole. And the 
recommendation came from both groups in a very strong and 
unanimous way. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the amendments 
deals with, and I believe you indicated in second reading of the 
Bill, that only qualified people can work in compulsory trades. 
Could you define for me what is meant by compulsory trades — 
what trades are covered? Perhaps it’s quite a long list and I 
don’t expect you to go through the whole list, but give us . . . 
give me an example of what the compulsory trades are and then 
could you define the term qualified people? 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, first off, qualified 
employees would be approved by the commission and would 
improve occupational health and safety as well as public safety. 
 
The compulsory trades, which was the first of his questions, as 
identified by the commission are electrician, plumber, 
refrigeration mechanic, and sheet metal worker. And these are 
compulsory to ensure employees are properly trained and 
certified in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, within that definition of those 
compulsory trades there’s, I guess in my mind at least, a grey 
area. Let’s take plumbing for an example. I certainly, you 
know, agree with the notion that if you have an individual that 
is actually running waterlines and doing the soldering and the 
cutting and the gluing and all those sorts of things, that they 
should be qualified to ensure that there’s quality of work and 
public safety. 
 
But if you have an individual who is merely carrying the 
supplies to the work site, perhaps doing some of their . . . some 
of the groundwork as far as facilitating the installation of 
sewage lines and that sort of thing, would an individual who 
doesn’t actually do any of the actual plumbing work in this 
example, would that individual . . . but is merely a person that is 
bringing the supplies to the work site and moving them around 
on the work site, would that individual fall under this definition 
of qualified people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, approximately 80 per cent 
. . . This is with regard to an apprentice and certainly we looked 
at 80 per cent of the training occurs at the job site and this 
allows for the opportunity to provide supervision, but also to 
meet the qualifications that the ATCC (Saskatchewan 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission) has put 
forward with regard to, especially the compulsory designation. 
 
Now just to comment a little bit about how a trade becomes 
compulsory. Before the minister recommends that the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council prescribe or remove the 
designation of a designated trade or sector as a compulsory 
apprenticeship trade sector, the minister must receive a 
recommendation from the ATCC respecting that designation as 
compulsory. And before the ATCC will make that 
recommendation to the minister, the commission will determine 
that a majority of employers and a majority of employees 
working in that designated trade or sector has made that 
recommendation. 
 
It has to be satisfied that the work of the designated trade or 
designated sector as prescribed is clearly defined; be satisfied 
that there is no overlap or duplication with the work of an 
existing designated trade or designated sector will occur, as 
prescribed by the regulations; be satisfied that the 
implementation of the recommendation will result in improved 
occupational health and safety — and public safety — at the 
work site; be satisfied that the implementation of the 
recommendation will be a benefit to Saskatchewan residents; 
and inform in any manner that the ATCC considers appropriate, 
employers and employees and the general public of the ATCC’s 
intention to request a new compulsory apprenticeship trade or a 
new compulsory apprenticeship sector. 
 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

So public notification is part of this. And where considered 
appropriate, persons working in the designated sector who 
might be involved with that sector are also consulted. They will 
also hold public meetings as necessary and meet any other 
requirements that the minister would designate. 
 
So there is quite an intricate process involved in how the trade 
becomes compulsory, and it is supported by the majority of 
employers and employees within that trade. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I certainly agree with the need for 
public safety and occupational health and safety of the workers 
and those sorts of things. And many of the things that you 
outlined, in my mind at least, would apply to construction sites 
of a large commercial nature and those sorts of things. 
 
But the compulsory trades also impact on small contractors who 
are perhaps doing residential work and those sorts of things. 
And particularly in the area that I represent, a rural 
constituency, we have small plumbers and electricians that 
operate out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I guess the question that they would have is: if they’re 
working, have a job, and they need some additional help just to 
need someone to bring the supplies to them . . . And perhaps 
they do have an apprentice working with them but they’d feel 
that it’s pretty inefficient to have someone who has some skills 
and can do the plumbing or run the wires and do electrical 
hookups, if that person has to go out to the truck to bring the 
supplies into the work site. And quite often they will hire 
someone on a temporary basis to do that. 
 
And I guess the question they have is: does that . . . are they 
breaking any regulations of the commission or are they allowed 
to hire, say for instance a high school student after school on the 
weekend to help him do some of the manual labour type work? 
Where do these small contractors stand in that issue, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
(11:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, with regard to 
people who are providing assistance to journeymen or 
apprentices, such as carrying from a truck to a work site, that’s 
perfectly fine. 
 
Where they would need to be a tradesperson, a journeyman, or 
an apprentice is where they are actually doing the work of that 
trade. And for plumbing for example, cutting the pipe, sealing 
the joint, whatever, that would need to be done by the 
journeyman or the apprentice who was in the process of 
learning that particular trade. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying that area. 
 
The next question or area that I would like to deal with is, there 
is mention to a probationary period in the apprenticeship 
process. I wonder if you could just explain. Has there been a 
probationary period prior to this time? If so, is there a change in 
the length of probationary period? I wonder if you could just 
provide some information dealing with this whole probationary 
period with regards to the apprenticeship program. 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, as . . . certainly the 
probationary period is something that has been in existence for 
some time. It’s always been that 6 months or 900 hours. And 
what the . . . what this Act now does of course is formalizes that 
more. 
 
I think it has been quite successful for employers and people 
who are observing the apprentice in terms of their 
qualifications, and also for the potential journeymen in 
determining the relevance of that trade for that particular 
individual. 
 
So that . . . there has been no change in terms of the 
probationary period. It remains at 6 months or 900 hours. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
hearing from some of the trade people that there is a bit of a 
backlog or a problem with the apprentices. I believe . . . I 
suppose it varies with the various trades, but the majority of the 
training takes place on the job. But there’s also a component 
where the apprentices need to attend SIAST for the formal 
education portion of their training. And I’m hearing from 
certain trades that there is a backlog at SIAST, that a number of 
apprentices have accumulated a number of hours of on-the-job 
training and yet they can’t get a space in . . . at SIAST to 
complete their formal education. 
 
I wonder if you could perhaps address that situation. Are you 
aware that this problem exists and, if so, what is being done to 
alleviate the problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, the member 
opposite does ask a good question and points out a current 
problem. Occasionally we do have situations where there are 
some waiting times. We certainly try to accommodate through 
scheduling as much as possible so that individuals are not 
waiting as long to acquire that particular bit of academic or 
classroom training. 
 
We also recognize that we have, as a province, completely 
backfilled the funding that was withdrawn from the federal 
government with regard to apprenticeship training. And we 
have also added additional dollars. And we also . . . the ATCC 
has also indicated that they will be charging increased fees in 
the near future so that they will have more available dollars, 
more available training positions, so that we can deal with some 
of the backlog and wait-lists that is currently in that particular 
apprenticeship environment. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, one of the areas that I am told there 
is a significant backlog is in the . . . I’m not exactly sure what 
the training program is, the correct title for it, but it’s the 
technicians that are apprenticing to repair and service the 
highway tractors and the large trucks, in that area. And I believe 
the SIAST program is being delivered through the campus at 
Prince Albert. And I understand there is a significant backlog in 
that area. 
 
I wonder if you could provide me with some information as to 
how long the backlog is, are you aware of it, and what steps are 
being put in place to deal with the situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair. I think what the 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

 

member opposite is referring to is the truck and transport 
mechanic program. I’m told that there is not a significant 
backlog with regard to that particular program. 
 
But we also recognize that SIAST and of course the 
Apprenticeship Commission looks very carefully at where 
backlogs may be occurring and modify their programs on an 
annual basis. So it is . . . there is some fluidity and some 
flexibility in terms of identifying where there’s increased need 
and how they can expand the availability of training positions in 
that area — and perhaps where there is decreased need for 
training, to actually pull back in some of those areas. 
 
So it’s certainly very fluid. There is flexibility built into the 
system. And as far as I’m aware, there is not a significant 
backlog in that area at this time, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, dealing with that specific — it’s 
Friday, Mr. Minister — specific program, I understand that 
there is some perhaps duplication of facilities in SIAST. 
There’s the new heavy equipment mechanics plant in 
Saskatoon, a new building that came on stream fairly recently. 
And I’m told that there perhaps is a duplication between the 
highway tractor mechanics program and the heavy equipment, 
that at least they could be complementary if they . . . and utilize 
more of the resources if they were at one location. 
 
Have you looked at perhaps some amalgamation or at least 
bringing these two . . . delivering these two programs out of the 
one facility so that resources could be utilized in a more 
efficient manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And the member opposite has asked a very good question and I 
can basically inform the Assembly today that SIAST and the 
industry have been engaged in some discussion for some time 
now, and that the plan is to move the components of the P.A. 
(Prince Albert) program to Saskatoon where there will be less 
duplication but also because of the industry base in Saskatoon, 
greater opportunity to provide that program in more effective 
way. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the information. 
The information that I have is that perhaps it would be a 
welcome move. 
 
I would like to deal with one section of Bill 5 that deals with 
benefit programs — and that the commission has a 
responsibility — and there is some proposed changes in this 
Bill as to the way the commission deals with benefit programs. 
I wonder if you could explain the intent of the amendments in 
that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and certainly again another good question. 
 
With regard to the apprenticeship training allowance, this is 
something that the commission has been doing for some time in 
providing those funds for apprentices in training and this 
formalizes the process. So really what it does is it allows the 
commission to do what it has been doing in providing the 
apprenticeship training dollars to the apprentices. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I understand that there is a variety 
of sources of funding for the training benefits. Could you 
explain levels of funding from the various sources and is there a 
significant change of funding from one source with this 
amendment or will the levels of funding from the various 
sources still maintain the same relative levels as prior to the 
amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly the allowances come from the skills training benefit 
program. And there is no real change to the allowances 
provided and these allowances are set out in regulation. 
 
And to just give an example for apprenticeship — apprentices 
and tradespersons attending training, these are the living 
allowances as provided: single with no dependants, $121 per 
week; married with a spouse who earns more than $385 per 
week, $121 per week; with one dependant, $157 per week; with 
two dependants, $171; with three dependants, $184; and with 
four or more dependants, $197. 
 
So those are the living allowances. They basically haven’t 
changed. And if there’s . . . living away from home there’s an 
additional allowance for residents outside of the northern 
administrative district of $94 a week, and residents of the 
northern administrative district, $125 per week. 
 
So the benefit is provided through the skills training benefit 
program and the level of allowance has not been changed, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the information. I 
understand that there is a new fee schedule to take effect in July 
of this year. Could you explain and give us an indication as to 
how the new fee structure will compare to the old fee structure. 
And also, was there consultation with industry on this new fee 
structure? Did your department propose the new fee structure or 
was it industry driven, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Currently the provincial government is providing 98 per cent of 
the costs. And there was significant consultation with the 
industry — employers and employees. The initiative in terms of 
providing a new fee schedule was industry sponsored, industry 
led. 
 
And what it does is that it ensures not only the viability of 
training but it basically allows for a position where employers, 
employees, and the apprentices will be providing components 
of their training. And the target is to have the apprentices 
provide approximately 10 per cent of the overall cost of their 
training. 
 
So currently the provincial government is providing a 
significant amount in the form of 98 per cent and the industry 
has indicated that they would like to see some participation 
from the apprentices in terms of providing some of the cost of 
their training. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information. 
I’m certainly pleased to hear that there was industry 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

consultation and I think we all realize that there is . . . skills 
training is an area that deserves a lot of attention. And any 
improvements to that area, we certainly welcome on this side of 
the House. 
 
There’s a lack of . . . we are hearing from employers that there’s 
a lack of . . . shortage of skilled tradespeople in the province 
and we certainly need to do everything we can to make sure that 
we have . . . provide the training opportunities for those people, 
for the jobs that are out there waiting for them, Mr. Minister. 
 
And that concludes my questions. My colleague would have 
one or two questions for you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just had a letter 
faxed to me from a constituent in Craik who belongs to the 
program. He was a little worried about the dramatic increase in 
fees here for the apprentice program. 
 
He was just saying on July 1, 2002 the larger fees go up to 120 
tuition, I believe. As well, there’s now $150 employer fee and a 
$250 certification fee, he writes. And other examination fees, he 
also writes in here. 
 
Can you answer the question on the examination fees: how 
much they are and how much increase there was from last year 
to this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair. As 
indicated, there have been some changes to the fee schedule. 
And with regard to the specific examination fee, it was $60 last 
year and it will be going up to $100 on July 1 of this year. 
 
And again, this was the recommendation of the commission 
which, through wide-based consultation . . . and certainly we 
are of the belief that the components that these fee schedules 
identify will ensure the viability of the commission in providing 
training opportunities to apprentices in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Was that the only fee 
increase then? I’m just kind of going through his letter, and it 
just came recently so I’m not up to date on it 100 per cent and I 
apologize to that. 
 
But just to clear up, I . . . some things, was that the only 
increase? Because he also talked about $120 tuition going up, as 
well $150 employer fee. Has that gone up, or was that the same 
as last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
the member opposite for the question. The employer fee last 
year was $60 and that will increase to 150 as of July 1. 
 
And the tuition component is new. We haven’t charged tuition 
in this province prior to the announcement that was made some 
time ago. That will be $15 per week. What it amounts to is 
approximately an apprentice tuition fee of $120. By 
comparison, Alberta currently charges $400 and Manitoba $200 
with regard to that same apprentice tuition fee. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Was that the only reason that you brought the 
fees up, just to be in line with the other provinces, or was the 

program needing the extra money to keep going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, it was 
in response to providing more and better training opportunities, 
and opportunities in the workplace. We also recognized that the 
component with regard to the apprentice providing some of the 
cost of their training was really not within sort of provincial 
standards in terms of other comparisons. 
 
But I think that the reason, the main reason for the change in the 
fee schedule was to provide for the viability of the training 
opportunities and to allow for expansion where necessary, and 
certainly also provide some of the component from the person 
who was receiving the training in terms of the benefit that they 
would accrue when they became a journeyperson. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, we would have 
no further questions with regards to this Bill, and I’d like to take 
this opportunity to thank the minister and his officials for the 
information and answers they provided us here this morning. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I too would like 
to thank the members opposite for their very intuitive questions 
and my officials today for being here to provide the answers. 
And I’m very pleased that we were able to have this discussion 
on this important Act for apprentices in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I look forward to seeing its implementation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Urban Municipal Administrators 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Tax Enforcement 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To 
my immediate right is Craig Dotson, the deputy minister of 
Learning. Directly behind me is Ken Horsman, the associate 
deputy minister of Learning. To my deputy’s immediate right is 
Don Sangster, the executive director of school finance. To my 
immediate left is Cal Kirby, the director of facilities planning. 
Behind Cal is Michael Littlewood, the executive director, 
legislation and school administration. I have Frances Bast just 
behind me, director of corporate services. I’ve got Mr. Gord 
Sisson, director of corporate services in the back of the room, 
and Anne Bellinger, benefits manager, teachers’ superannuation 
commission. Have I got everybody? And Shirley Robertson, 
manager of pension benefits, as well. Those are the officials 
here this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the 
minister and welcome to your officials. It’s great to have an 
opportunity to discuss, I believe it’ll be K to 12 education 
today. I have a number of questions and then a number of my 
colleagues also will have individual questions. 
 
So I’m going to start today by asking you about the isolated 
school factor. In information that we received in the 2002-2003 
operating grants, we understand that last year’s grandfathering 
provision where school divisions received no less than 80 per 
cent of the former small schools recognition is no longer in 
place. Can you tell me how many schools are being affected by 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair. That’s 
again a very good question from the member opposite. We 
announced the isolated school factor last year as a two-year 
phase-in to replace the small school factor. When we looked at 
isolated schools in terms of whether they were truly isolated, it 
was felt that support should be provided to the school division 
in terms of dollars of recognition to that school division, and we 
have provided that. 
 
Certainly, because it was a two-year phase-in, there was some 
grandfathering last year. It’s full implementation this year. 
 
With regard to the specific question in terms of the numbers of 
school affected within the province of Saskatchewan, I can’t 
give her those exact numbers at this point in time. But we will 
provide those numbers to her in short order, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — To the minister through the Chair, thank you. I 
have one other question. The last paragraph under this isolated 
school factor says: 
 

One other refinement to the isolated school factor has 

occurred. A new maximum total amount payable in this 
factor is determined by a calculation of 25 per cent of the 
basic rates for the school division. 

 
Could you please clarify this for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, again, a very 
good question. It is my knowledge that there are three school 
divisions that would be affected by that. These are very small 
school divisions where the basic total amount of recognized 
expenditure and revenues, we’re talking approximately $5,000 
per student. And what it does is that it provides a cap in terms 
of the amount of dollars that can be provided based on that 
particular formula. And it affects approximately three school 
divisions who have very small enrolments. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me this 
year how many schools you are expecting will be closing in the 
2002-2003 year; and if you have any indication of how many 
there will be in the next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. The 
most up-to-date information that we have from school divisions 
at this point in time with regard to 2002 is that there are six 
schools throughout the province that have been indicated for 
closure. It is the Minto School in Estevan Rural. It is the 
Viceroy School in Red Coat Trail School Division. It is the 
École de Ferland in francophone School Division 310; the 
Handel School in Biggar; Rabbit Lake which is part of the 
Northern Lights School Division; and the Battleford Junior 
High which is part of the amalgamation realignment of service 
in the Battlefords area. So that is a total of six and then there are 
several schools that have indicated motions for grade 
reductions, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — This is for 2002-2003. Do you get indications 
for a year in advance or is it something you wait until you 
receive motions from the school board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair. There 
is a process in terms of the motions that must be provided, so 
there is a motion of intent. Currently we have for 2003 four 
motions of intent. We have an additional two final motions for 
2003. So I would anticipate similar numbers next year as 
compared to this year. 
 
Oh, and the member opposite asked me the names of those 
schools as well. The 2003 closure/grade reductions — school 
divisions that have passed motions of intent would be the 
Torquay School in Estevan Rural, the Artesian School in Red 
Coat, the Leader Elementary in Leader, and the Saar School in 
Buffalo Plains. These are motions of intent so the final public 
consultation and so forth hasn’t occurred. 
 
There have been final motions passed for two school closures, 
Goodeve School in Deer Park and St. Thomas School in Souris 
Moose Mountain. And I think that would be the most up-to-date 
information that we have as this time, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Whenever there is a school closure I know that you are aware 
that it’s a heart wrenching decision not just for the board but for 
the parents and for the students. So it’s something that we . . . 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

none of us take lightly. 
 
And when we look at rural Saskatchewan and the effects of the 
economy and overall downsizing in rural Saskatchewan, it’s 
something that we all are really worried about. 
 
Does your government actually have a mandate to centralize 
schooling in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
thank you to the member opposite for her question. 
 
Certainly the government has no mandate to centralize schools. 
It’s not part of the role of the provincial government. The 
provincial government, of course, respects the autonomy of 
school divisions to make the best local decisions for the 
students that they have enrolled in their school division. 
 
But I just might comment a bit about the numbers of school 
closures we’re looking at this year and next year. In terms of the 
past 20 years, really, really, these numbers are quite small. 
When we look at, for example, the number of schools closed in 
1983, it was 19; 1984, it was 20; 1988, 17; 1990, 20; ’92, there 
was 10; ’93, there was 18; ’94, 16; ’97, 14; ’99, 12; 2000, there 
was 7; 2001, 8; and in the 2002 is 6; 2003 preliminary is 6. 
 
So in terms of the context of the past 20 years, we’re actually 
seeing a decrease in the number of school closures in the past 3 
or 4 years compared to that 20-year average. 
 
So I don’t know if we’re getting to the point where some of the 
rationalization of schools within school divisions in rural 
Saskatchewan have now got to the point where the distances are 
such that it’s more difficult to close some of these schools — 
and of course, we do support truly isolated schools and school 
divisions through our isolated school factor. 
 
But I think it’s relatively good news to have numbers that are 
less than the 20-year average this year and, of course, the 
anticipation for next year. 
 
So thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, in your government’s 
opinion do you feel that the amalgamation issue is going to 
have an effect on school closures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ve 
been asked this question and have had letters from members of 
the public on a number of occasions. And what I’ve said is that 
the rationalization of schools within a school division is 
completely separate from the amalgamation of school divisions. 
 
What we have done in terms of the approach that we’ve adopted 
with regard to school division amalgamations is that we’ve 
provided a challenge and a target to have 25 per cent less school 
divisions in the province of Saskatchewan by the board 
elections in the fall of 2003. 
 
We have currently, I think, somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
over 40 school divisions discussing amalgamations. And with 
the context of amalgamations that have occurred what we’ve 
found is that in school divisions that have amalgamated there 

have been more resources and greater availability of actually 
providing — truly providing — support to isolated schools. 
 
And the reality is that we haven’t seen school closures in 
amalgamated school divisions, but in fact enhanced support 
through providing additional services that are available because 
of the larger base of resources available to these amalgamated 
school divisions. So amalgamation of school divisions does not 
mean school closures. 
 
The new division board, or the amalgamated board, obviously 
has the autonomy and the ability to make those decisions, but 
what we’re finding is that with the additional resources 
available to the amalgamated school division that in fact 
schools that might have been closed have not been closed 
because of the additional resources provided. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you indicated that there was, I 
believe, 40 applications or 40 school divisions that were 
considering amalgamation. Is the Thunder Creek, Moose Jaw 
public school divisions one of the ones that are considering 
amalgamation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The answer to the member opposite, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, is yes, the Moose Jaw, Thunder Creek 
divisions have both passed motions of intent and are engaged in 
discussions with regard to amalgamation, as are some 40 other 
school divisions throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when the issue of amalgamation 
came up, I agreed that school board amalgamation in cases 
where they’re not forced and the local people have the decision 
and the autonomy, and have decided this is the best thing for the 
ratepayers and students is something that should be encouraged. 
 
But I’m wondering why you’ve actually set a target to decrease 
the number of school divisions? And why, if it’s not something 
that your government is actually encouraging, why you’ve 
actually put the money forward to do this? 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, when 
we talk about the process with regard to amalgamations and the 
number of studies that have been done going back some 10, 15 
years, the current round of provincial government leadership in 
terms of amalgamations really started about 1996-97. 
 
But most recently . . . And why we’ve put forward the challenge 
of that 25 per cent reduction is that we now have a track record 
in terms of school divisions that have amalgamated. And they 
are able to relay those positive experiences to other boards who 
are discussing amalgamation and have concrete data in terms of 
the improvements that they have seen for their staff and 
students in their divisions. 
 
So now we have initially the theory that, well, it’s probably a 
good thing to do. But what is the impact when school divisions 
really do amalgamate and what is the benefit to their students 
and their staff and their ratepayers? And what we found is that, 
for example, the experiences with regard to Prince Albert, the 
knowledge that we’re gaining from Buffalo Plains/Cupar/Indian 
Head, that these are providing not only the data to indicate to 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

 

other school divisions where those positive relationships and 
positive improvements can occur, but we also now have the 
ability of those boards who have amalgamated to provide 
mentorship to divisions that are discussing amalgamation. 
 
So what we’re finding is that the results . . . that in surveys that 
have been done to amalgamated boards is that the number of 
positives — and I’ve outlined this in several speeches, for 
example, to the Teachers’ Federation spring council recently — 
that the benefits to the staff in terms of enhancements for 
professional development, the enhancements with regard to 
student experience in terms of speciality services such as speech 
pathology that can be improved, and also the enhancements 
with regard to ancillary service such as band, practical and 
applied arts, are all enhanced within these amalgamated 
divisions. 
 
So the positives are there. They are concretely identified and 
they are available to be relayed to the other divisions that are 
talking about amalgamation in a positive way. So I can see that 
the process has accelerated now and that’s because we have a 
track record in terms of the positive experiences that have been 
identified by the amalgamated divisions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, it may also be accelerated 
because of your press release or your idea that there is going to 
be 25 per cent fewer school divisions in the next two years. So 
some school divisions are thinking that they might as well do it 
voluntarily before they are forced into it. 
 
So I would guess my obvious question is, after this two years is 
up, is there going . . . are you going to be forcing it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, as indicated when 
I put out the challenge to the school trustees and their 
convention last fall, that there is no intent to force any 
amalgamations. 
 
We listened to the stakeholders in terms of providing the 
additional enhancements. And these, again, these additional 
enhancements, in terms of the dollars provided to amalgamated 
divisions on a per student basis, were actually drawn from 
numbers that we were able to get from amalgamated boards in 
terms of their actual costs in proceeding to amalgamation. 
 
So our approach is to provide incentives, to put a target. And I 
believe that that target will be reached. And where we go from 
there, well, we’ll have that discussion. But there certainly is no 
intent of myself or this government of forcing any school 
divisions to amalgamate. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
stand here with some reluctance today, frankly, because of the 
difficult situation that a community in my constituency is 
facing. But I do think that we need to address it simply for the 
purposes of acquiring some information for the taxpayers, the 
citizens, of the community of Leader. 
 
As you’re no doubt aware from many calls to your office and 
media reports, about 10 days ago there was a situation 
developed between the division board and the area around the 
community of Leader and one of their employees. And as a 
result of an arrangement, a mutual termination arrangement, the 

protests that developed caught the whole community by 
surprise. 
 
I was wondering if, Mr. Minister, today you could give us an 
indication of the current status of the situation that exists in the 
school division of Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
thank you to the member from Cypress Hills with regard to the 
question. 
 
This issue is indeed one that my office has fielded a number of 
calls on, and certainly my officials within the department. And I 
have received correspondence from not only the Teachers’ 
Federation, but also from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) with regard to the issue in Leader. 
 
I can state to the Assembly today that first off there was a 
mutually . . . mutual agreement between the principal at Leader 
Composite School and the division board with regard to a 
settlement package. 
 
What we have . . . what has evolved since then — and that of 
course was the incident that brought forward the community 
involvement and the community, I would almost say, outrage 
— what we found is that since that time the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation has placed the Leader School Division in 
dispute. 
 
And what that means is that under The Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation Act, the designation of in dispute indicates that that 
division board and that division is on notice with regard to the 
teachers’ profession in Saskatchewan and across Canada with 
regard to problems that their professional association is having 
with the employer. And that if there were to be a hiring of a 
teacher by that board, that teacher would then be in a position 
where he could be reprimanded or fined by the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation. 
 
So that in dispute clause is something that is rarely used, but in 
this particular case what it has done is it has created an 
environment where both the SSTA and the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation have engaged in consultations with that 
division board and with their local teachers’ association in 
terms of resolving some of the deteriorated relationships that 
have developed over the past two years. 
 
So the incident with regard to the principal has highlighted, I 
believe, a deterioration of relationships that has gone on for 
some time. And I believe that the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) and the SSTA and the division board and the local 
board and the local teachers’ association are looking at how 
they can rebuild those relationships. 
 
And once those relationships have been rebuilt, then the STF 
will remove its in dispute designation and, hopefully, people 
can move forward from that. 
 
Certainly I have been requested to look . . . to consider the 
advisability of holding an inquiry. I’m certainly in no position 
to make that at this time. As long as discussions are occurring 
with the involved stakeholders and I believe a resolution can 
come from that process, I certainly won’t be looking at any type 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

of provincial intervention. And I think that would be very 
unwise at this time. 
 
So thank you for the question, Mr. Member. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the detailed 
explanation. As you can appreciate, part of the difficulty in the 
situation in the community of Leader is the element of privacy 
and the concerns about divulging information that would breach 
the privacy of the individual involved, and the board itself and 
any of its reasons for having taken the action it did. 
 
But with the concerns about privacy also comes the very serious 
lack of information and when people are starved for 
information, all types of things happen. Sometimes 
imaginations run wild but what usually occurs is that people 
become suspicious of the whole process. 
 
And as a result of that type of a situation, over and above the 
meetings that you’ve described involving the SSTA and the 
STF and the local board and the division board, is there any 
other dispute resolution mechanism that the people of the 
community can appeal to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
thank you to the member opposite for that question. There 
really . . . there’s some separate issues here and it is a complex 
issue. First off, there is a mutually agreed upon contract 
between the principal and the school division. That is a legally 
binding contract, and of course you have to respect the privacy 
of the individuals. If there was any dispute with regard to that 
contract then of course that would put it into a legal realm and 
there’s options available there. 
 
When you have a communication breakdown or perhaps a 
communication breakdown that has occurred over some time, 
then the dispute availability available to the community is to see 
if they can enhance the communication with their division 
board which is their elected body responsible for the delivery of 
services, for the decisions on administration and the decisions 
on finance within that division. And they are the duly elected 
autonomous board responsible for that. 
 
So, you know, I mean the community has a right to know. I 
don’t think that we can get into some of the privacy issues with 
regard to individuals and their employment, because that’s 
something I’m sure the community would like to know. But 
unless that individual comes forward or as a group the parties to 
that signed agreement would indicate, you know, provide a joint 
release of some type, then we can’t really force that issue. 
 
What we can do is try and resolve some of the issues with 
regard to deteriorating relationships as outlined by the 
Teachers’ Federation and see if we can work on how that would 
be moved forward in a positive way. 
 
Certainly with regard to what my role would be, there is 
provision in The Education Act that does allow a Minister of 
Education to convene a board of inquiry which has all of the 
powers under The Public Inquiries Act. And that is a very, very 
rarely used clause. And I think in the last 20 years it’s only been 
done once and it was related to the en masse resignation of the 
Indian Head board which had been several years ago — very, 

very unusual circumstance to have an entire board resign en 
masse. 
 
So there are provisions in the Act that allow for the minister to 
have an inquiry. Certainly I would consider that as being 
something quite aggressive and as a sort of a last resort. And I 
think the discussions, the mediation efforts of the SSTA and the 
STF in terms of talking to that division board and involving the 
community, I think is the much better way to go and hopefully 
we can have some of this resolved to the betterment of Leader 
and surrounding area as soon as possible. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you once again, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Chairman, through you to the minister, in view of the delicate 
nature of a situation like this and keeping in mind sort of the 
primacy of the local autonomy element, I understand that 
there’s, you know, a pretty fine line has to be walked here. 
 
But what concerns me, as sort of the provincial elected 
representative for the people of that area, is the overwhelming 
number of communications I’ve had with my office. I’ve got a 
couple of letters with me this morning that arrived just today 
and I’ve had many, many letters and e-mails and telephone 
calls. And the frustration level of the people is directing them 
— the community people — is directing them toward legal 
action. 
 
And while that might be a way of assuaging some of their 
concerns and might be some action they can take, as you can 
understand, it’s certainly not the preferable response to a 
situation like this in terms of the welfare of the community. 
And I would be really very reluctant to encourage legal action 
or even see that started. 
 
So given the fact that there is a mechanism in The Education 
Act that would allow you to hold an inquiry and you’re 
reluctant to do that, I guess what I want to know: is there some 
other mechanism at the provincial level that could be used to 
help bring all the sides into sort of a mediation process, maybe 
inserting an independent third party into the process, that 
doesn’t really go the full-blown length of inquiry route or the 
legal route? Is there some other possible mechanism that could 
be employed in this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly with regard to . . . we have . . . Well here’s the 
ultimate sort of inquiry under The Education Act. We do . . . 
Obviously there is provision for us upon request to provide 
mediation services. I think the preferable route is where the 
local division board talks to its parent organization, the local 
teachers’ association talks to its parent organization, and 
engages the community, the community of interest within the 
Leader School Division in terms of resolving these issues. 
 
If that’s not possible then certainly I would believe the next step 
would be for some type of a mediation process. And certainly 
we would not be opposed to entertaining that or looking at that 
if that request did come at some point in the future. 
 
We also believe that, because the Leader School Division 
represents the entire Leader area, there are other communities 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

 

outside of Leader. So when we talk about what communities 
should be involved, there’s broader interests as well with regard 
to that board than just the Leader Composite School and the 
problems they may have been having there. 
 
So it is a complex issue and I think that we are on the way to 
resolving some of those issues. And I would hope that those 
issues can be resolved and communicated in a satisfactory way 
to the community in Leader so that people can move on and 
look forward to graduation and things of that nature. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your delegates today . . . your officials today, 
pardon me. 
 
I had some questions brought to my attention from a constituent 
of mine from Canwood and the concerns are regarding the 
Parkland School Division and concerns regarding community 
schools and preschool systems. 
 
Now my first question is: under the community school system 
that’s in place today, does there have to be a preschool system 
— not a kindergarten system but a preschool system — in place 
in order for the community school system to function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly the member opposite asks 
a very good question. When we look at the number of initiatives 
we put forward in recent years with regard to the community 
school designation — and we have seen a doubling of the 
numbers of community schools designated in the province of 
Saskatchewan and expansion to high schools and rural K to 12 
— we recognize that when we provide the community school 
. . . when that community school designation is provided that it 
allows for additional resources to be provided, it doesn’t 
necessarily require that part of that additional resources be in 
the pre-kindergarten area. 
 
What we are finding is that in most cases it does, with some 
expansion of the pre-kindergarten services, but there is no 
requirement that that go along with that community school 
designation. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
As you’re aware, there was a letter sent to the Minister of 
Learning — which is your department — from a lady from 
Canwood and her name is Patricia Provencher. Now I believe 
from the letter that I received from her earlier that she used to 
teach preschool in the Canwood area. 
 
Now she sent a letter to the Parkland School Division chairman, 
Mr. Gerry Guillet, and that was sent on May 14th. And I just 
want to read a little bit from that letter just to give you some 
background. It was sent May 14, as I just said. 
 

There are concerns of young . . . (people) getting off at . . . 
home and no one being there . . . There is also concerns on 
the cost of bringing the children to the preschool. 
 
(Some other issues are of concern) is on the hiring of a 
preschool teacher. Why (is) the need for a 4 year education, 
when the community is in favour of the teacher already in 
place. 
 

And the reason she brought that up is because she’s already a 
teacher teaching preschool in that area already and she’s doing 
it under a voluntary system basis. 
 
Now under . . . and that’s why I asked the question regarding 
the preschool involved in community schools. If it’s mandatory 
that they have preschool systems under the community school 
system, then I don’t think this lady would have a problem 
following the route that the Parkland school director is taking. 
But if there isn’t, and there’s already a system in place where a 
lady is doing it voluntary . . . voluntarily, why is the director of 
education . . . or director of the Parkland School Division 
implementing that this has to be followed through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Now 
I’m not aware of the specifics with regard to this particular case 
in Canwood. 
 
What I can say is that when we do provide that community 
school designation — and the community school designation is 
really something that the division board will provide — based 
on their recommendation, we will then provide that designation 
on a province-wide basis, but it is a division board that makes 
that designation. 
 
Also with regard to the services provided in that school, that is 
again a decision made by that division board. There is no 
requirement — it’s certainly not mandatory — that 
pre-kindergarten be part of that community school designation. 
And the whole purpose of community schools is to allow for the 
uniqueness and diversity in traditional high-needs areas in terms 
of providing the tools for that division board to meet those 
needs. 
 
If there’s existing pre-kindergarten services within a community 
that are excellent, then that division board will look at these and 
make its decision based on whether that was something that 
would be needed to enhance the services with regard to that 
community school. And if it felt it wasn’t needed, and in some 
cases it was felt that there was no need, but it doesn’t mean that 
they cannot be called a community school. What they would 
have done is provided those resources in another way. 
 
So the combination of early learning opportunities, 
pre-kindergarten spaces, lunch programs, day care, speech 
pathology services, any of those things that would be needed for 
perhaps children at higher risk is something that that division 
board . . . which is in the best position to make that decision 
based on the uniqueness of that community. 
 
So no community school is exactly the same and the services 
provided in that community school are never exactly the same 
because the needs of the community are different throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. You 
indicated that you were not aware of these questions that I’m 
asking. On April 20 there was a letter sent to your department 
by the lady, Patricia Provencher. Last week, I believe it was on 
Tuesday or Wednesday, I also sent another copy of the letter to 
your department and also a copy of the letter that went to the 
director of the Parkland school district. So there’s been two 
copies sent to your department. 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2002 

 

The lady goes on to say that there’s six or seven kids involved 
in this preschool system, which she has taught for some time — 
or has been teaching for some time — so there’s not a lot of 
kids. But the costs are extreme in regarding to the school 
system. 
 
And the lady that sent this letter to you goes on to say, from 
what we are told, the CEO (chief executive officer) of the 
Parkland school district plans to use approximately $40,000 in 
grant money to supply special afternoon transportation for these 
parents of these four-year-olds. The children will be coming 
three afternoons a week. They will be hiring a teacher with her 
university degree and also a teacher aide. 
 
Early childhood teachers are told they are not . . . have the 
proper training for this position. Mrs. Provencher’s argument is 
the university teachers do not specialize in the youth of these 
children. Yet the director still wants to follow through on this. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you been in contact with the minister of the 
Parkland . . . not the minister, the director of the Parkland 
school system in regarding this letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly what I can say to the 
member opposite today is that we will pursue this particular 
letter with some vigour in the next day or so and provide a 
response directly to the individual involved in . . . as soon as we 
can, so . . . 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. So by 
that answer then I’m ensuring that you have a copy of the letter 
. . . You don’t have a copy of the letter? Okay, what I’ll do then, 
Mr. Minister, is I’ll give you a copy of this letter for you to 
address and then you can keep me followed-up on what’s 
happening. I thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I just have a few questions about the whole issue surrounding 
amalgamation of schools and of the districts. 
 
And I would just . . . To refresh the memory, I would like to 
read from a memorandum that yourself sent out to all MLAs on 
February 12 regarding support for school division restructuring, 
and I’ll quote from your memorandum: 
 

I want to inform you of Saskatchewan Education’s plans to 
support school division restructuring. 
 
As many of you may know, I have publicly stated my 
expectation that there will be 25% fewer school divisions 
by October 2003, the next provincial election for boards of 
education. Currently there are 99 school divisions — 22 
with an enrolment of less than 500 students. By 2003, I 
expect there to be, at most, 75 school divisions. The vast 
majority of changes will take place in rural areas of the 
province. 

 
Mr. Minister, it’s obvious from this memorandum that you do 
support amalgamation of schools . . . school districts. And I 
would like to know what measures you are taking as a minister 
to promote this and what you are doing in the local school 

divisions to make this . . . to realize your goal of reducing 
schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
certainly the member opposite has brought up a very good 
issue. 
 
Certainly when we talk about the circumstances that, in this last 
go around, that started in about 1996-97 in terms of initiatives, 
what the package in terms of incentives we provided to school 
divisions for amalgamation, first off, we’ve indicated that we’re 
more than willing to provide information from school divisions 
that have amalgamated in terms of the positive effects that they 
have undergone because of amalgamation. 
 
We have also found that school divisions who have 
amalgamated are more than willing to provide their knowledges 
and experiences with regard to amalgamation to amalgamating 
boards and have made themselves available on a number of 
occasions to come down and chat with boards who are 
considering amalgamation. 
 
With the announcement to the SSTA of the goal of having that 
25 per cent reduction, we also indicated that there would be a 
financial package associated with that that was closely related 
to the actual cost of doing the amalgamation. So that, as a 
provincial government, we would provide support to 
amalgamating boards so that they would not have to worry 
about drawing those dollars from their local tax base or from 
their own services to provide those incentives. So those 
incentives have been documented in terms of the per-student 
grant that would be provided. 
 
And there was a process outlined that has been sent to all school 
boards and directors of education to indicate how that process 
would work from the motion of intent to the final motion and to 
the amalgamation once it’s complete, in terms of how the 
dollars would be distributed to those division boards. And the 
maximum amount of dollars available in terms of a large board 
with a large student enrolment is, I think, in that 4 to $500,000 
range. So there are some substantive dollars involved here with 
regard to amalgamating divisions. 
 
And thirdly, we have indicated to division boards and to the 
School Trustees Association that we would make available the 
expertise of the department in terms of staff personnel who 
would also assist with the division board discussions. 
 
And as indicated earlier, it is my understanding that we’re 
looking at some 40 different division boards now that are 
actively engaged in discussions. There are various sort of levels 
of where they have gotten to. We’re very close to having a fully 
amalgamated board, for example, with Buffalo Plains, Indian 
Head, and Cupar. We have amalgamated boards in the Prince 
Albert area. And as indicated we now have, for example, Moose 
Jaw, Thunder Creek who have both passed motions of intent to 
amalgamate. 
 
So there is supports from the provincial government. The 
division boards will be discussing and consulting. We will 
provide and facilitate as much as we can. 
 
But certainly it is a voluntary decision and certainly no 



May 24, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

 

intention to do any sort of forced or mandatory amalgamations 
at this point in time, and certainly not in the near future either. 
So, thank you. 
 
So thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55. 
 


