















































Hansard: June 12, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1993 
 June 12, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the treatment of the snowmobile industry in this province 
by this government. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom provincial trails and obtain funding 
for this through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown land and 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registrations. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Kelvington and Nut 
Mountain. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Humboldt and area, citizens who would like to see the 
Humboldt territory operations office of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority maintained in Humboldt. 
 
And the prayer reads as follow, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
new, exciting, and vibrant city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand today to 
present this petition on behalf of people who are concerned 
about the cost of prescription drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions are from Rose 
Valley and Kelvington. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
rise on behalf of citizens concerned about the shortcomings of 
the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
The signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are 
from the communities of Tisdale, Kelvington, and Archerwill. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable 
condition of Highway No. 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals all from the community of 
Chaplin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
the crop insurance premiums. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of crop 
insurance programs and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Trossachs, 
McTaggart, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from injured workers who are not being covered by WCB. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizen by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and equitable 
treatment be given to those injured and disabled people and 
their families and be diligent in this most urgent matter. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

Signed by the citizens of Wymark, Swift Current, Blumenhof, 
Wymark, and also Cadillac. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
again have a petition of citizens concerned about Highway No. 
15. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, demonstrate how well 
travelled our highway is because they’re from Kelvington, 
Watrous, Imperial, Craik, Cupar, Simpson, Davidson, 
Saskatoon, Meadow Lake, and Eston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
bring forth a petition today 
signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the Besnard 
Lake situation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives to 
bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation and 
to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Parkside, Shellbrook, Prince Albert, and Holbein. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning workers injured permanently in the 
work . . . in work-related accidents; and 
 
Petitions previously tabled during this session as 
addendums to sessional paper no. 7, 11, 18, and no. 157. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: will the minister provide an 
itemized statement as to how the $33.3 million from the 
initiative announced by the federal government for 
purchasing crucial diagnostic and treatment equipment was 
spent in Saskatchewan; (2) what diagnostic and treatment 
equipment was purchased and at what cost; (3) what 
purchases were made other than diagnostic and treatment 
equipment and at what cost; (4) what money are left over 

from this initiative? 
 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon 
I’m very, very pleased to welcome in your gallery, introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of the members of the 
Assembly and people who are watching our proceedings, 
community leaders that I’m very, very proud to be associated 
with and co-operate with on many matters of mutual interest. 
 
I would like them to stand as I introduce them. There are 
community leaders here, mayors of our cities and some of their 
staff that have accompanied them here today as well: Mayor 
Tim Perry from Estevan; Mayor Pat Fiacco of the city of 
Regina; Mayor James Maddin, Saskatoon; Mayor Phil DeVos 
from Yorkton; Dennis Korte, mayor of Humboldt. And with 
them in attendance this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I’m also 
pleased to introduce Theresa Dust from the city of Saskatoon; 
Shelly Brown, city of Regina; Merrilee Rasmussen and Keith 
Schneider, who’s the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association representative. 
 
Please help me welcome these fine people to our gallery this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if 
I may I would also like to introduce a long-time friend and a 
former mayor, a former mayor of the city of Melville who 
happens to be here today and now works with me at my 
constituency office, Jim Walters from Melville. Please help me 
welcome him as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the official opposition I would also like to welcome 
the mayors, their staff, and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) representatives here this afternoon. 
I’m sure they’re here for the anticipated first reading of The 
Cities Act and just want to pass along to them that there’s no 
reason that that Bill can’t be introduced and passed by the end 
of this session. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order, members. We’re still 
into introduction of guests, members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly a number of guests in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. We have two grade 4 students from the White 
Bear Education Complex on the White Bear First Nation: 
Brittany Lonechild and Taneka Kequahtooway Lonechild. If 
they’d please rise. They were in the Legislative Building this 
morning actually for the unveiling of some very special artwork 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

 

which the member from Cumberland will tell the House about 
in a moment. 
 
Joining them is their teacher, Georgia Dangster, who brought 
them to Regina today. Also with them are two SaskEnergy 
staff, Margot Almas and Gillis Lavalley. They are here to watch 
the proceedings this afternoon and I would ask all members to 
join me in welcoming these special guests to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce some grade 7 and 8 students 
from Dinsmore, from the Dinsmore School. They are seated, 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery and they are accompanied by 
teacher Lisa Reinfelds and by chaperones Sue Lytle, Ellen 
Manson, and Rodney McConnell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet with this class 
before lunch and they made a special effort to come back so 
they could watch some of the proceedings here in the 
legislature. And I would appreciate it if all members would give 
these Dinsmore students and their teacher and chaperones a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I have two very 
special people in your gallery that I would like to introduce. 
First of all, my wife Gail, but also particularly I would like to 
introduce Calla Högnabba, who is an exchange student that has 
been living in the Hermanson household for the past several 
months, taking her grade 11 in Beechy High School. 
 
She comes from — and I’m really struggling pronouncing this 
— but she comes from Terjärv in Finland. She’s just been a real 
pleasure to have in our home and she will be leaving soon to 
return to Finland after the end of the school year. 
 
And I would appreciate if you would give Gail and Calla a 
warm welcome to the legislature as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
stand and introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, students from a school in my constituency. 
 
And to properly do that, I think back to the sod-turning 
ceremony at the school that is shared, a joint-use school, with 
Jack MacKenzie. And I remembered Ron Kruzeniski at the time 
saying that Mr. MacKenzie should pick wisely a name of a saint 
that he would like to have his name joined with in perpetuity, 
Mr. Speaker. And the choice of course is a good one. It’s St. 
Gabriel. 
 
So today I’m introducing 71 grade 4 and 5 St. Gabriel angels to 
the Assembly. They’re seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
and they’re accompanied today by their teachers, Ms. Erichsen, 
Ms. Reding, and Ms. Weafer. 
 
They’ll be with us for a time and then they’re going to join with 

me for a picture and some good questions and answer time in 
room 218. 
 
They are also accompanied today by the chaperone, Ms. 
Hydaman. And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join 
with me in a warm welcome to the students of St. Gabriel 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
would like to introduce to you and to the rest of the Assembly, 
87 students, grade 6, 7, and 8 from St. Jerome School in my 
constituency. They are seated in the east gallery. And I was able 
to visit with them earlier on in the day. 
 
They are accompanied by Dave Gartner, teacher, Corinne 
Bzdell, Darla Keen, and — no stranger to this Assembly — 
Vice-principal Bill Allen, who used to be a member. 
 
And I would like all members to join in welcoming this group 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Drug Abuse Resistance Education 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
I had the privilege of attending the grade 5 Whitewood School 
D.A.R.E. graduation. Mr. Speaker, D.A.R.E. stands for Drug 
Abuse Resistance Education. And in my constituency now, we 
have three communities, the Whitewood, Broadview, and 
Grenfell high schools that have included the D.A.R.E. program 
into their educational program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in talking to the students, they are very excited 
about this program. Certainly parents and now some of the past 
graduates have certainly looked back on the educational format 
and have been young people that the grade 5 students can look 
to as they think about the reasons for the program. And this 
program is designed to help students say no to drug or abusive 
situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s a very good program. The reason the 
program is doing so well is because of the efforts of Constable 
Sutherland, Sandra Sutherland, a young individual in the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) detachment in Broadview 
who has a real heart for these young people and is a very 
enthusiastic individual. And I can see just by her enthusiasm 
why the students have enjoyed the program so well. 
 
So I would like to extend my congratulations to the three 
schools and the grade 5 students in Grenfell, Whitewood, and 
Broadview for their participation in this program and their 
graduation. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

Donelda Klein Retires after 29 Years at Hansard 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-nine years 
ago when Donelda Klein first walked into the Hansard office 
and hooked herself up to whatever infernal contraption of a 
recording machine and typewriter they used in those days, she 
was able to hone her craft with the likes of Allan Blakeney, 
with his particular phraseology; Davey Steuart, with his every 
other word a rasp, sometimes colourful delivery; and the young 
Roy Romanow, who even then could shatter glass when he got 
wound up. 
 
Through her 29 years, Donelda has ably, accurately, and 
without prejudice transcribed the word by words of dozens of 
parliamentarians. And she has trained literally hundreds of 
Hansard employees, including, I am told, several directors. 
 
She has been involved in some of the momentous debates of 
this legislature and remarkably has given the same care and 
attention to the completely inconsequential because all are a 
part of public record. 
 
We have been able to boast nationwide our ability to read 
Hansard the very next day and now thousands can pick it up on 
the Net, with some not small thanks to Donelda and her staff for 
that work. 
 
School groups would know her as the woman above the 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we know the jobs we perform every day 
as members of this Assembly has had many hands that make it 
work. Donelda, I am proud to say, is my constituent and has a 
pair of the most capable hands in the building. 
 
As she leaves us to pursue her real avocations of gardening and 
golf, we wish her and her husband Bill all of the very best in the 
future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Scott Canadian Firefighters Combat Challenge 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the first weekend in 
June, Riverside Park in Swift Current hosted the Scott Canadian 
Firefighters Combat Challenge. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
report that two of the top three finishers in the major event for 
the day, the relay, were from the constituency of Swift Current. 
 
The city of Swift Current emergency services team placed first, 
edging out the Edmonton fire department. Meanwhile the RM 
(rural municipality) of Swift Current volunteer team surprised 
many with a great third place finish. 
 
Overall the city of Swift Current lost their right to boast that 
they were the reigning champions, Mr. Speaker, to the 
department team from Edmonton. However there are several 
congratulations that also should go out to some individuals, 
including Rick Anderson of Swift Current who finished second 
in the over 40 individual division, Elizabeth Randall who 
finished third in the female division, and Peter L’Heureux of 
Swift Current emergency services who finished second overall 
in the male category. 

Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of calling many who currently 
work at Swift Current emergency services my colleagues when 
I was at the city of Swift Current. And I recall their efforts 
earlier on to launch a combat challenge team. 
 
Very quickly they proved themselves to be among the elite in 
Canada, and as for departments from smaller cities like Swift 
Current, there is none that can compare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the organizers of the Scott 
Canadian Firefighters Combat Challenge in Swift Current two 
weeks ago, to all of the teams who participated. And I know 
you and members in the Assembly today will join with me in 
wishing them the best of luck as the city of Swift Current team 
competes at another challenge in Vermilion this weekend. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Economic Growth in Assiniboia 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
some very positive news coming out of the city of Assiniboia. 
The Assiniboia Times in May 2002 reports that the Assiniboia 
business community created 206 new full-time jobs and 108 
new part-time jobs over the last five years. 
 
With the recent job numbers indicating that 11,000 jobs were 
created throughout the province, it is good to see that 
Assiniboia is also taking part. The Assiniboia Economic 
Development Authority interviewed 161 businesses during 
2001. 
 
It discovered that existing businesses are an integral part of 
creating economic activity and job growth within a community. 
And estimates indicate that between 60 and 80 per cent of the 
new employment in the community is due to existing and 
established businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Assiniboia has a large number of successful, 
long-term businesses. Over 46 per cent of existing businesses 
have been operating for more than 15 years. The majority of 
businesses have experienced an increase in gross sales and 
expected that trend to continue. 
 
Assiniboia has always been a very, very proactive community, 
Mr. Speaker, and members on this side of the House hope that 
attitude will ensure that the people and organizations will 
continue looking for the next opportunity to enhance their 
business, their industry, and their representation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Jim Rose Charity Golf Tournament at Weyburn 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
ninth annual Jim Rose charity golf tournament was held at the 
Weyburn Golf Club on Saturday, June 1. This year 122 golfers 
took part and they raised $6,000, which is $1,000 more than 
they raised last year. 
 
Some of the charities that will benefit include Kamp 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

 

KoKo-Moko, the Weyburn Youth Centre, and the Weyburn Big 
Brothers and Big Sisters. 
 
The staff at the golf course, golfers, and many businesses in 
Weyburn work together every year to make this a great success. 
But, Mr. Speaker, this year something very special happened — 
and this is not surprising but it is special. 
 
Andrea Heath, who owns and operates the local newspaper, 
Weyburn This Week, won the tournament with an impressive 
88. Andrea had the honour to be the first female winner of the 
Jim Rose memorial golf tournament and was presented with the 
Brian Benning championship trophy and the prize 
championship jacket. So I’d just to congratulate Andrea and 
wish her all the best next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Safety Calendar Winners 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, for the second year, SaskEnergy 
has invited First Nations students from across the province to 
submit entries for its First Nations safety calendar. Eleven 
hundred students from kindergarten to grade 12 entered their 
art. Fourteen drawings were selected for the calendar; and if 
you want a preview, you can see them today in the Cumberland 
Gallery in the Legislative Building, along with biographies and 
pictures of the students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are the name of the students who all our 
members should congratulate: Delainee Antoine-Tootoosis 
from Poundmaker; Constance Ahenakew, Muskeg Lake; 
Lynnae Cantre from Makwa Sahgaiehcan; Kevin Crookedneck, 
Island Lake; Joey Wahobin from Mosquito; Brittany Lonechild, 
White Bear; Taneka Lonechild, White Bear; Lorraine Albert, 
Muskowekwan; Charles Martell, Moosomin; Katelyn Mitsuing 
from Makwa Sahgaiehcan; Terry Bear, Little Pine; Misty 
Blackstar, Moosomin; Shane Naytowhow, Montreal Lake; 
Gordie Gladue, Island Lake; also Rayne Bass from 
Muskowekan. 
 
Also the winning schools were Mosquito School with the 
highest percentage of school participation; the Moosomin 
School for the highest number of student entrants. 
 
Let’s thank the students for their good work in art, and also for 
their participation in a good cause of safety. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Canada Cord Girl Guides 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on Sunday, June 16 in Nipawin, 17 Pathfinders will be awarded 
their Canada Cord. It takes a great deal of commitment and 
dedication to reach this goal. 
 
In order to obtain their Canada Cord these young women must 
be a member of the Girl Guides for a minimum of nine years, 
they must prepare and deliver a speech on “What Guiding 
Means To Me,” and they must also meet over 100 challenges. 
 

These challenges include different areas such as community, 
home, outdoor world, camping, and leadership. It must be 
shown that they can contribute to each of these areas without 
benefiting themselves. 
 
Three of the Pathfinders were recommended by their group 
leader Jan Hunter for their hard work in achieving this goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their names are Heather Wheeler, Autumn 
Neighbours, and Chelsie Serack. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in congratulating Heather, 
Autumn, and Chelsie on being honoured with the Canada Cord. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party has and continues to fully support the call from 
governments of the Western provinces, and from farm 
organizations, for a $1.3 billion injury payment in the face of 
the US (United States) farm Bill. 
 
We believe that any trade injury payment should be 100 per 
cent funded by the federal government — it is their 
responsibility. 
 
After the Premier learned from the media that the federal 
government is planning a new farm package to be cost shared 
with the provinces, he decided to jet off to Ottawa to meet with 
the Prime Minister. 
 
Now I understand that in question period today, the Prime 
Minister stated that the provinces would be happy to share a 
cost of the pending farm assistance package. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, will the Deputy Premier, our Minister of 
Agriculture, tell this House if the Premier has changed his 
mind, and if the Premier will bring home a federally funded 
$1.3 billion trade injury program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have the 
Leader of the Opposition again reaffirm their party’s and his 
position on the trade injury, Mr. Speaker. It’s very helpful to 
continue to hear the Leader of the Opposition to remain on that 
page, Mr. Speaker. Because from time to time we worry about 
the slippery slope that he might find himself on and take a move 
in a different direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased today that the Leader of the Opposition has 
remained steadfast in his commitment, not only with this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker; that he stayed fast with the Western 
premiers in Canada of which our Premier is today attending. As 
we’re speaking today, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is in Ottawa, is 
meeting as we speak today with the Prime Minister, and is 
continuing to press the issue that we’ve pressed from Western 
Canada forever — which is, that on the trade injury piece it’s a 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

federal government responsibility. It would be . . . The 
compensation for Canadian farmers needs to be 100 per cent by 
the federal government. 
 
That issue has not changed. That position has not changed. And 
that’s exactly the position that the Premier’s articulating with 
the Prime Minister as we speak in this House this very moment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
Saskatchewan Party believes that a trade injury program from 
the federal government is a must. But despite our support, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Despite our support and despite the 
backing of farm groups in the province of Saskatchewan, we 
believe the NDP has dropped the ball. In fact, the NDP Minister 
of Agriculture told the media that he was getting his 
information of an $800 million payout from a national farm 
organization. And he claimed, sort of like Lyle Vanclief 
speaking through the media that farm groups had sold out to the 
feds. 
 
Well I’d like to know, Mr. Speaker, why isn’t our Minister of 
Agriculture on top of the situation? I would say to the NDP: this 
is no way to run a province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why have negotiations on federal farm aid 
program come down to an emergency trip by the Premier to 
Ottawa? Why didn’t our minister know exactly what was going 
on with the development of a farm aid package? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you. I want to, Mr. Speaker, table 
to the Assembly the work of this government and this Premier 
and this ministry for the past year and a half. Because on a daily 
basis I hear the Leader of the Opposition standing up and 
questioning about what it is that this government has been 
doing to enhance the positions of farmers in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker — not only in Saskatchewan but in Canada. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And so today, Mr. Speaker, I want to table a series of reports 
that go back to June of last year right now; where this minister 
has made a presentation to Ottawa on two occasions, where I’ve 
made a presentation to the federal ministries on behalf of 
Canadian farmers. And what the Premier has submitted, Mr. 
Speaker, on A Fair Deal For Canadians, and I want to table that 
this afternoon. 
 
And then I want to see from the Leader of the Opposition, I 
want to see his documentation in terms of what he’s done in 
better than a year, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to farmers and farm 
families in Canada. 
 
And I can tell you what’s in his document, Mr. Speaker. It’s this 
one little page here that has agriculture included in one little 

spot. That’s what the opposition party has done for Canadian 
farmers in this province for the last year, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what they’ve done. 
 
I’d like to table this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Release of Report on Harassment Allegations 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Premier released a one-page summary of the 
investigation of harassment allegations against the Environment 
minister. But there was something missing from that one-page 
summary. The Premier refused to release the investigator’s 
conclusion of whether or not the minister was guilty of 
harassment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the independent consultant find the minister 
guilty of harassment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak on 
behalf of the government and I want to go directly to the quote 
that the member from Carrot River made yesterday to the 
media. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that he would rise in his place 
today after he said exactly what he did. And I quote, Mr. 
Speaker, what Mr. Carl Kwiatkowski it says, quote, said . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I just want to remind the 
member that while using members’ names in quotations is 
permitted, using them outside of quotations is not permitted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I appreciate, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity 
to re-address this issue, Mr. Speaker. And the article reads this 
way from the member from Carrot River, and I quote: 
 

Well I think we have to trust the report. I mean this is what 
we asked for and this is, I think, what the people of 
Saskatchewan expected from us. And there would be a 
report and that a decision would be based on the findings of 
that report. 

 
I think the member who was asking the question answered his 
own question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that yesterday we were unaware of certain 
circumstances surrounding the release of that report, Mr. 
Speaker. Not the least of which is that the complainant in this 
particular situation was never provided with a copy of that 
report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to review briefly and once again pose the 
question: the Public Service Commission’s harassment policy 
says inappropriate touching is a form of harassment. The 
consultant said the minister touched her staff, and the minister 
recognizes that this was inappropriate behaviour. The Public 
Service Commission policy says harassment includes conduct 
that causes humiliation. The consultant said the employee felt 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

 

humiliated. And the Public Service Commission policy says the 
impact on the recipient is the measure of whether or not 
harassment occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the independent consultant, was the 
minister guilty of harassment or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to again refer to the report on the 
investigation and the summary, which members opposite had an 
opportunity yesterday to hear. And I want to quote, I want to 
quote again, Mr. Speaker, on the part of what Ms. MacKenzie, 
who did the report, said. She said this: 
 

A Ministerial aide, received contact to her face by the hand 
of Minister . . . Lorjé. 
 

It goes on to say that: 
 

The Complainant was justified in expressing her concern 
(and) as she felt that her personal domain was violated and 
she felt embarrassed and humiliated. The Respondent 
admitted to touching the Complainant’s face and has 
apologized several times for her actions, which . . . now 
recognizes as inappropriate behaviour. 
 
The investigation of the incident resulted in a finding that 
the touch, although physical, was not . . . sexual or (of) 
violent nature, but one intended to be given in a friendly 
and affectionate manner. 

 
And then the report, Mr. Speaker, goes on to say this, the 
recommendations of Ms. MacKenzie who says: 
 

The Complainant should be re-assigned to a different 
office. 

 
Secondly, it says that: 
 

The Respondent should be reinstated in her former 
position. 

 
And concludes by saying, that there should be a protocol on the 
volunteer task force developed to examine future policies of the 
government. 
 
It’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what the process has 
been and followed immediately by the Premier, when it came to 
our attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the Public Service 
Commission human resource manual clearly contains a section 
called “Process And Procedures for Addressing Harassment in 
the Workplace.” And, Mr. Speaker, here’s what it says about 
the final report of an investigation, and I quote: 
 

The investigator will submit a written report to the 
Permanent Head, the Public Service Commission, the union 
if applicable, the respondent, and the complainant. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the policy clearly states that Pearl Yuzicappi is 
entitled to a copy of the final report — not the one-page 

summary handed out by the Premier yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pearl Yuzicappi was not given the final report. 
Why not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’d like to quote again from what the 
Premier said yesterday in regards to this report at the news 
conference. And the member opposite, I expect, may or may not 
have been there and didn’t have the opportunity to understand 
or appreciate the contents of what the Premier had said 
yesterday. So today, I will read again what the Premier had 
said. He told the news conference, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

. . . citing the Freedom of Information and the Privacy Act, 
and the need to ensure that employees who have complaints 
aren’t constrained from coming forward, (and) the 
government did not release (Mrs.) MacKenzie’s report. 

 
That’s the rationale, Mr. Speaker, for why the Premier 
yesterday did not release the report but proceeded on the 
process, Mr. Speaker, which he said he always would. When in 
fact there was an allegation that was made, immediately the 
Premier engaged a private individual from out of province to 
prepare a report on this particular issue but not intervene in the 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today, we take the recommendations of the report, Mr. 
Speaker, and are implementing the findings of that report on all 
fronts, Mr. Speaker, accordingly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Perhaps we should remind the minister 
about what kind of information is required according to his own 
government’s policy. The final report is supposed to contain the 
complaint, the statement of respondent, a list of witnesses, 
witness statements, all relevant documents, the findings of the 
investigation, and the investigator’s conclusions as to whether 
harassment occurred. 
 
Pearl Yuzicappi is entitled to all of this information, not just the 
one page statement the Premier gave her yesterday. 
 
Why is the Premier withholding this information? Why is he 
violating his own government’s rules? And why, most 
importantly, is he violating Pearl Yuzicappi’s rights? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I recognize the passion and the interest 
that the member opposite has in the outcome of this out . . . of 
this undertaking. And I say to the member opposite, yesterday 
when you were asked by the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Just remind the member to 
make all his remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yesterday, when the member was asked 
about his interest and his feeling and his concern about the 
outcome of this undertaking, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, this is 
what the member said, and I say to you again . . . or he says, 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, that I think that we have trust in the report. And 
that says to me, Mr. Speaker, that the report that was prepared 
for the people of Saskatchewan, to this Premier, was 
satisfactory to the member opposite from Carrot River. And 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member was quite satisfied by the 
outcome of the report. 
 
Today, the member is on his feet saying that he’s not sure 
whether or not he supports the content of the report, Mr. 
Speaker. And today, he’s questioning, Mr. Speaker — today, 
he’s questioning the validity and the strength and what’s in the 
report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And is that what the member opposite is asking today, that he’s 
concerned about the qualifications and the strength of the report 
and whether or not Ms. MacKenzie was really the compatible 
person to do the piece of work? Is that the question that he 
asked? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Rest assured if we would have known 
yesterday that the government was trying to hide the fact that 
they hadn’t provided her with the report, if they weren’t trying 
to hide the fact that she quit her job in disgust, the response 
would have been considerably different. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier said 
the reason for not releasing the report is so that others are not 
constrained from coming forward. Well, let’s just give that 
some thought, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The alleged harasser has her job back, meanwhile the person 
who lodged the complaint is now out of a job. She feels 
humiliated, embarrassed, and violated. And the Premier is 
violating her right to receive a copy of the final report. How on 
earth is this going to make other harassment victims feel like 
coming forward, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Why again, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier violating his own 
government’s harassment policy? Why won’t he provide a 
complete copy of the final report to Pearl Yuzicappi? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m absolutely amazed that 
the member opposite is saying that somehow somebody is 
hiding something because yesterday, yesterday — and I don’t 
know, Mr. Speaker, whether or not the member was at the press 
conference or not; I don’t know whether or not he listened to 
the Premier when he stated his answers here today to the House 
yesterday — I don’t know where the member was, Mr. Speaker, 
because clearly the Premier outlined why he proceeded with the 
undertaking, what in fact was the outcome of the undertaking, 
and then what recommendations that would be followed once 
the document was prepared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is as clear and as concise as we can make this 
issue for the member opposite and if today he’s decided that he 
doesn’t have any confidence in the report that Ms. MacKenzie 
has prepared for this House or this Assembly, he should stand 

on his feet and say that he doesn’t agree with the report that Ms. 
MacKenzie has prepared for this Assembly and that he doesn’t 
agree with the recommendations, Mr. Speaker. He should stand 
in his place and make that kind of comment, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what he should do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, every other government 
agency and department in this province has to live with the 
rules created by the NDP (New Democratic Party). Every other 
employer in this province has to live with the rules made by that 
government and by that cabinet. But why, Mr. Speaker, with 
impunity, do these cabinet ministers get to break those rules? 
Why does the Premier get to break those rules? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is required to give Pearl Yuzicappi a 
copy of the entire final report. Instead he gives her a one-page 
summary that doesn’t even indicate whether the minister is 
guilty or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is cabinet breaking its own rules? Why are 
they violating Pearl Yuzicappi’s rights? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — When the Premier asked that this report be 
commissioned, which he did immediately upon receiving the 
information; there was no delay in proceeding with that, Mr. 
Speaker. The selection of an individual from Manitoba, who 
was out of province and which . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
independent of this province, Mr. Speaker — a professional of 
20 years of experience — who then proceeds, Mr. Speaker, to 
do a report on this particular issue, of which then, Mr. Speaker, 
this report is then prepared for the Premier. 
 
And the Premier has been very clear from the very first time 
when he commissioned the report, that this report would not be 
made public but in fact he would be protecting the information 
that would be in that report, and he said that before the report 
was even commissioned, Mr. Speaker. And he said that on the 
basis that he was going to be protecting the freedom of 
information and privacy Act and the need to ensure that 
employees who have complaints aren’t constrained from 
coming forward. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, we began with that 
process from the very first day. 
 
And I say to the member opposite and to the members opposite, 
if in fact they believe for some moment that the report that was 
filed by the member . . . by the individual from Manitoba, that 
they don’t support the recommendation of the . . . and the 
recommendations of the professional from Manitoba, then they 
should stand in their place and take attack on the member . . . or 
the person from Manitoba who did the work . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Your time is elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Movie Industry 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister responsible for Crown 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

 

Investments Corporation. 
 
Last year the NDP decided they wanted to get into the movie 
business so they used four and a half million dollars of 
taxpayers’ money to buy 30 per cent of a movie company called 
Minds Eye Pictures. 
 
A couple of days ago we asked the minister how Minds Eye 
Pictures have done since the NDP bought in, but as usual the 
minister either didn’t know how the government’s $4.5 million 
investment was doing or he left the legislature and the media to 
believe that he didn’t know. Either way the taxpayers did not 
get an answer. 
 
So we’re going to try again, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: how 
many productions has Minds Eye Pictures done in 
Saskatchewan since the government bought in last July? And 
how many productions has Minds Eye Pictures done in Alberta 
and Manitoba over the same period of time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the investment by 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and 
Minds Eye Pictures was an equity investment, Mr. Speaker, in a 
company that is reputable, that has a great balance sheet, Mr. 
Speaker, has a great record of production here in this province, 
and in fact, Mr. Speaker, has a great record of production across 
Western Canada. 
 
We have a 15 per cent equity investment in Minds Eye Pictures, 
Mr. Speaker. We have every reason to believe that we can 
expect a reasonable and good rate of return, and a bonus, Mr. 
Speaker — employing many, many young people here in 
Saskatchewan. What has that member got against that, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister has a . . . getting a reputation for non-answers — 
and there was another one — as much as his notoriety for his no 
answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one question, one question that taxpayers have 
about the $4.5 million investment in Minds Eye is what did 
Minds Eye Pictures do with the money? According to the NDP 
news release, July 26, 2001 the taxpayer . . . taxpayers’ money 
was used, and I will quote, “to fund the growth of its 
distribution library and a number of acquisitions.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, what acquisitions did Minds Eye Pictures make 
with the $4.5 million that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan made 
in this company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I do 
know that several days ago we announced there were 11,000 
new jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I do know, Mr. 
Speaker, and I do know, Mr. Speaker, that Minds Eye and its 

contribution contributed, Mr. Speaker, to many of those jobs in 
our province as well. 
 
In the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, we had a $5 million investment . . . 
or $5 million worth of productions in our province. In the year 
2000, Mr. Speaker, we have $50 million worth of productions 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have approximately 850 
people employed in that industry; many of them young people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We should be incredibly proud, Mr. Speaker, of what Minds 
Eye and other production companies are doing in our province 
— diversifying the economy and contributing to those 11,000 
jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t get an answer from the NDP government on 
a simple question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the money was used for acquisitions. My 
question is simple and direct: did Minds Eye Pictures use any of 
the $4.5 million of taxpayers’ money to buy production 
companies or facilities in Manitoba or Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the investment was 
an equity investment, 15 per cent in a company based in 
Saskatchewan that has a great balance sheet, Mr. Speaker, has a 
good record of production, and CIC believes it’s a good 
investment because it employs people, primarily young people, 
in our province in an industry, in an industry that we should be 
proud of that’s grown a phenomenal amount, Mr. Speaker, in 
the last few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Minds Eye, I can say to the member, has made a 
commitment that revenues that accrue from Saskatchewan 
productions will be committed, will be committed from . . . or 
for a five-year period in Saskatchewan beginning in 2003 — 
January 1, 2003 — to 2008, Mr. Speaker. I can say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — We know, we know of the wild 
investment in the picture company. But then the NDP gambled 
another $11 million of taxpayers’ money to build a new sound 
stage in Regina. The problem is that the government’s new 
movie company has decided the government’s new sound stage 
doesn’t have good enough sound. And the president of Minds 
Eye pictures also says the government will have to spend 
another half a million dollars to bring the new sound stage up to 
industry standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how could the NDP spend $11 million on a sound 
stage that its own movie company says won’t work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d like to just start by of course correcting the opposition in 
terms of their inaccurate presentations. The government 
invested $3 million in a $12 million project. The federal 
government invested money, the city put up money, and the 
industry put up money. So don’t tell people in this House and 
across the province that the $11 million came from the NDP 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

government. Simple, clear distortion by the member opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let me say also this. This sound stage will provide an 
anchor for a growing film and video industry that’ll help take us 
from $60 million worth of production to $100 million of 
production. And that’s good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a good thing we get some answers to written 
questions because we sure don’t get any to oral questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been asking the NDP government to 
produce its business plan for the new sound stage, but as usual 
the NDP has refused to provide any accurate information. Now 
we’ve got $11 million of taxpayers’ money, taxpayers’ money, 
on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. The member may start over if he wishes. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re a little 
sensitive on that side of the House. Because it is $11 million of 
taxpayers’ money — I don’t care how you cut it — it’s $11 
million of taxpayers’ money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the sound stage fails industry standards for 
sound. It fails the industry standard for sound. There might be 
one possible explanation. The NDP maybe wants to get back 
into silent movies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that Charlie Chaplin was a big hit in the 
’20s, but this NDP’s latest vaudeville act and its apparent move 
to corner the silent movie industry is going to end up as a 
disaster for taxpayers. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask 
members to allow the question to be put. I would ask members 
. . . Order. I would ask members to turn the volume down just a 
little bit. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 
NDP need to get into silent movies because they’re sure not 
silent when these questions are coming up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is going to end up as being a 
disaster for the taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, unless the NDP is 
counting on a big comeback in demand for silent movies, isn’t 
it time for the Premier to give up on his dreams of being a silent 
movie mogul and admit the NDP has gotten taxpayers into yet 
another multi-mullion dollar loser? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
certainly want to start by saying once again, when the member 
has an opportunity to stand up and apologize for what he has 
said, he should do so. 
 
It’s a $3 million investment by taxpayers that leveraged $12 
million worth of investment in this province — that’s good 

news. It’s a sound stage which is 80 per cent leased — that’s 
good news. It’s attracting investment and jobs — that’s good 
news. 
 
Now the member opposite says, where is your business plan? I 
suspect he wants to look at it because maybe he’s looking for a 
new job. Now I can say to that member opposite, he follows the 
script very well here. But we do not need any more bad actors 
from that side of the House involved in the industry, thank you 
very much. 
 
We will manage this industry. We will continue to work with it. 
We will grow it for 60 million to 100 million. That’s good news 
for Regina. It’s good news for Saskatchewan, but very, very bad 
news for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Cities Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, very much. Thank you, very 
much, Mr. Speaker. Today in the spirit of co-operation and 
working towards the economic benefits of this great province of 
ours — our communities, our cities, our towns, and our villages 
— I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to move Bill No. 75, The Cities 
Act, and that it be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. Order, members. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 76 — The Cities Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 apportant 
des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 

The Cities Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 76, The 
Cities Consequential Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand on behalf of the 
government today to convert questions 304 to 312 for debates 
returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 304 to 312 have been converted to 
debates returnable. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question 313. 
 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

 

The Speaker: — The response to 313 has been tabled. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just noticed the 
arrival of a city mayor, Mayor Don Cody of Prince Albert, who 
has joined us in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like everybody to welcome him as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
rise today to speak about how Sask Water, Saskatchewan water 
utility, will provide solutions to communities and offer products 
and services to meet community water service needs. 
 
And after these comments, Mr. Speaker, I will move the second 
reading of The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act. 
 
The proposed legislation re-establishes the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation as a focus utility. This reflects the commitment I 
made on behalf of the government when I announced our safe 
drinking water strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of the safe drinking water strategy, cabinet 
directed Sask Water to work with Saskatchewan communities 
to address their drinking water challenges. The refocused Sask 
Water will be a CIC subsidiary providing water and waste water 
treatment, as well as consulting services on a commercial basis. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Previously, Sask Water also had a regulatory approval role. 
This legislation removes all regulatory functions from Sask 
Water. Sask Water is a solutions provider for Saskatchewan 
communities. The corporation will work with communities to 
achieve affordable, appropriate, and sustainable water and 
waste water solutions. 
 
Working with Sask Water will provide communities with a 
number of benefits, including: high-quality, cost-effective 
services; comprehensive solutions; and technical expertise. 
With improved water treatment infrastructure and improved 
drinking water quality, Saskatchewan communities will be 
building for their future with expanding economic opportunity 
and healthy lifestyles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sask Water will emphasize partnership and 

quality management. The corporation will work with industrial 
clients to support business success based on quality of water, 
quantity of water, cost-effectiveness, and meeting 
environmental concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the refocused corporation will meet 
Saskatchewan’s water services needs. Sask Water’s services 
will include the supply of treated and untreated water; technical, 
engineering, and management advice; assistance related to the 
supply of water; water treatment, distribution, and storage; 
sewage disposal, collection, or transmission; management or 
operation of works; emergency planning; water conservation 
services; operator training programs; and treated and untreated 
bulk water using its regional systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Sask Water will work with communities 
to create custom-made solutions for their water needs. Sask 
Water will ensure waterworks systems provide safe, clean, and 
sustainable drinking water to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you, and I now move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Sask Water in the latter number of years has been a corporation 
that has carried out many and varied functions throughout the 
province. It has carried out the function of providing water 
services and consultations to communities, such as how to set 
up your water systems, your filtration, your gathering of water, 
how to deal with the disposal, Mr. Speaker, of sewage waters, 
how to treat it, and the proper methods of doing that. 
 
Sask Water has also provided services, Mr. Speaker, related to 
the storage of water such as building, providing for dams, Mr. 
Speaker, that would provide water, as a source of water for 
either communities or for agriculture. It has provided 
consultation and support for water projects, Mr. Speaker, such 
as diversion, such as drainage, Mr. Speaker, and those kind of 
services. 
 
It has also acted as a body, Mr. Speaker, that has mediated or 
provided the buffer to ensure that the rules and regulations of 
water usage are conformed to, Mr. Speaker, and provided an 
appeal process where two neighbours or perhaps jurisdictions 
have come into conflict, Mr. Speaker, and Sask Water has 
provided the Water Appeal Board to make the determination as 
to who is right, who is wrong, and what the proper remedies 
are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this new Bill, Mr. Speaker, moves away from that role to a 
large extent. It still provides the supports to the communities in 
providing support to providing water services in the sense of 
bringing water into the communities and in treatment of water. 
But what it does, though, Mr. Speaker, in what used to be 
advice and consultation from the department, will now be 
charged for at a commercial rate. 
 
Sask Water is now virtually, Mr. Speaker, becoming another 
Crown corporation that will compete in the public sector with 
private businesses that provide those kind of consultation 
services and services in providing supports to building water 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

systems, Mr. Speaker. Sask Water is now on the way to 
becoming another commercial Crown. And that’s not the role 
that Sask Water has played in this province up till now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so you have to question. The minister said that 
Sask Water is getting out of the regulatory functions. Who then, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to carry out the regulatory functions of 
maintaining and ensuring the water quality, that water is 
available, Mr. Speaker, and that conflicts between districts, 
between communities, jurisdictions, or between neighbours are 
resolved in a manner that is equitable and within the law, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Because we do have rules as to how things such as drainage 
should take place, and the remedies when drainage is done 
improperly, Mr. Speaker. And up until now that remedy has 
been through Sask Water. The Sask Water Appeal Board dealt 
with those kind of issues. 
 
And yet that is being removed, Mr. Speaker, according to the 
minister when he says that Sask Water will no longer perform a 
regulatory performance, duties. So who will be then, Mr. 
Speaker, enforcing the rules and regulations as set out in this 
province in dealing with water? 
 
Those are some of the concerns we have, Mr. Speaker — the 
commercialization of Sask Water and who will be carrying out 
the regulatory bodies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are other individuals and groups around this province that 
have some concerns with this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re waiting to hear from them because it affects a good many 
people, everyone across this province. We’ve seen the problems 
that we’ve had in North Battleford with water, in Perdue with 
water, in Arran with water. 
 
We’ve seen the case out in the RM of Saltcoats where Sask 
Water took the RM to court because of drainage, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve seen problems in other areas, Mr. Speaker, with legal 
drainage, with illegal drainage, or how to carry on drainage 
after it’s been put in place, Mr. Speaker, and after a number of 
years as the system deteriorates and it needs to be restructured 
again. 
 
Sask Water played a role in those areas, Mr. Speaker. And it 
seems that Sask Water is giving up that role to become a 
commercial Crown. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because there are a number of people and 
groups across this province that have a great deal of concern 
about this Bill, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Saskatchewan Watershed 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to make some brief remarks about this government’s 
commitment to ensure safe, high-quality drinking water for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — After these remarks, I will be moving 
second reading of The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act. 
 
As you know, on April 5 this government announced a new 
provincial long-term safe drinking water strategy. The thrust of 
the strategy is to secure safe drinking water for the people of the 
province right from the source to our taps. 
 
A key element of that strategy, Mr. Speaker, is the management 
and protection of the province’s surface and ground watersheds. 
In the past, this task used to be shared mainly by three different 
agencies: Sask Water, Saskatchewan Environment, and the 
Saskatchewan Wetland Conservation Corporation. 
 
Not any more, Mr. Speaker. To better coordinate efforts to 
protect water sources across the province, this government has 
created the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority to be the single 
agency to focus on watershed management. The new Crown 
Corporation combines the expertise from the three 
organizations I’ve already mentioned. It will eliminate any 
conflicting priorities, reduce duplication, and increase 
efficiency. 
 
Watersheds, Mr. Speaker, are geographic areas with common 
outlets such as a stream, river, lake, or wetland, into which 
water drains. Plants and animals depend on a healthy watershed 
for their habitat. People depend on watersheds as well. If we 
don’t care for watersheds properly, we can ruin water supplies 
and recreation areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our intent that this authority focus on activity 
when it comes to protecting the province’s watersheds. Its 
mandate is broad and extremely important. It will focus on 
watershed management involving all environmental and 
socio-economic aspects associated with water source issues and 
developments. 
 
This includes watershed planning, groundwater management, 
protecting aquifers from depletion, encouraging the 
conservation of wetlands, promoting sustainable economic 
development through the wise use of water and related land 
resources, and helping to resolve disputes over the use and 
diversion of water. In summary, the Watershed Authority will 
manage the supply allocation of water in this province. 
 
The Authority will implement a plan of protection and 
stewardship aimed at improving the health of the watershed, 
protecting source waters, conserving wetlands, and reducing the 
contamination of surface and groundwater. It will also provide 
technical support for managing aquifers, agricultural water 
development, and provide advice on the suitability of water for 
intended purposes and water source protection. The Watershed 
Authority will work closely with Saskatchewan Environment 
and assist them in their role to protect the safety of drinking 
water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water is life and watersheds are the basic building 
blocks of the natural environment. No government can provide 
this protection on its own. Water is the responsibility of all of 
us. That’s why this new Watershed Authority has an important 
role for the people of the province. And that’s why its vision is 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

 

people working together as watershed stewards for clean and 
safe water supplies in healthy ecosystems. 
 
The Authority will involve the people of Saskatchewan in 
issues and planning around the protection of water sources. The 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority will use partnerships with 
organizations with interest in watershed conservation to develop 
watershed protection and development plans. Everyone, Mr. 
Speaker, has a role in keeping our watersheds healthy and the 
Watershed Authority will make that task easier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you and I now move second reading of the 
watershed authority Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 67, An Act respecting water rights and the Saskatchewan 
Watershed Authority consequential amendment Act, is quite an 
extensive piece of legislation and it changes a number of things, 
issues around the whole water management of our province. 
 
The minister talked a little bit at the start — well through most 
of her speech — regarding safe drinking water and a safe 
drinking water strategy and how this Watershed Authority was 
going to help that and ensure safe drinking water in our 
province. And we would applaud that, Mr. Speaker, because it 
wasn’t very long ago when the North Battleford water crisis 
was going on and we received documents, a cabinet decision 
document, that said their strategy to deal with that whole thing 
was to try and keep it quiet and not say that there was any 
problem with any of the drinking water. 
 
Well now that we look at this Bill and they’re talking about safe 
drinking water throughout the province, maybe they’re finally 
coming to realize the responsibility this government has with 
drinking water. And that’s probably the reason why this Act is 
coming in. It’s great that it’s coming in the year 2002. It’s too 
bad it wasn’t there and the government didn’t take 
responsibility for drinking water sooner. 
 
But there are a number of other departments and issues around 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that will really impact people in rural 
Saskatchewan. This just talks about . . . And the minister just 
simply talked about safe drinking water. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
Bill goes much further than just safe drinking water. 
 
And I’ve just been looking through it over the last little while 
and it talks in the division, division 4, it talks about complaints 
re: draining, drainage. The whole drainage issue of our province 
is a huge, huge issue. And it talks about, you know, if there are 
problems in filing . . . how to file complaints, hearings, that 
whole process that was dealt under Sask Water before and now 
is under this new Act. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the opportunity of farming in an area that 
has a C&D (conservation and development) and the other night 
I was talking about the C&D that we are in, the Souris C&D, 
and how the oceans and fisheries are impacting it. 
 
But I, Mr. Speaker, I also had the opportunity of talking to a 

few of the directors on this C&D and asking them have they 
heard anything about the new watershed Act, and where their 
complaints are going to be going through. They had heard 
nothing about this. And this is a director of a C&D 35 miles 
southeast of Regina here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Act is going to significantly change the way the whole 
water management of our province has worked. And, Mr. 
Speaker, some of the people that are closest to that 
management, the directors on local C&Ds, have very little 
knowledge of this Act. And it’s just unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was talking to this director, and we were talking 
about how when you try and do anything right now with water 
management and water drainage, how it can be a real problem. 
And he was saying that you know it’s bad enough dealing with 
Saskatchewan Environment because right now it’s over six 
months to get an approval on something simple from this 
government — from Sask Environment. But even worse is a 
federal agency, which is a year and a half. 
 
And so what we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is this Act which is 
going to change the whole drainage process, the whole structure 
that has been in place in this province on drainage water, water 
management of our province, and people on the ground that are 
the very in the trenches, if I can say that, of the water drainage 
issue in our province — I guess I can say that — is that they 
haven’t even been notified, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a Bill that when I look at it, it is quite a significant Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. I mean it’s about 56 pages in length, to be introduced 
on day 60, with no — that we know of — consultation with any 
of the people that are affected directly. Yes, people in the cities, 
the drinking water . . . people that are dealing with drinking 
water, but this Bill goes much further than that, Mr. Speaker, 
much further. 
 
And I know we’ll have much more to say on the Bill once we 
get a little more input, and I’m sure that input will be coming 
fairly quickly regarding how it’s going to affect the water 
management of our province. 
 
It was an issue that we really probably didn’t think we’d have to 
worry about three days ago, or four days ago, or five days ago, 
in the near future. But right now, Mr. Speaker, if you go 
southeast of Regina where there’s been four inches of rain, the 
ditching is a huge, huge issue. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is not uncommon — it is certainly not 
uncommon — to have neighbour against neighbour going 
through the court system as far as that can go, Mr. Speaker. 
Water drainage is a huge, huge issue in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So until we can talk to the people that this Bill is going to be 
affecting, and the change in the whole water management 
structure that this Bill talks about, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 
adjourning debate until we get more consultation. 
 
And I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker, again. After 
my remarks, I will be moving second reading of a piece of 
legislation that is a keystone in the protection of this province’s 
environment — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2002, or EMPA, 2002. 
 
This is an extremely important piece of legislation to the people 
of Saskatchewan and the protection of one of our most 
treasured resources — our water. This Act is broad in scope. 
For example, it regulates the management of drinking water, 
waste water, environmental discharges, and hazardous 
substances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, safe drinking water is an essential element of a 
healthy environment and a strong economy. This Act makes 
substantial changes in this area. EMPA, 2002 will consolidate 
and update the legislation for the management of the province’s 
drinking water and waste water in response to the North 
Battleford inquiry. 
 
Most of the changes help in the implementation of the new 
long-term safe drinking water strategy released on April 5, 
when the North Battleford Water Inquiry report was released. 
This legislation demonstrates this government’s commitment to 
ensure that our water is safe. I have said it before, and I will 
keep saying it, we cannot take safe water for granted. Each and 
every one of us has a responsibility to keep our water safe. 
 
This new Act provides legislative changes that will ensure that 
the people of Saskatchewan have sustainable, reliable, safe, and 
clean drinking water. It complements the measures contained in 
the watershed authority Act. For example, inspections and 
administrative penalties are important tools in ensuring 
compliance with the regulations related to the quality of 
drinking water. This legislation provides those tools. 
 
New sections in EMPA, 2002 give the minister the authority to 
issue emergency waterworks and sewage work orders, and 
precautionary drinking water advisories. They provide 
additional options for promoting compliance by expanding the 
range of compliance and enforcement provisions. 
 
This Act ensures that operators and owners of water plants will 
be legally required to report problems with their systems to 
Saskatchewan Environment. This was one of the 
recommendations of the North Battleford water inquiry. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, owners of water treatment systems will 
have improved accountability to their residents. Henceforth, 
they will report to their customers on the quality of their water, 
their compliance with sample submissions requirements, and on 
the financial plans for their waterworks. The end result, Mr. 
Speaker, will be legislation that is better able to manage and to 
protect our environment and to protect . . . and to provide good, 
clean, safe water for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Act we are working with up to now was first introduced in 
July 1984. The Act has been effective. However, Mr. Speaker, 
the Act is almost 18 years old. Many things have changed over 
those years and many amendments have been made to the Act. 

The result is a piece of legislation that is dated and structurally 
complex. At the same time therefore, as we are proposing 
amendments to implement clean, safe water, this new Act will 
make the overall legislation more concise and improve the 
administrative operation of the Act. The Act is being 
reorganized to achieve that purpose. 
 
The old Ozone-Depleting Substances Control Act is being 
rolled into this new legislation in order to manage ozone 
depletion in a way that is consistent with national commitments 
and is also consistent with other provinces. 
 
Provisions with regard to contaminated sites and liability for 
those sites are being clarified and made consistent with 
department policy. The end result of the proposed amendments 
is a province that will continue to be justifiably proud of its 
natural environment, its diversity, its clean water, air, and land. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I now move second reading of 
The Environmental Management and Protection Act 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
to speak on Bill No. 71, An Act respecting the Management and 
Protection of the Environment. 
 
The minister has made many interesting comments about the 
Bill but the most interesting one is the urgency she seems to 
have in . . . concerning the water, clean water in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just like to remind the House this is day no. 60 and this is 
now just — Bill No. 71 — is into second reading. I believe 
everyone in the province, everyone in the country knows about 
Saskatchewan’s water problems and it’s amazing that it’s taken 
the government this long to bring in amendments to this, to this 
Act. And I think the people of North Battleford and other 
communities around the province — Perdue, that’s in my 
constituency — are very concerned about the timing of this Bill 
and why it’s taken so long for the government to bring in any 
legislation to begin addressing the environmental and the 
concerns about safe drinking water. 
 
The minister spoke about all the different amendments and 
again she highlighted an area where the legal liability will . . . 
aspect came up. And as we know, the former minister of the 
Environment actually suggested or more than suggested that 
town officials will be, will be charged if they didn’t have their 
water systems in a perfect state of repair by, I believe it was, 
July of last year. 
 
And as we know, Mr. Speaker, wishful thinking doesn’t 
improve the water treatment plants in this province. It takes 
money. And, as an example, in the community of Perdue, which 
the minister of Sask Water will be visiting tomorrow, these 
communities need infrastructure funds. 
 
And as in the situation in Perdue, that community has applied 
three years in a row to get infrastructure funds to upgrade their 
water treatment plant, their sewer system, their whole water 
system and they’ve been turned down three years in a row and 
hopefully the fourth application will be successful and 
communities like Perdue will have the necessary . . . 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Elphinstone 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you very 
much for the good grace of the member from Redberry Lake. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to the members of this legislature, two people seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. One is Solomon Cyr; the other is Ashley 
Topuschak. If you could both please rise? 
 
Solomon is involved in the youth committee of the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board, I believe. 
And Ashley works with the Labour Force Development Board. 
And they both do excellent work in this very important field. 
 
So I wonder if you could all give them a rousing round of 
applause to show them you’re still alive. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 71 — The Environmental Management 
and Protection Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
continue speaking on Bill No. 71 as the point I was trying to 
make is there is a big difference between bringing in 
amendments and rules and Acts and laws, but what’s needed on 
the ground is money for the communities to improve their 
infrastructure. And it’s a very serious concern to the rural 
communities that they do not have the money and they need 
infrastructure funds to update their water treatment facilities and 
their sewer systems and their whole water plants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many other issues in this Act. The minister 
spoke about rolling the ozone amendments or Acts from other 
areas into this. And so it’s fairly lengthy and I think that our 
critic for the environment will need time to study this Act. We 
will discuss this issue with the stakeholders, with the rural and 
urban communities of this province, and at this time I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. After my remarks I will be moving second reading of 
the amendments to The Forest Resources Management Act, 
2002. 
 
The amendments before us will further improve upon what is 
already some of the most advanced forestry legislation on the 

continent. When The Forest Resources Management Act and its 
accompanying regulations came into force in 1999, 
Saskatchewan confirmed its position as a leader in sustainable 
forest management. Provisions requiring public consultation, 
long-term planning, and monitoring make it second to none in 
terms of protecting the long-term health of the forest. 
 
As the Act has been implemented over the last three years, 
ways to further improve its effectiveness and the clarity of its 
intent have been identified. These amendments . . . these 
improvements are in the amendments now before this House. 
The amendments will specify that the minister has the option to 
place conditions on the approval of forest management and 
operating plans. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Currently the minister’s options are either to approve or to 
withhold approval. If approval is withheld, the plan must be 
returned to the company for required revisions, then 
resubmitted to Saskatchewan Environment. The ability to place 
conditions on ministerial approval will eliminate this effort and 
expense resulting in greater efficiency for both the company 
and for the government. 
 
Another amendment improves the legislative tools for 
managing Dutch elm disease. By moving the authority of this 
program from The Pest Control Act to The Forest Resources 
Management Act, we improve the ability of municipalities in 
partnership with Saskatchewan Environment to implement 
effective measures to protect their trees. 
 
The move will bring the authority for enforcement of applicable 
Dutch elm disease regulations to Saskatchewan Environment 
allowing for greater coordination with the provincial Dutch elm 
disease management program. 
 
Another positive change included in the amendments, Mr. 
Speaker, is the authority for Saskatchewan Environment to 
establish province-wide standards that apply to all forest 
companies. 
 
Currently, the operations of individual forest companies are 
controlled by setting conditions on their licences and 
management plans. Province-wide standards will provide for 
greater consistency and clarity for all forest businesses, all 
across the provincial forest. These standards will be results 
based, focusing on desired outcomes rather than process. 
Province-wide standards will create a level playing field for all 
forest companies in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999, amendments to The Forest Resources 
Management Act first introduced the option of assessing 
administrative penalties rather than proceeding to court for 
certain types of non-compliance in the forest. This 
administrative option has been accepted by the industry and has 
proven to be an effective way of dealing with non-compliance 
in specific circumstances. 
 
The amendment before the House, Mr. Speaker — or Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, rather — will expand the circumstances where 
this process may be used to include activities such as renewal, 
submission of records, grazing, and wood measurement. The 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

option of using administrative penalties will streamline the 
process of achieving compliance for both Saskatchewan 
Environment and for the forestry industry. And forest operators 
found in non-compliance still have the option of going to court 
if they feel that the administrative penalty route is not in their 
best interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently the Act provides the authority for an 
officer to stop unauthorized harvesting or damaging activities 
on Crown land. An amendment will clarify the circumstances 
under which the officer can rescind such a stop work order. 
This clarification will help forest harvesters to reduce the 
duration of a work stoppage by allowing the officer to rescind 
the order as soon as problems identified are addressed by the 
company. 
 
This is another example, Mr. Speaker, of working with forest 
companies to achieve compliance in a fair and efficient manner. 
All these amendments will make an already effective piece of 
legislation work better for industry and for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2002. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce to you and 
through you all members of the Assembly, a group of 27 grade 
4 students from W. J. Berezowsky School in Prince Albert. 
 
They are accompanied by teacher Henry Strelioff, by Mary-Lou 
Wieiers, by Skip Fengstad, by Sam Bober, and by John Spicer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a couple of words about W. J. 
Berezowsky if I could. My three children began school in W. J. 
Berezowsky, which is about a block and a half away from my 
home. They all came through W. J. and went on to other 
schools. It’s the best school in Prince Albert and I know all of 
the grade 4 students are going to agree with me that it is. It’s a 
good place to go to school. They’ve got good teachers and it’s a 
good neighbourhood to come from — the west . . . the East Flat 
in Prince Albert. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Would all members join 
me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 65 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this deals with the forestry resources of Saskatchewan, 
a very important industry in this province. In fact, it’s an 
industry that is seeing some stressful times at the present time 
both from forest fires and because of the softwood lumber 
tariffs being imposed by the US on the industry — not just in 
Saskatchewan obviously but across Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of the problem with the forest industry, the 
softwood lumber tariffs that are facing . . . that Saskatchewan is 
facing is this government’s lack of interest in dealing with those 
particular issues. 
 
We raised the issue in the House, Mr. Speaker, along with the 
agricultural tariffs that the US farm Bills have put in place and 
asked that those be combined together as one effort in trying to 
deal with them on a national level. That we bring the people 
from BC (British Columbia), from Alberta, from Manitoba, all 
together as a western interest group and deal both with 
agriculture and with the softwood lumber industry to try and put 
forward a common front, Mr. Speaker, that would deal with 
something greater than just grain because it seems down in 
Ottawa the grain industry is of no importance. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the softwood lumber industry impacts not 
just Western Canada, but also impacts in Ontario, in British 
Columbia — excuse me, in Quebec — and the Maritimes. So 
we believe that there was a stronger argument to put forward 
that might have a greater impact in Ottawa than simply going to 
them with agriculture. 
 
Now having looked at the Premier’s performance over the last 
little while in dealing with the agricultural tariffs, it’s perhaps 
understandable why they didn’t want to tie softwood lumber 
into that because up until now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has not 
been successful in getting tariff-related, trade-related subsidies’ 
benefits to Saskatchewan producers — at least subsidies or 
tariff benefits, Mr. Speaker, that are paid for by the federal 
government and not by the province. 
 
So I can understand then perhaps because of expecting to fail, 
they didn’t want to tie the softwood lumber industry into that 
same failure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the particular Bill that we’re dealing with here has 
a lot of definitions in it. But looking through it, Mr. Speaker, I 
didn’t notice it deal with both large and small producers and 
how they both impact in the forest, Mr. Speaker. And I think we 
need to take a strong look at how the large corporations and the 
small logging operations can work together for the best interests 
of Saskatchewan and the best interests of the forests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
I know in my very limited travels in the North looking at the 
forestry industry, there seems to be times, Mr. Speaker, where I 
think that there are perhaps better ways than we’re currently 
dealing with the situation. And part of the problem that has 
been related to me, Mr. Speaker, is that the government isn’t 
prepared to deal with very many players in the field. They want 
to be able to deal with two or three or four or five large 
operations and not want to have to deal with the mom-and-pop 
lumber industry, Mr. Speaker. And I think there are trees, there 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

 

is timber out there that could be best utilized to make lumber 
out of, that is perhaps going for other purposes. 
 
And so we need to take a very good look, Mr. Speaker, at the 
forest industries and how it’s all operating, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m not sure that this particular Bill does that. It seems to deal a 
lot with definitions but I’m not sure that it’s really dealing with 
how the forest is operated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that it talks about though, in the Bill, it 
defines, it changes it from wood residues to wood by-products. 
And it talks about the minister’s opinion, whether or not some 
wood, wood products could be used in manufacturing or not 
and whether it should be . . . and whether they should be. 
 
And I just wonder on what basis does the minister form that 
opinion? What kind of information does the minister receive to 
determine whether or not it would be an undue financial 
hardship on the logging operation whether or not they had to 
utilize the forest products that they are harvesting in some form 
of manufacturing process, Mr. Speaker — whether or not they 
should make two-by-fours or two-by-sixes, whether it should go 
to the pulp plants or whether it should go to pickets or whatever 
else, firewood perhaps, whatever else it could go to? 
 
I know in my part of the country, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a 
lot of large trees and so when you see a piece of a tree that’s 20 
feet long, it looks like a pretty big piece to us and why wouldn’t 
you utilize it? And yet those kind of pieces of trees, Mr. 
Speaker, seem to be discarded fairly often. And someone from 
the southern half of the province looks at that and says, well 
gee, that would make three pickets. Why isn’t it being used? 
 
And so how does the minister determine whether an undue 
financial hardship is being imposed on that logging operation if 
they have to utilize those products, those by-products from their 
logging operations? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of people who have a great 
deal of interest in this Bill, in how it’s going to impact both the 
large operations across this province, how it’s going to impact 
on the small timber operations, that need to have a look and see 
how it’s going to impact them and their communities, Mr. 
Speaker. So they need to be given some time to look at this Bill, 
to read it, and to understand how it’s going to impact them. 
 
So I would move, Mr. Speaker, that we adjourn debate at this 
time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 48 — The Alcohol 
and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is an honour to get involved in the debate on Bill 
No. 48. The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act has made a 
number of significant changes to its regulations, to its clauses, 
regarding how SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) will govern itself and how it will affect the minister 
and the departmental officials. 
 
During its reading provided by the minister, the minister 
highlighted four key areas that this Bill was trying to address. 
And it was . . . it began by . . . the minister began by indicating 
that the first priority was that it was . . . the Bill was going to 
enhance the Authority’s accountability as a regulator. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that interesting that we are now looking at 
enhancing the ability for regulations to be done outside of this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
With interest, Mr. Speaker, I turned to the new section 179, 
which is section 23 of the Bill, to see how many regulations 
were now going to be enacted, or possibly could be enacted by 
the regulatory body. And, Mr. Speaker, being that the numbers 
are (a) to (z) and then (aa) to (zz) and (aaa), that would mean 
now that there are 53 such areas of regulations that will now be 
in . . . the Authority will now have the ability to enact 
regulations in 53 areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the consequences of last year’s 
investigations by Justice Wakeling prompted a need to address 
some of the concerns. And if I read Justice Wakeling’s 
comments clearly, he stated that the Act was deficient in some 
fashion, that it allowed for inconsistencies. And that was said, 
stated very clearly by the minister when he made 
recommendations during the minister’s speech on May 22. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, during those comments that were made by the 
minister, the minister stated that Justice Wakeling had some 
concerns with section 133 of this Act and that it was too 
restrictive. And really what he was saying, if I look at his other 
comments, was that it was time for the government to move the 
Act or to enhance the Act by changing section 133 to more 
accurately reflect what was part of the current century — in 
other words move with the times, if Justice Wakeling was 
indeed saying that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I found it very interesting when I looked at 
the comments made by the minister, and I’m quoting from 
Hansard, when he says that: 
 

To the extent the guidelines are in conflict with section 
133, they are not valid and cannot support a justification for 
actions prohibited by section 133. 

 
The minister goes on to say that the section should be amended. 
But section 22 of the Bill does not amend in the words I think 
that Justice Wakeling was intending. Justice Wakeling was 
intending, I think, section 133 to be looked at to address the 
issue of gifts and trips and all the kinds of things that officials 
and the minister may get into difficulty with. He was suggesting 
that that should be changed and to more accurately reflect 
current times. 
 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does propose a change to section 
133. And section 133 is hereby repealed. It is completely 
eliminated from the Act, Mr. Speaker. So in one hand the 
minister was saying that they were going to follow the 
recommendations of Justice Wakeling — because Justice 
Wakeling had indeed pointed out some inconsistencies and that 
there was going to be a need to address section 133 and make it 
more in tune with the times. 
 
But I don’t think Justice Wakeling was said, throw it out. And 
that’s exactly what this government has decided to do. They 
have removed section 133 from the Bill. 
 
Now where it has been placed? It has been placed in 
regulations, Mr. Speaker, regulations that will be drawn up at 
the end of the process of this Bill and fully implemented. In 
other words, Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Assembly and all 
members here, both in government and opposition, will not 
know what those regulations will say and how they will affect 
the minister, the officials of Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
 
Currently it’s very clear. The section states that the minister or 
officials shall not solicit in any way a gift or gift in kind. Now 
that’s going to be in regulations. What will that, what will that 
limit be? Every MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
goes through the process of meeting with the conflict of interest 
to declare whether or not gifts of $200 or larger have been 
received, and those kinds of things have to be declared. That is, 
that is the controls that we work under, Mr. Speaker. This is 
now moving it outside of the Act so that in no way can the 
Legislative Assembly actually control what is happening in the 
area of gifts. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a clear indication of not wanting 
to comply with Justice Wakeling’s recommendations and 
moving far beyond what Justice Wakeling was saying. I think 
it’s something that people and . . . in Saskatchewan would not 
be wanting to support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other recommendations, which we 
think is a very positive recommendation in the Bill, is that there 
was a need to enhance the Authority’s role in promoting the 
socially responsible use of liquor and gaming. Very clearly 
anything that this Legislative Assembly and we as officials can 
do to ensure that the socially responsible use of liquor and of 
gaming is enhanced, we would support that. So very clearly 
there is . . . there are sections in this Bill that are introducing or 
are enhancing the current Act to make it much more useful I 
think for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the concerns that has been expressed by a number of 
people who have looked at this Bill is with regard to expansion 
of people and groups that are now going to be eligible for liquor 
permits. 
 
Normally, Mr. Speaker, I know in many communities, both 
urban and rural, liquor permits are granted to service clubs; 
they’re granted to a number of organizations when a social 
evening is planned and there is a need for a liquor permit. The 
Act enhances that criteria or enhances the eligibility a great deal 
and it broadens the basis for who is eligible for a permit. And 
there are some concerns as to what the regulations will state 
around that issuance of permits, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns has been expressed by 
the horse racing association, and we’ve had the opportunity to 
consult with them regarding gaming and how it applies to the 
horse racing association . . . And again in the Act it states that 
there will be a need for the definition of good character. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s something that I think is interpreting . . . be 
able to be interpreted in many different ways, whether or not 
someone is of good character. It will be left to regulations, Mr. 
Speaker — not clear at all as to what will be meant by that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are awaiting some recommendations from 
the horse racing association that they will be providing to us 
and that we will be able to raise those concerns with the 
minister as we move forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also had the opportunity to meet with the 
hoteliers association. The executive of the hoteliers association 
met with a number of our caucus and we provided them with a 
Bill, with Bill No. 48 and the explanatory notes. And they are 
currently reviewing that process and are looking at how the Bill 
will affect their industry regarding the sale of liquor, regarding 
the permits that will be issued to different corporations or 
individuals, and they’re going to provide again a number of, I 
think, recommendations and some suggestions about how some 
of this Act may be changed to better reflect what the industry 
really wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of concerns, as I’ve indicated, 
that various groups in the province have with Bill No. 48, that 
they want to provide some solutions. And overall, the Bill has 
some good points, so we need some time to be able to more 
accurately identify the weaknesses of this Bill and provide some 
alternatives. So with that, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 49 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 49 — The 
Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to join in the adjourned debates on Bill No. 59, the 
charitable fundraiser business Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that really I guess is coming forward 
when you really wish, I guess, that you wouldn’t have to have a 
Bill of this nature. This Bill addresses I guess people that will 
go out, fund raise under a name that is very similar to a 
non-profit name. 
 
Where I first heard of this issue, I was at a banquet or a 
reception put on by the CNIB (Canadian National Institute for 
the Blind) and they were talking about how there have been 
groups that have come into the province with initials very, very 
similar to the CNIB, but not the CNIB, talking about trying to 
raise money for the blind and where that money goes after it’s 
raised. It’s raised by this organization and then is gone out of 
the province and never does really get to the CNIB. 
 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

 

That was just one example, but there are many, many examples 
of people that are in the province that are doing . . . that are in 
the business of fundraising, but it’s not going to the intended 
non-profit organization. And that’s really, really unfortunate. 
Unfortunately, this legislation has to come about to try and 
prevent some of the unscrupulous fundraising organizations out 
there that are, that are kind of ruining it for everyone. And 
that’s why this Bill is needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last session I had done a little research and found out what 
other provinces were doing with legislation, dealing with this 
problem through legislation. And I put forward a private 
member’s Bill, Mr. Speaker, on this very, very issue. I since 
then heard that there had been a committee struck to deal with 
this issue and they’re looking at legislation from around the 
nation as to which would be the best way of handling it. 
 
As I go through the Bill it looks like it’s pretty much in order. 
And it’s a good thing, because fundraising is a major industry in 
our province — whether it’s the non-profit organizations that 
are fundraising, right down to the hockey teams, the soccer 
teams, service clubs, many, many different organizations that 
are in the fundraising business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess I probably wouldn’t have realized how much 
organizations rely on fundraising until our two boys got into the 
sports field, whether it’s hockey, whether it’s soccer, whether 
it’s lacrosse, and now even through the school system. In the 
schools there are a number of fundraising drives for different 
reasons and it’s just amazing. It seems like there are chocolate 
covered almond boxes coming to our house in case lots every 
second week that then we’re supposed to go and distribute. 
 
Unfortunately my colleagues haven’t really helped me. I guess 
we’re going to have to bring more of those to the legislature and 
I think maybe I could dispense a couple of those for the 
different fundraising. And the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
says he’s more than willing to buy a couple of boxes of 
chocolate covered almonds. 
 
But certainly the whole issue of fundraising is just huge in the 
province. And as I said, it doesn’t matter whether it’s on the . . . 
in the school level, whether it’s through sporting teams. As I 
mentioned, the hockey is the one area that I know. And I know 
there are a number of different fundraising initiatives put on by 
hockey teams because of the expensive ice time, rental of ice 
time, and everything else. 
 
Where this Bill really is directed though, are more the 
non-profits such as the CNIB, as I mentioned, the Cancer 
Society, and all of the non-profits that are really reliant on 
fundraising to keep their doors open, to go towards research, 
and to eventually, we all hope, find a cure for whatever the 
organization is representing. 
 
So as we go through the legislation there are a number of things 
that we think are moving . . . or pieces of legislation that are 
moving in the right direction. 
 
Some of the things that they talk about is that canvassers will all 
have to wear identification cards, which is a very good idea. We 
hear of horror stories where people are going up to doors and 
canvassing, and do you really know whether that canvasser is 

representative of that organization or are they going around 
misrepresenting an organization and collecting the money and 
does that money then get to the appropriate organization? So 
the issue of wearing a identification card we think is a very 
good idea. 
 
They also talk about restricting the hours of fundraising — 
door-to-door fundraising — from 8 a.m. to 9 p.m., and we 
would have no problem with that either. I would really question 
that an organization that was out in a community fundraising 
would have to be out knocking on doors at 8:30 and 9, or at 
9:30 and 10 o’clock at night. If there wasn’t enough time 
between that 6 to 9 o’clock time frame, you’d really wonder. 
 
And I know from my own experience of fundraising for a 
couple of organizations, you want to try and get there right . . . 
just after the supper hour while everybody’s still at home and 
they haven’t run off to the ball game or the soccer game or 
whatever else. Because it seems like some evenings, it seems 
like some evenings you can walk up and down the streets and 
knock on a lot of empty doors. But certainly with my proper 
badge on and they know I was there for the proper reasons, they 
would have been answering the door. 
 
But of course if they . . . There are a couple of areas though, 
Mr. Speaker, that as we’ve consulted with different 
organizations . . . As we’ve consulted with different 
organizations there are a couple of areas that do raise some 
concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Section 4 of the Bill allows for the appointment of a registrar of 
charities, and further appointing of one or more deputy 
registrars. This sounds like it might be a bit of an unnecessary 
bureaucracy that may be created. We need to consult with a few 
of the organizations and have their input. 
 
I realize there is a committee struck for this legislation, but we 
would really, I guess, question, is that bureaucracy or that 
structure necessary for this Bill to go forward? 
 
(15:30) 
 
It’s brought to our attention from a non-profit organization that 
in section 22 they have raised some concerns that this section 
prohibits solicitation of an individual if he or she has requested 
that no solicitation be made. Accordingly if such a request is 
made, the individual’s name is put on a list of people who may 
not be solicited. This list is then compiled, meaning it is done 
on an ongoing basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the problem with that is that when you, as an 
organization, if you hire a professional solicitor to do the work 
for you, they are given these lists and they know who they can 
and can’t phone in a general area. But the problem with it is, 
Mr. Speaker, if you’re a volunteer and you’re given a section of 
the city, you’re given two or three blocks of the city that you 
are to go and fund raise. Do you know which people on that two 
or three block — are they isolated on the two or three block 
area — whether they can be solicited? And according to the 
legislation if they say that they don’t want to be solicited, they 
can’t. Now does the information get to the people that are 
actually doing the canvassing, the volunteers in the community 
that are doing the canvassing? 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

So the concern that has been raised is that the section does not 
distinguish between those solicitations made directly by staff or 
charitable organizations and solicitation made by volunteers 
working on behalf of the charitable organization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are concerns with the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I know we 
need to talk to some of the organizations and see whether these 
concerns would be enough to hold up the Bill. And I don’t think 
they would be, Mr. Speaker, but it is a concern. 
 
And as I said, just from my own experience and my family’s 
experience of doing some fundraising on our street, in our 
cul-de-sac, do we know the people that have tried to be 
registered or don’t want to be solicited. And as a professional 
organization, when you’re given a group of phone numbers, you 
are notified. But as a volunteer would you be notified and you 
could be in breach of the legislation without any fault of your 
own. 
 
Section 22, also seems a bit unclear as to whether or not this 
restriction covers solicitations by those volunteers who may be 
canvassing door-to-door on behalf of a non-profit business, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So as I mentioned, there are some concerns with this but they’re 
minor. I think the intent of the law is going in the right 
direction. And as we mentioned, this legislation, unfortunately 
needs to be put in place because of some unscrupulous 
canvassers and solicitors that have come into the province and 
walked away with some money that was intended to go to the 
proper non-profit and unfortunately didn’t go there. 
 
But overall though we are encouraged that the Bill goes in the 
right direction, Mr. Speaker. And with that I would move that 
we move this Bill to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 53 — The 
Department of Economic Development Amendment Act, 
2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular 
Act . . . or the amendments to this Act looks to me like very 
much on the surface, a housekeeping kind of amendment. As 
we all know and as maybe the people that are watching are 
aware, the Department of Economic Development, 
subsequently called the Economic and Co-operative 
Development has now been changed, amalgamated with other 
departments and the new department is now called Industry and 
Resources. 
 
I think putting those kinds of energies together in a department 
probably has some good ramifications in terms of efficiency, 
especially in administration and maybe some of the common 
elements needed in administering the mandate to those different 
departments. 

And so at first glance, we would see that this Act has very much 
going in the right direction and I said housekeeping in trying to 
get the words correct in order to describe the Act. 
 
So I think we should do whatever we can do in this province 
and particularly through the Economic Development, in this 
case Industry and Resources, to do whatever we can in trying to 
grow the province, to attract investment in this province. That is 
the key fundamental element of growing this province and 
putting the fundamentals in place in order to get the confidence 
of the investment, which creates the jobs and businesses, which 
creates the taxpayers. That is the cycle that we need. And we’ve 
talked about that before. 
 
So if these new changes, if these new changes were in fact 
going to do this, I think I could support those changes. But 
again, when I read further into the amendments, I don’t see 
those kinds of changes. Under the explanatory notes it is stated, 
Mr. Speaker, that the new clauses are being added in the 
implementation section to define what “government 
department” is, in order to define the scope and responsibilities 
and powers of the minister in these new amendments. 
 
But it comes up very short in terms of describing what is going 
to be done in these amendments and what should be done. So 
again we have to speculate as what is meant, what is the 
ultimate mandate of this department, and again the question 
keeps arising, what is the intent and where is this particular 
change leading us? 
 
If those questions aren’t asked, and the understanding isn’t 
there, in terms of making or clarifying what the intent is and 
where the . . . what the purpose of the amalgamation is, how can 
there be continued confidence or increased confidence in the 
economic development strategy of this government? 
 
If those changes were identified, and they’re putting those 
fundamentals in place, I could certainly support them. I think 
we all could support them. If those changes were to create a 
one-stop shopping for the industry — both in areas of economic 
development in the traditional sense and in Mines and Energy, 
which has been absorbed into this department, or in Northern 
Affairs or Forestry — if it became a one-stop shopping and it 
effectively gave some efficiency, then I would say that we 
could support that, these changes. 
 
If the changes, Mr. Speaker, were to revise the regulations and 
to increase the . . . decrease the red tape involved, so that again 
people interested in investing and developing in this province 
wouldn’t have to go through the long routine of red tape and 
delays, then I’m sure we could support this. However, on those 
points, I don’t see where this particular Act has stated any of 
that. And I guess what I’m saying is that this is an opportunity 
lost in trying to make a more transparent and a . . . and build 
confidence in our economy in which the industry needs to 
invest, and needs that confidence in order to do that. 
 
If some of these changes would in fact allow the government to 
get out of the businesses and allow more private industry to 
enter with confidence that they’re not going to be competing 
against their own tax dollars, again we could support that. We 
don’t see it in this Act, and again it’s an opportunity lost that we 
may have been able to share with the people of this province 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

 

what the intent was of this new department. 
 
If these changes that are being contemplated here in 
amalgamating the different departments actually allows the 
fundamentals to be put in place that will encourage the kinds of 
things that I’ve been talking about, Mr. Speaker, then I’m sure 
that we could . . . we could support these amendments as well. 
 
If there was a clear vision or if there was a direction given for 
the development — economic development — in this province, 
that is what is needed and that is the clear statement that needs 
to come out of the amendments that we’re having here. The 
amendments, as we see it, are trying to make the transition legal 
into the new amalgamation. 
 
What we need, as I mentioned, is that confidence. And as 
industries that have traditionally tried to work in this province 
have found, especially in mines and energy, they’ve run into 
lots of regulation, lots of red tape, and lots of barriers. If those 
could be eliminated that’s where we need to go. 
 
For instance, in Northern Affairs the same thing would apply. 
When we tried to ask the minister to clarify some of the 
concerns that we had in the forestry section we were told that 
that’s not under his jurisdiction anymore, and therefore we 
don’t seem to know exactly what department we should be 
asking the questions of. And I’m sure that the people in this 
province are even more confused when it comes to finding the 
answers. 
 
I noticed also that’s a symptom that’s happening in a lot of the 
transitions. For instance, questions that we’re trying to direct to 
the old Department of Municipal Affairs, that seems to have 
been divided up and spread all over. And we in fact are having 
trouble getting answers from the people that we think 
traditionally we should have been getting the answers from. It 
becomes very confusing for people in this province that have to 
deal in this particular environment. 
 
One of the positives in this Bill however, Mr. Speaker, I think is 
in the fact that it starts to refer to the computerization of the 
government and putting the whole centralized focus of IT 
(information technology) and how the computers are going to 
be worked into e-government. I think it’s a good step. I can 
certainly support that. 
 
The ability of people in this province to access electronically 
information and ask for electronic . . . response to electronic 
questions, I think is more important all the time. Saskatchewan 
by its distance is a, certainly, a positive candidate for that kind 
of relationship between its citizens, taxpayers, and the 
government. And so I’m pleased to see that this department is 
now responsible for taking over the IT of . . . and computerized 
implementation of this government. 
 
The question I guess I would have regarding the 
computerization or the IT aspects is the ability for this 
department to purchase on behalf of other departments and to 
allocate computers and resources. That is a change in these 
amendments. The question then becomes who is responsible for 
the budget and the costs of those computers? Where is those . . . 
where are the costs allocated and whose budget does it go 
through? Is the budgeting redundant? Will it cause, again, 

confusion and less transparency? Those are questions that still 
have to be answered. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic development amendment Act, as has 
been presented, should I thought have clarified some of those 
questions that I’ve tried to enunciate today. I think that there is 
an opportunity lost in terms of the background documentation 
that might have come with this, with this Act. I understand why 
the Act is being put in place, for reasons of making the Act 
legal in the existing interpretation of the new industry and 
resources. But again, that kind of, that kind of opportunity to 
clarify to the people has been lost. 
 
These questions that I have put forward, those questions I think 
still need to be asked. I would like to get some more responses 
from some of the people in our province that are very much 
involved in economic development. I don’t think they’ve been 
asked . . . have been . . . had a chance to get a response yet. And 
because of that, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would, I would 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill 53, The Department of 
Economic Development Amendment Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 43 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 43 — The 
Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation Act be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today to speak on Bill No. 43, An Act 
respecting the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reading this Bill, I understand and I recognize 
that it is largely housekeeping in nature, moving to recognize 
the changes that has happened in the functions of HSURC, that 
used to . . . which is Health Services Utilization and Research 
Commission. Acronyms can kind of make people’s eyes glaze 
over. 
 
But what it really says is that this research function in the health 
system is now going to move under the auspices of the quality 
council structure and there has to be appropriate changes to 
legislation that would recognize this fact. It also is important 
that this new legislation would also create the opportunity for 
research funds to follow the structural change in the research 
structure in our province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I certainly think that the nature of this Bill 
is very much appropriate and we will be supporting it and 
moving it on to committee after my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though I think that I’d be negligent if I didn’t take 
some opportunity this afternoon to reiterate the very important 
aspect research has in the medical field, and even in the 
scientific and academic field as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past our province has had some real 
difficulties in attracting research dollars to our province and 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

particularly to our universities. We’ve had a situation where the 
government has created an environment that hasn’t been very 
friendly to companies to come and do research in 
Saskatchewan, and as a result the university has really had a 
difficult time in attracting research dollars in the health field. 
 
When I talk to companies in the pharmaceutical area, they tell 
me that certainly this has been the case and has been the 
environment that has been created in this province, and that’s 
very unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is on the cusp of having an 
incredible opportunity in front of us in many aspects of 
research, but in particular I would like to speak a bit about the 
opportunities that we have in medical research with the 
Canadian light beam underway and the project well advancing 
in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of obvious advantages of 
research that the Canadian light beam is going to be able to take 
advantage of. Certainly issues of environmental studies, mining 
and metallurgy, but certainly in the whole area of 
pharmaceuticals, when you start being able to have a source of 
information that can look at things on a molecular level, that 
that is a very, a very important bit of a scientific opportunity 
that we have in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it sort of at times dismays me when I hear 
that Calgary, for example, had a light beam institute before we 
did in our own province. Calgary right now is advertising the 
fact that they’re only an hour away from the Canadian Light 
Source in Saskatoon, and encouraging people to set up research 
projects in Calgary, and availing themselves of the close 
proximity that they have for research to the light beam. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope that our province does 
better than just sort of becoming an itinerant location for people 
from outside of our province to come and run a batch of 
experiments for a week or two and collect the data in an 
electronic form and then disappear to other parts of the world to 
do the advanced research from the data they collected in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That may do a very good job for the hospitality and the hotel 
industry in Saskatoon as these itinerant researchers come in, do 
their projects, and leave, but it doesn’t do very much to 
encourage and enhance basic research in our province. 
 
And so I think it’s very important that we really do everything 
we can to take advantage of the synergies of the Light Source to 
really build on the opportunities in research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I’ve toured the university I’ve had the 
opportunity to meet with some of the people that are doing 
research in many of the fields and some of them are very 
extremely advanced and very forward-thinking in terms of the 
way they’re approaching some of the challenges of research. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to encourage and give 
accolades to those researchers who are working so hard to see 
to it that their projects are recognized and funded in an 
appropriate way. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the other side of research is — and when you go 
to the university quite often you notice this — is that you can’t 
do it in a vacuum. You need a proper physical environment. 
You need some laboratory space, you need some office space 
adjacent to it so that you can do your projects and so that the 
people that work on your research team can have a suitable 
environment to conduct these experiments. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s also very important that that whole 
thing is recognized and it’s part of the reason why we said it’s 
very important for this province to recognize the wisdom of the 
proposal of the University of Saskatchewan in terms of the 
integrated health sciences facility that’ll provide not only an 
area where there’s academic training and learning going on, but 
there is an opportunity to provide the physical environment for 
the research that has to be coupled with this whole endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people who do research are a very special group 
of people. They not only are very curious about how scientific 
thought and knowledge is progressed; they also have a great 
desire to make sure that they transmit and communicate their 
desire and their thoughts and their knowledge that they acquire 
through the research to other people. 
 
And that’s . . . it’s an appropriate place to be at in a university, 
and especially a teaching university that has the five health 
sciences disciplines that are important to recognize as a real 
strength. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the thoughts that were in the Fyke report 
that was tabled last year was a clear understanding that research 
is an integral and important part of the whole health scene. And 
Mr. Fyke recommended that the province increase its 
commitment to research to a percentage of the health budget — 
I believe it was 1 per cent of the health budget should be 
committed to basic research in the province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that this is 
recognized. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s clear that if people look at 
all of the challenges that we have before us in the health field, 
that we recognize that there is no one single small way we’re 
going to solve all the problems, we’re going to have to have a 
very coordinated and dedicated response to these issues and 
research is a critical component of this. And certainly to create 
the mechanism, and this Bill does, to provide for the 
opportunity of the funding for research is an important step 
forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it is important that we create these 
mechanisms, but it’s even more important that we create the 
environment and we send out a clear message to our academic 
community, to this province, to this nation, and internationally 
that we are determined to create an environment whereby 
advanced research can happen in our province. 
 
I would like nothing better, Mr. Speaker, than to hear that the 
project that they are undertaking at the synchrotron to try to 
actually develop the funding and the support for a dedicated 
light beam, dedicated to medical research, I’m hoping that that 
initiative by the Canadian Light Source is going to be 
successful. In fact, even more successful that down the road that 
we will hear that major research initiatives or major research 
companies will indeed come to Saskatchewan and support it. 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re very supportive of research in this 
province, we’re very supportive of the fact that this Bill does 
indeed create the mechanism for funding for research. And 
we’ll be pleased to move it to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Ethanol Fuel Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
right is the deputy premier of Industry and Resources, Larry 
Spannier. Behind me and to my right is Michael Fougere, who’s 
the director of strategic investment attraction. And immediately 
behind me is Dave Kutcher, who is the senior project leader on 
the ethanol file. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I, just for 
the interest of the minister, I wanted to read a paragraph from 
an article that was written in a magazine called Emissions. It’s 
an eastern magazine that was written by a fellow by the name of 
Doug Nixon. And the article was “The short-term ethanol 
strategy for the Saskatchewan Party.” And it says: 
 

Even though not in government, the Saskatchewan Party 
can nevertheless hold onto its leadership role (as) on the 
ethanol issue through a combination of deft political 
footwork, and always maintaining and displaying as good 
or better working knowledge of the subject than its NDP 
counterparts. 

 
(16:00) 
 
And I know the minister would be very interested to know that 
that article was published in the East. So with that, I would 
move on to something that the former minister said. And this 
was at a breakfast luncheon on Tuesday, November 6. And he 
said: 
 

So what is the government strategy? Our strategy is that, as 
a first step, we’re going to build an existing technology that 
will allow a grain-based ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. 
We want that industry to be built upon the strength and 
sound business plans and direct private sector investments. 

 
And later, on March 21 in Hansard, he said in this House: 
 

That’s why I’m very pleased to tell you today, our 
government has announced a plan that will create an 
investment climate required for the private sector . . . for 
the private sector to build a vibrant ethanol industry in the 
province. Our plan is the greenprint for ethanol production, 
which will result in extensive consultations with 
businesses, industry, and the people of the province. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to make it very clear, the ethanol industry 
in Saskatchewan will be built upon the strengths of sound 

business plans and direct private sector investment. 
 
He went on to say later: 
 

What this policy does do, Mr. Speaker, is it does not pick 
winners and losers, nor does it dictate the size and locations 
of those facilities. (And) I believe . . . this policy will 
provide a foundation for a good mix of plants of various 
sizes across the province. 

 
So assuming that all those consultations with different 
businesses have indeed taken place and they’ve looked at a 
number of business plans and so on and so forth, how is that 
still the government strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to say 
to the member opposite, that is the government strategy, it was 
the government strategy, and it will be the government strategy 
in the future. 
 
With respect to ethanol development, I would ask the member 
to spend a couple of minutes and look through the Greenprint 
document that we have produced that outlines ethanol 
development as the government sees it in this province. 
 
I noted the member opened her line of questions with a 
comment that was obviously written by someone very close to 
her, should be an immediate family member I would assume. 
We welcome, I want to say, a critique of our ethanol strategy by 
members of the Saskatchewan Party opposition. I would have 
preferred it to be in a positive light, sir, to help us establish a 
good developmental process. 
 
But they can’t unhinge themselves from the concept that this 
provincial government is willing to assist in supporting the 
communities who want to develop ethanol in this province and 
who want to develop an intensive livestock industry in this 
province. And they can’t unhinge themselves from the concept 
that there shouldn’t be a nickel of public funds. 
 
We, on the other hand, are saying that it will be a private sector 
driven industry; that the majority shareholders, the large 
shareholders, will be private sector; that there will be room for 
community investment; and that we will backfill, through 
Crown Investments Corporation, through a direct investment if 
it’s required and if it makes business sense. 
 
And the member from Shaunavon asks why? Well let me tell 
him why. I’ll tell him why. Because businessmen and women in 
his community initially came to this government asking for a 
loan guarantee. And after discussions . . . Oh, he mouths a bad 
word, Mr. Chairman. He should go home and ask the people 
who I met with, and he should ask them directly what they’re 
saying about what he is doing in his community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say to that member from Shaunavon that they initially 
said they would like the government to look in terms of a loan 
guarantee to support their proposal for ethanol development in 
Shaunavon. 
 
And I said that, when I met with them, that there were private 
sector investors who were coming to this province who said 
they wanted to put money into the ethanol development. And 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

you know, subsequently they met with these folks; and 
subsequently they met with other community groups in this 
province; and they signed a memorandum of understanding 
with a private sector company, a private sector investor, and 
that member should be I think a little more straightforward with 
his position. 
 
We have produced our ethanol Greenprint — it’s here. And we 
have been very clear in terms of attracting private sector 
investment to help us develop this industry here in this 
province, and we’re going to do that. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, next that member will stand up and she 
will say that ethanol development was not a concept or not an 
idea of this government; that these people were the idea people 
who decided that should be developing ethanol here in this 
province. 
 
So I’ll table my plan today. I ask her to table their plan. Mr. 
Chairman, I say they don’t have one. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Our plan was actually in a news release last 
fall. Anyone who cares to access that can; if you can use your 
high-speed Internet perhaps, you would find it to your 
advantage. 
 
I would also like to address the minister’s insinuating that 
perhaps Doug Nixon and I were friends. I’ve never met the man 
— never, ever met Doug Nixon, the writer of the Emissions 
magazine. So I’m sorry, he’s not a personal friend of mine at 
all. 
 
With that it’s interesting that he says that they are welcoming 
private sector investors but they are going to invest because 
they see a need. And at the Crown Investments Corporation 
Committee meeting on May 7, I had the opportunity to talk to 
Mr. Hart at that meeting. And I asked him there, was that . . . 
are you aware of any projects that’s being proposed in our 
province that have indicated that they’re not interested in CIC 
investments, that they have enough capital or are putting 
together enough capital on their own without CIC investments? 
 
And Mr. Hart said, no I’m not aware of any projects that have 
said that they specifically don’t want our capital. The ones that 
I’ve talked to indicate that they would like us to invest, as I 
said, under the concept of facilitating their community 
investment. 
 
And so further I asked him, how do you know then if there is a 
need for you to become involved in the industry? And he 
replied, so far the individuals we’ve talked to have told us that 
they want us to be involved. Well that’s kind of interesting. If 
communities and groups come and ask Mr. Hart if they, you 
know, CIC would be involved, I can’t see groups that are not 
interested in CIC money setting up a coffee appointment with 
Mr. Hart and saying, oh by the way we just thought we’d chat 
about the weather because we’re not interested. 
 
Of course they’re not going to come to him if they’re not 
interested. So when I questioned him if there was any studies 
done, if there’s any sort of, you know, doing a realization, is 
there communities out there who are building or looking at 
building an ethanol industry, doing the feasibility studies, doing 

business plans, investing the money in that type of work, that 
have not approached CIC for money, how would the 
government even be aware unless he gives them the time to 
develop the plans that they are working on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite, it’s clear where she comes from. It’s hurry up and 
slow down. It’s hurry up and slow down because we don’t want 
to see development. 
 
And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, industry are developing 
ethanol opportunities in Manitoba. I can say to that member that 
I’ve met with a private industry entity who is right now in the 
process of putting together ethanol in Manitoba. And you say, 
slow down. 
 
Well I say to you, Madam, that this government will not slow 
down. This government is moving on ethanol development 
over, through, or around you people in the opposition. It’s going 
to happen. And it’s going to happen with private sector 
investment. It’s going to happen with community investment. 
And if it’s necessary, it will happen with a component of public 
sector investment. 
 
Now this is a pretty difficult concept for those members to 
understand. And I recognize that. The member from Swift 
Current is quite interested in getting into the debate and I 
welcome that. Certainly all of his economic development 
expertise has been welcomed in Swift Current, and would be 
welcomed here in the province, but we’ll deal with him a little 
later. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I want to say to members of the 
Saskatchewan Party that we will develop this industry. And I 
want to say to members of the opposition that we are in the 
process of developing regulations that will put the guidelines 
around how that development takes place. 
 
And I will share with members opposite that the development 
and the regulations and the policy and the developmental 
scheme that we are putting forward will require that there is a 
large private sector investment component in any ethanol 
development, that will recognize that there needs to be room for 
private sector capital from Saskatchewan in terms of a 
developmental proposal. 
 
I want to say to that member that there will be room in our 
ethanol mandate policy for large entities and there will be room 
set aside for smaller entities. 
 
Now the member opposite may want to pay a little attention to 
it. And I know she’s going to want to focus on private or public 
sector development, and I think she might want to talk about 
exclusivity — I’m not sure about that — but we can go through 
all of that this afternoon. 
 
But I want to say to that member, we’re going to work with the 
communities in this province. We’re going to develop this 
industry. We’re going to create jobs. We’re going to produce 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

 

ethanol. There’s going to be a by-product, the wet and dry 
distillers grain that’s going to be fed to cattle, the 750,000 
calves that we have in this province that are being exported. 
 
We’re going to be feeding those cattle here in the province. And 
we’re going to have intensive livestock here, and there’s going 
to be Saskatchewan men and women working at that livestock 
industry. And we’re going to build it and we’re going to attempt 
to attract a packing industry and a secondary processing 
industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, all the time these guys, all the time these 
guys are going to say, well you’ve got to slow down. You need 
to slow down and you need to wait. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we took their advice, we would be slowing 
down and waiting for an ethanol industry to develop, not here in 
Saskatchewan, but in the neighbouring province of Manitoba. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I like Mr. Doer; I think he’s a 
great guy. But I tell you what. If I’m going to support ethanol 
development, it’s going to be here in this province and it’s not 
going to be in the neighbouring provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say to that member, 
we are not going to hurry up and slow down. We’re going to 
work with the people who want to develop an industry here in 
this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this weekend was a real tough 
weekend for members of the Saskatchewan Party. You know 
what happened? Mr. Speaker, it rained. It rained in this 
province. It rained. Can you believe it, Mr. Speaker? It rained. 
After coming off one of the driest years, we had rain. 
 
It rained in Swift Current and it rained in Shaunavon and it 
rained in Morse and it rained in Herbert and Moose Jaw and 
Regina. 
 
And do you want to know something, Mr. Speaker? The 
members of the Saskatchewan Party came in here on Monday 
morning with long faces. Do you want to know why? Because it 
was an area of gloom and doom that they couldn’t continue. 
 
And you know something? This year in May, we had an 
interesting thing happen because the number of people working 
in this province increased by 11,100 after a year, a difficult 
year, 2001. And do you want to know something, Mr. Speaker? 
They came in with long faces because you know what, they 
couldn’t talk the gloom and doom of a difficult year. So what 
did we get? We got rain and we got an increase in jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you want to know something, what they are doing today? 
Today is — what? —Wednesday afternoon, she’s day 56 . . . 
60, day 60 today of this session and we are debating, we are 
debating Bill no. what? The piece of legislation that is putting 
in place the framework to create millions of dollars of 
investment, to create hundreds of jobs, to diversify agriculture 
in rural Saskatchewan. And do you want to know something, 
Mr. Speaker? Did they stand up in this House and say we 

support this development? The answer is no, sir. 
 
You know what they said? Hurry up and slow down. Hurry up 
and slow down. Don’t you get that ethanol industry moving. 
Don’t you work with people in my community to develop 
ethanol. And the member from Shaunavon stands in the back 
grinning because he knows what the people in his community 
are saying. 
 
And they’re saying, work with us, Government of 
Saskatchewan. They’re saying, work with the private sector, 
Government of Saskatchewan. They’re saying, work with 
communities, Government of Saskatchewan. And they’re 
saying, it’s time to be positive about ethanol development and 
move this file forward. That’s what they’re saying. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they should start reading the editorials. And 
they should start reading the letters to the editor that are coming 
in saying, quit playing politics with economic development in 
rural Saskatchewan. Put your personal political self-interests 
behind you for a change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the course of this debate will show clearly a 
difference between the Saskatchewan Party and this 
government. And I want to tell you what the difference is, Mr. 
Speaker. The difference is we’re going to act, we’re going to 
move this ethanol file forward, we’re going to create jobs and 
job opportunities for Saskatchewan people, we’re going to 
create investment opportunities for Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. And they want to stall it. 
 
I say to them, you can bellow all you want and you can whine 
in this legislature because things are going well with respect to 
jobs and the fact that we got rain and the fact that we’re 
producing the historic piece of legislation that’s going to allow 
us to create an ethanol industry and lead Canada in ethanol 
production. We’re going to do that in spite of them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That 
was one of the best stump speeches I ever heard. Is it not a fact, 
Mr. Minister, isn’t it a fact, Mr. Minister, that your desperation 
on this timetable has a lot more to do with your electoral 
successes than a decent ethanol industry in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, let me ask that 
member what’s to be gained by waiting. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to point out that the minister 
did a rant that as much as he likes Mr. Doer, he is not going to 
help the Manitoba ethanol industry expand because he’s going 
to make it happen here in the province. 
 
And he made reference to someone who approached him and 
talked to him and I believe he’s referring to Canadian biofuels; 
and the president, John McCook, who is building or working on 
a ethanol plant in Manitoba, said if this deal is signed by the 
government, that’s where his next plant will be. So this 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

government’s policy is the best policy I’ve ever seen to grow an 
ethanol industry in Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — We can talk about commercial oil. We can 
talk about ADM (Archer Daniels Midland Company), we can 
talk about Iogen, we can talk about Canadian biofuels, and 
there’s a few others that I can’t think of right now, that are 
hesitating to invest in this province because of this exclusive 
deal that this government refuses to explain or address in an 
honest manner. 
 
When they’ve had a minister in the past who said it’s going to 
be driven by the private investment . . . which in truth it’s not 
going to happen that way. We’re going to have Sask ethanol. 
 
The minister stood there and did a rant on how we’re going to 
build this, we’re going to build that, we’re going to make this 
happen, we’re going to make that happen, and the private 
investors are saying, guess what? Get out of our way. 
 
How’s all this been working for the government so far? I would 
like the minister to stand up and say, exactly, lay it out for the 
producers of the province who are interested in this industry, 
how it’s going to help the farm gate if it’s 40 per cent 
government owned and 60 per cent owned by one company. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
obviously wasn’t listening. I said we’re looking for a major 
investor, which to my mind . . . And we’ve already had a 
commitment by one investor who said, we’ll invest up to 60 per 
cent in a plant. 
 
And I said two minutes ago to the member opposite that the 
policy is going to ensure that there’s room for local private 
sector investment here within our province. 
 
And we’ve met with people from Tisdale and Shaunavon and 
Melville and all over this province and there’s going to be room 
for private sector investment. And I said as well that, if it’s 
required, Crown Investments Corporation will look and if 
there’s a business case to be made, we’ll backfill the balance. 
That’s what I’ve said. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, that member may choose 
not to hear that. But I’m telling you, and I will say it one more 
time, we’re going to be looking for a large equity investment 
from private sector who are going to drive, who are going to 
have the management expertise, and the operational expertise, 
and they are going to drive this, sir. And there is going to be 
room for Saskatchewan investors to put money into these 
ethanol plants as well. 
 
And I’ve said as well, Mr. Speaker, we will look on a case by 
case basis with respect to Crown Investments Corporation. If it 
makes some business sense, if it makes some economic sense 
for us, we’ll look at investing in that as well. 
 
So is it going to be driven by the private sector? The answer is 
absolutely yes. The vast majority of the capital in any proposal 
will have to come from the private sector. There is going to be, 
I will say one more time, room for local investors such as — 

well I’m not going to mention names — but the folks that have 
been talking very publicly about working with a large investor. 
And there’s going to be room for other investors, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
We’re open to looking at anyone who’s interested in bringing 
money to this province to develop this industry. We’re also 
interested in working with private sector people to capitalize the 
intensive livestock industry that’s going to be a component of 
this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fairly clear that the members opposite 
want to play politics. And what they should do is they should 
sometime — they should sometime — listen to what people in 
their constituency are saying. And I’m just going to end a letter 
from a guy by the name of John Persson from Melville: 
 

If we lose this project, the Liberals and Saskatchewan 
parties and the media are clearly to blame. 

 
And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, that is exactly right. But I tell 
you we’re going to, as I said, we’re going to work over them, 
through them, under them, around them. We are going to 
develop this industry. We’re not going to hurry up and wait. 
 
And you want to know about political time frame. You know 
what satisfies your political time frame, and you know what 
issues satisfy your political time frame? No rain, a decrease in 
jobs, a downturn in the economy, no development of ethanol, 
no development of the forest industry. That would serve your 
political purposes. 
 
But I tell you what, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan 
are well aware that we’ve had just about $1 billion invested in 
the forest industry in the last two or three years, and there’s 
another billion coming. 
 
They know that there’s going to be ethanol development around 
this province, they know there’s going to be intensive livestock 
tied to it, and they also know that the Saskatchewan Party will 
do anything in their power to stop development of anything in 
this province. 
 
They haven’t had a positive idea. They won’t have a positive 
idea. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they’re going to sit in the 
opposition sides and that’s why that member’s going to sit in 
the back corner. 
 
He can get elected in that area of the province perhaps another 
three or four times; but you know something, Mr. Speaker, he 
will never graduate from that back corner on the opposition side 
because he doesn’t deserve to be anyplace else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
want to actually extend this bit of information to the minister. It 
rained wonderfully in the Cypress Hills and I’m here to declare 
today that the drought is over in the Cypress Hills. 
 
But I didn’t hear a single person thanking the NDP government 
for it. Not a single person was gratified enough by your efforts 
on their behalf to thank you for the rain. 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Party isn’t interested in seeing 
this industry slowed down. The Saskatchewan Party is 
interested in seeing this business, this potential for 
Saskatchewan, developed at an equitable pace by people who 
know what they are doing. 
 
Right to this day, CIC doesn’t have a clue what they’re doing 
about ethanol. And you’re talking about investing about $100 
million of taxpayers’ money in an industry that we have no 
experience with. That sounds to me like a recipe for another 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company). It sounds to me like another black hole like ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan). We’re 
putting all kinds of taxpayers’ money at risk. 
 
Now if you’re asking me will I support any CIC involvement, I 
think I would have to say that as a last resort, as a guarantor of a 
loan, at last resort, I might consider that. But that’s not what 
you’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re talking about an equity position. That’s a 
significantly different position than a loan guarantee. And I 
think that the taxpayers of this province would like to see 
private industry take the lead in this and have an opportunity to 
develop this industry before — before — the government jumps 
in with $100 million of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you prepared to stand here today — are you 
prepared to stand here today — and guarantee each of these 
communities that have talked about an ethanol plant the 
opportunity to find and source their own financing before CIC 
weasels its way in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there you have 
it. Now the economic geniuses on the other side say, put up 
loan guarantees. You take all of the risk and you take none of 
the benefits. That’s what they’re saying. That’s what that 
member just said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an option. Of course it’s an option. But I 
tell you I would rather have people who understand the markets, 
people who understand the industry, and people who come with 
the capital to develop. And we’re talking the private sector here. 
We are talking the private sector who would own the vast 
majority of the equity in any initiative, that there would be 
room for Saskatchewan people to invest in a corporation, in a 
development. 
 
And I said before that we’re willing to backfill, if we need to, 
with investment from Crown Investments Corporation. They 
say, don’t do an investment component. You shouldn’t ought to 
do it, you should do nothing; but you should put Crown 
Investments Corporation’s funds at risk through loan 
guarantees. Now that’s what he’s saying today. 
 
Now I want you to table your proposals, and I want you to table 
your plan with respect to economic development. Now is it, on 
ethanol, does it include an equity position? Does it include loan 
guarantees or not? Tell us today: does it include loan guarantees 
or not? And if it includes loan guarantees, would you admit that 
a loan guarantee puts capital at risk without an upside? 
 
You know, I would do a loan guarantee for my kids. And you 

know something? I do, Mr. Chairman. And I tell you I 
guarantee their mortgages when they go out to buy their first 
home. And do you want to know something? I think that’s a 
reasonable thing to do. 
 
But I tell you what — I’m not going to guarantee a loan 
guarantee for another company from goodness knows where. 
I’ll you what I’ll do. I’ll look at equity, and I’ll look at taking an 
equity position where there’s some upside to my investment. 
But I’m not willing to put money in the form of a straight loan 
guarantee at risk. And that’s what members are just saying here 
today. 
 
So this is what the difference is, you see, Mr. Speaker. These 
are the business geniuses who would put public money at risk 
through the form of a loan guarantee, but who adamantly 
oppose any equity investment in ethanol development. 
 
So the issue is: you put your money in a loan guarantee, you put 
it at risk, but don’t take an equity position. Well I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan want to have a 
component. They do. And I tell you they’re going to have the 
opportunity, they’re going to have the opportunity to invest. 
They’re going to have a component of these ethanol 
development plants to invest, whether these people opposite 
want them to or not. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re debating here today, I thought we 
might, a piece of legislation that allows this, sir — for this 
government to mandate a portion of our fuel and to support that 
throughout this province through a mandate of blended ethanol. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, it makes environmental sense and it 
makes economic sense, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
development of ethanol and it makes sense for agriculture. 
 
It makes sense for agriculture because it allows us to diversify. 
It allows us to value add on what we’re doing. You take grain 
and you turn it into ethanol. You take the by-product and you 
feed cattle, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this is about. 
 
Now these guys over here don’t like who has come forward 
with money. They pound on them in the papers and they pound 
on them in this legislation. So they don’t want that private 
sector component, that private sector money that has been 
offered to this province to develop ethanol. They slander, they 
slam these people every chance they get. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why? Straight political reasons. Nothing 
more, nothing less. And then they say, don’t you rush into, 
don’t you move on this ethanol file; don’t you take this private 
sector investment and put it together with local capital and 
invest in an ethanol industry. They say, don’t do that; you’ve 
got to slow down and you’ve got to wait. 
 
Well why, Mr. Speaker? Why? Do you want to know? Because 
it doesn’t serve his political interests to have a great big 
development sitting in Belle Plaine and it doesn’t serve his 
political interest to have a big investment in Shaunavon — 
that’s why. That’s why, Mr. Speaker. That’s why. 
 
And do you know something? They cannot support anything 
that speaks positively about creating jobs and job opportunities 
for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, anything positive, they 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

shy away from. Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a thing that the people 
in this province do in a positive way that they support. 
 
But do you know what they do support, Mr. Speaker? They 
support political power for political power’s sake. This is not a 
new story. They’ve tried to disassociate themselves from their 
cousins of the 1980s who ran this province into deficit after 
deficit after deficit, even in spite of the fact that they worked in 
the very offices of those ministers, Mr. Speaker; even in spite of 
the fact that they used those people as references to get jobs 
inside government. They, Mr. Speaker, don’t want to talk about 
that. They don’t want to talk about their record of the ’80s. 
They don’t want to talk about their connection to the people of 
the 1980s. They want people to forget that. 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, people will not forget that. 
That’s why they’re going to be in opposition. 
 
And they want us to stop the development of ethanol in this 
province. They want us to stop the development of an intensive 
livestock industry in this province. Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
going to happen. That’s not going to happen because we’re 
going to continue to work with men and women in this province 
who see a future, who see opportunity, and who are not 
ideologically hidebound like those folks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move this file forward and they’re 
going to be some disappointed because there are going to be 
announcements shortly. They’re going to have to bite the bullet. 
They’re going to have to suck it up, Mr. Speaker, because the 
people of Saskatchewan are moving forward. They’re moving 
forward without these people. 
 
But do you know something, Mr. Speaker? They’re just as 
happy marching alone because they wake up with a smile on 
their face. They know there are opportunities here in this 
province. They’re going out to capture them and they know 
their government is right behind them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I think the minister has got 
something wrong with his view of the provincial landscape. The 
people aren’t moving forward with this government. The people 
are standing there with their heels dug in, being drug by this 
government against their will. 
 
I’ll tell you in response to the minister’s tirade there, if he wants 
to understand why we’re suggesting go slow, I think a reference 
to the Bill itself might be a good place to start. You know, we 
got this Bill very early on in the session. Actually it’s no. 1. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Chairman, this particular Bill has less in it than anything 
we’ve seen this whole session. This has less in it. 
 
Now that’s a pretty good reason why an official opposition, Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition would want to take its time before 
we jump into bed on this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I looked at this Bill and I looked at the short 
title, its entitled The Ethanol Fuel Act . . . 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I looked at this Bill 
pretty carefully and, as I said, the short title is The Ethanol Fuel 
Act. And then section 2 in this Act talks about interpretation 
and gives a number of definitions. It goes through from (a) to 
(h), a total of eight definitions. 
 
It talks about such items as the consumer which means the 
consumer as defined in The Fuel Tax Act, 2000;” (b) is the 
definition of distributor, which means a person in Saskatchewan 
who sells or provides fuel to consumers; (c) is an enforcement 
officer, that means any prescribed person or class of prescribed 
persons; (d) is ethanol, that means ethanol produced from 
biomass or renewable feed stocks; (e) is ethanol-blended fuel, 
that means, Mr. Chairman, if you can believe this, it means fuel 
that is blended with ethanol in the prescribed manner; (f) is fuel, 
and that happens to mean fuel as defined in The Fuel Tax Act, 
2000; (g) we have a definition of the minister here — Mr. 
Chairman, apparently, we have to define the minister as a 
certain classification because ordinary classifications don’t 
apply, it means a member of the Executive Council to whom for 
the time being the administration of this Act is assigned; (h) 
defines the word prescribed, that means prescribed in the 
regulations. 
 
Now we have eight definitions there, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We move on to the third part of this Bill which has minister’s 
responsibilities. The sum total of the minister’s responsibilities, 
according to this Act, Mr. Chairman, is (a) the blending of 
ethanol with fuel; and the promotion of a cleaner environment 
through the use of ethanol. The minister is going to be 
responsible for the production and use of ethanol including 
those two matters, the blending of ethanol with fuel and the 
promotion of a cleaner environment through the use of ethanol. 
 
On page 2, on page 2, Mr. Chairman, we get to the use of 
ethanol-blended fuel required. And I’d like to read this for you 
because it’s mind . . . it’s very enlightening, let’s put it that 
way. 
 

On and after the prescribed date, every distributor must sell 
only ethanol-blended fuel. 
 
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to: 
 

(a) any prescribed fuel; or 
 

(b) fuel used for a prescribed purpose. 
 
And then we get to enforcement and compliance. Now what 
we’ve got here are the possibilities for enforcement — who will 
be given the powers of enforcement and under which Acts they 
will be allowed that enforcement capability. 
 
Finally we move on to no. 6, where we’ve got offence and 
penalties. You know, the telling thing about this particular piece 
of legislation is that section 6, under offence and penalties we 
have more written than any other section. 
 
We have — just a few definitions — we have just two areas of 
responsibility assigned to the minister. We have an indication of 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

 

where ethanol-blended fuels may be used. We talk about 
enforcement and compliance. And then we have a whole long 
list of penalties and offences. 
 
That’s rather typical of this government. I think this says, in an 
allegorical sense, the very approach of this government to this 
industry — you do it our way or we’re going to penalize you for 
it. 
 
And this lays out offences in a very kind of precise way when 
it’s applied to the actual Act and how the use of ethanol fuel is 
distributed and provided for in this province. But the analogy, if 
you draw a larger picture, says that when penalties are the 
largest component of this particular Bill, that, in reality, is 
what’s going to happen to the industry, given the government’s 
involvement. 
 
The industry itself is going to be penalized because if they don’t 
play the game the way you’ve outlined the rules, they will be in 
a position of offence and the penalties will be non-participation 
by anybody who doesn’t play the game your way. 
 
I’d like to take a little time to read this entire section because 
it’s really, it’s really quite enlightening in some ways. It says 
here: 
 

No person shall: 
 

(a) make or participate in, or assent to or acquiesce in 
making, a false or misleading statement in any document 
provided to the minister or an enforcement officer 
pursuant to this Act; 
 
(b) destroy, alter, mutilate or dispose of any book or 
record, if the book or record is required to be kept for the 
purposes of this Act; 
 
(c) make or participate in, or assent to or acquiesce in 
making, a false or misleading entry in a book or record, if 
the book or record is required to be kept for the purposes 
of this Act; 
 
(d) omit or participate in, or assent to or acquiesce in 
omitting, an entry of a material fact in a book or record, 
if the book or record is required to be kept for the 
purposes of this Act; or 
 
(e) contravene any other provision of this Act or the 
regulations. 

 
Now all we’ve got through is the first section of article no. 6. 
 
Moving on to: 
 

(2) Every person who contravenes any provision of this Act 
is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction: 
 

(a) in the case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding 
$10,000; 
 
(b) in the case of a corporation, to a fine not exceeding 
$50,000. 

 

And: 
 

(3) If a corporation commits an offence pursuant to this 
Act, any officer or director of the corporation who directed, 
authorized, assented to, acquiesced in or participated in the 
commission of the offence is guilty of the offence and 
liable on summary conviction to the penalties mentioned in 
this section whether or not the corporation has been 
prosecuted or convicted. 

 
Now we’ve got through the penalty section and move to page 3 
where we have the real interesting stuff. We have the 
regulations. Now I could read all of these regulations and . . . 
Do you want to . . . Should I read these regulations just for the 
record? I think the people in the House today might be 
interested in how little these regulations actually say. 
 

7 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 
regulations: 
 

(a) defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of 
any word or expression used in this Act, but not 
defined in this Act; 

 
(b) prescribing persons or classes of persons as 
enforcement officers; 

 
(c) prescribing a date for the purposes of subsection 
4(1); 

 
(d) prescribing fuel for the purposes of clause 4(2)(a); 

 
(e) prescribing a purpose for which fuel may be used 
for the purposes of clause 4(2)(b); 

 
(f) respecting the records and documents that a 
distributor must keep for the purposes of this Act and 
requiring the keeping of those records; 

 
(g) respecting the handling of storage of 
ethanol-blended fuel; 

 
(h) prescribing any other matter or thing required or 
authorized by this Act to be prescribed in the 
regulations; (and) 

 
(i) respecting any other matter or thing the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council considers necessary or expedient 
to carry out the intent of this Act. 

 
You know, this whole . . . this whole Act isn’t worth the paper 
it’s written on. It doesn’t say anything until you get to the final 
two parts of the regulations. Mr. Chairman, (h) says: 
 

prescribing any other matter or thing required or authorized 
by this Act to be prescribed in the regulations; (and) 

 
(i) respecting any other matter or thing the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council considers necessary or expedient to 
carry out the intent of this Act. 

 
Coming into force, the final section. 
 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

8 This Act comes into force on proclamation. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there’s nothing in this Act. There’s nothing here. 
We’ve got eight definitions on the first page, two minister’s 
responsibilities outlined, the use of ethanol-blended fuel 
required, enforcement and compliance, offence and penalties, 
and then regulations. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, if the minister wants to know why we’re 
interested in slowing this process down, I think we have good 
cause to do that. I think we have every reason to do it, because 
this Act says nothing. 
 
Everything that might be important will be in the regulations. 
That means that the government can and will do anything it 
wants concerning this industry, whether it’s to the benefit of the 
industry or not, whether it’s to the benefit of the province or 
not. And I think that if we were not an efficient and effective 
and a serious opposition, we would have rubber-stamped this 
right after you asked us to and passed it on. 
 
But we simply can’t. There is too much unsaid here and too 
much freedom and latitude left to the government with no 
appeal, no way of countermanding the government’s decisions 
in these regards. 
 
So I would like to say to the minister that the reason we have 
decided that we need to go slow on this has a lot to do with 
what is left unsaid in this particular piece of legislation and — 
on one hand — and on the other hand what it is you have 
actually said about the ethanol industry and the inability of the 
opposition and the people of this province to make sense of 
your approach. 
 
Now if you’re asking me to justify what I just said, I will go 
back, I will go back to statements made by the previous 
minister, who is providing background support for the minister 
of Economic Development, and he is saying that things have to 
go just the way the current minister is indicating it ought to. But 
he sang from a different song sheet on March 22. 
 
Mr. Minister, the previous minister said something completely 
contrary to what you’re telling us now. The previous minister 
said this industry would be driven by, driven by the private 
sector. We are not seeing this industry driven by the private 
sector. We are seeing it driven by your government and your 
political ambition, the needs of your political party. 
 
We’re seeing a timetable that is being hurried up to your 
economic development benefit and that of your government — 
the government that is desperate for support in rural 
Saskatchewan. A government that hasn’t been able to hold a 
seat in rural Saskatchewan in 1999 and is likely to lose a lot 
more in the next election. A government that is desperate for 
anything. A government that is driven to desperation will do 
anything. And right now your government is committing up to 
$100 million in the ethanol industry to advance your political 
timetable. That’s all there is to it. 
 
Mr. Minister, we know of several communities that had no 
interest in CIC’s involvement in an equity position or in a 
lender of last resort position. We know several of them. And 
I’m sure that if they were given their druthers, they would just 

as soon proceed with the plans that they had in place, the plans 
they were developing, before this whole brouhaha established 
. . . came about. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if we’re talking about a lender of last resort, 
that’s exactly what we’re talking about. It’s the organization 
that provides money when every other opportunity has been 
exhausted, when every other lender has been checked out, when 
every other source of funding has been considered, applied to, 
and/or refused. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, a lender of last resort is just that. When 
every other avenue, every other option has been exhausted, then 
I would grant the opportunity for CIC to participate. 
 
But if that has not been accomplished, Mr. Minister, then we’re 
not talking about a lender of last resort. We’re talking about 
somebody jumping into this, this situation prematurely, 
unnecessarily, and maybe even against the will of some of the 
communities that want to proceed with ethanol. 
 
We all read the story in the Leader-Post of the community of 
Weyburn and their concerns. They didn’t come running, as I 
understand it, to CIC for money . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
They came to SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation). You’re saying they came to SOCO? Would you 
table the evidence of that? 
 
I don’t understand, I don’t understand where you get that, I 
don’t understand where you get that information from because 
that is not the impression that we were left with in the story in 
the Leader-Post. And if the Leader-Post is wrong you can take 
that up with them. But I’m taking that at face value from the 
newspaper publications. 
 
If you want to know where the Saskatchewan Party stands on 
issues like this I’ll be very blunt and very direct. We stand very 
clearly on no grants for projects of this type. We stand very 
clearly on no equity positions in projects of this type. We have 
said this time and time again. We have enunciated this 
particular policy in a public forum. 
 
We have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I just told you what we 
would do about loan guarantees — lender of last resort. Last 
resort. Now you . . . the minister asked me, the minister asked 
me to state clearly where we stood. I’ve said three times here 
that we would accept a lender of last resort position. A lender of 
last resort ordinarily does not get involved unless the equity is 
already in place. 
 
The other thing I want to ask the minister is if we have a private 
sector investor who’s prepared to come here and invest $60 
million, if we have a private sector investor who’s ready to 
come here and invest $60 million, surely that’s enough under 
ordinary ratios for that private sector investor to leverage 
additional monies out of private sector funding. Surely with a 
$60 million pot of gold, some investor, some business, some 
entrepreneur might be able to go to a bank and say, I’ve got $60 
million. What can that leverage me for? How much money can I 
generate given a $60 million deposit? 
 
What could possibly be wrong with that approach? When I go 
to the bank and ask for financing for my little farm, when 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

 

business people go to the bank and ask for financing for their 
operations and they can put up 25 per cent equity, they’re 
probably good for a 75 per cent loan. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Now if we’ve got a $60 million equity by this company, what’s 
to say that they couldn’t generate, oh let’s say 300 or $400 
million? Why couldn’t they do that? Or is the economy of that 
project in question? Is there a business plan? Have they done 
the homework? Have they established the criteria they need for 
success? Or did they just come to CIC and say we think this is a 
good idea, we’ll put up $60 million, you put up the rest? And 
you would be prepared to jump into bed with a company that 
had that kind of a proposal? 
 
You’re talking about a company that has never manufactured a 
litre of ethanol. You’re talking about a company that’s never 
distributed a litre of ethanol. They’ve never built an ethanol 
plant. They’ve never been involved with ethanol in any respect. 
You’re talking about a company that has business experience in 
other areas but you’re not talking about an experienced ethanol 
developer, distributor, manufacturer. You’re not talking about 
any of those things. 
 
Now I would think that, as a taxpayer in this province, I’d be 
pretty reluctant to have my government commit a $100 million 
of our money in a project with a company that has so little 
experience. 
 
Why would you not, why would you not make the same kind of 
offer — if you’re prepared to do that, if you’re prepared to 
invest that kind of money on behalf of taxpayers — why 
wouldn’t you go to the companies that specialize in ethanol? 
Why would you pick one that never had anything to do with 
ethanol over and above companies that have had some kind of 
experience in that regard? 
 
I mean it doesn’t make sense that you’d invest the money to 
begin with. But if you’re going to risk that much money that 
belongs to taxpayers, ultimately, if you’re going to invest $100 
million on behalf of the taxpayers of this province, why would 
you not . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I’m not able to hear more than one 
speaker on both sides so I recognize the member for Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you’re going to 
invest $100 million on behalf of the taxpayers of this province, 
why would you not at least make the deliberate decision to go 
with a company that had some familiarity with the industry? I 
mean as a very minimal approach to this, wouldn’t that be the 
first question you would ask? 
 
I, as a business man, would say if I’m going to invest a lot of 
money on my behalf and on behalf of other people, I’m going to 
want to make sure that my partners know what they’re doing. 
And I think that’s one of the glaring difficulties with the 
proposal that has been brought to the government by CIC, if in 
. . . I’m sorry, by Broe industries, if in fact that’s the way it 
happened, and we’re not sure at this point that that’s exactly 
what occurred. 

On March 22, the previous minister in charge of the ethanol file 
said that this would be a private sector driven initiative. He was 
very clear about that. In fact he was so clear that we greeted his 
announcement with some enthusiasm. What happened in the 
short few weeks following March 22 that the government found 
it necessary to change their minds on that? Or was Broe and 
CIC’s marriage a marriage of convenience? Did it just seem 
suitable at the time? Was it a shotgun marriage? Was it the kind 
of thing that was meant to enhance and promote the ethanol 
industry or was it something else? Was it something that was 
intended to kind of throw people off the idea that the private 
sector could really take this initiative and could really run with 
this and in the meantime the government might get some credit 
for having made this particular arrangement work? 
 
I’m not so sure that we’ve been completely made aware of all of 
the ins and outs of this deal, but the more we look at it, the more 
questions we have. 
 
Now I was, I was really pleased in some respects when I got to 
my office this afternoon and found that the minister had written 
a letter to the Leader-Post which is headlined, “No exclusive 
deal to develop ethanol,” signed by the Minister of Industry and 
Resources. And I read through this and there were some 
questions that came to my mind as a result of seeing this letter 
in today’s paper. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to refer to this letter, 
paragraph by paragraph: 
 

The June 5 edition of the Leader-Post contained an 
editorial regarding the development of the ethanol industry 
in Saskatchewan. 
 

The minister goes on to say: 
 

Our government announced an ethanol strategy earlier this 
year — a strategy that included working with communities 
and the private sector to establish a viable ethanol industry 
in the province. 
 
(He goes on to say that) Since that time . . . 
 

Now I’ve underlined the words “since that time” because a 
question came to my mind. Let me just read the sentence in its 
entirety, Mr. Chairman: 
 

Since that time, a number of communities have been 
working with the private sector to develop ethanol projects 
across the province. Many of these projects make good 
economic sense, and are good investments for communities 
and good investments for the private sector. 

 
Mr. Chairman, the question I have for the minister is what about 
efforts made by those companies before this time? What about 
the communities that had plans in place, who had set up 
communities . . . committees in their community to look at 
ethanol, who had maybe even paid for feasibility studies, who 
had taken the initiative to source funding? What about those 
communities? Will they have the assurance that they will be 
able to proceed with their ethanol projects without the 
interference of the government? Will they have the 
opportunities to see their project come to fruition without the 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2002 

 

involvement of CIC? Will they have the opportunity to benefit 
from their own initiative without any particular government 
interference? 
 
I’m not convinced as of this time that that is going to happen. 
 
In some instances . . . the minister goes on to say in his letter: 
 

In some instances where projects will not proceed without 
some provincial investment — and where there is a solid 
business case — the province will consider financial 
participation. 

 
Now the minister has made that point in the House here several 
times. He says we will consider financial participation. 
 
You know the reality is, Mr. Chairman, that it’s not a matter of 
will consider, it’s a matter of must consider. I think the 
government must consider those situations. 
 
But again, I want to stress that they must be considered in a 
situation where the government becomes the lender of last 
resort — not the lender of first resort, not the guarantor of first 
resort, not the position of an equity holder, but the lender of last 
resort. 
 

I want to state for the record (the minister says in his letter) 
that the Government of Saskatchewan will not be entering 
into an exclusive agreement with the Broe Group of 
Companies, (you know that’s really the first good news 
we’ve heard on this file for sometime) to develop ethanol 
facilities in the province. Broe approached the Crown 
Investments Corporation (CIC) with a proposal whereby 
CIC would hold a minority equity position in the ethanol 
plants. 

 
What about additional loan guarantees? I need to ask that of the 
minister. You’re saying here in your letter that CIC would hold 
a minority equity position in the ethanol plants. Will CIC not in 
those situations also be prepared to take on a loan guarantee? 
Will it be one or the other? Will it be both? 
 
Those questions, I think, need to be asked and we haven’t seen 
that as part of the explanation here. If in fact, if in fact CIC 
takes an equity position and provides a loan guarantee, 
conceivably CIC or public money could be at a risk in a greater 
percentage than the minority position you’ve talked about. 
 
If you’ve totalled up an $80 million plant and CIC took an 
equity position of 40 per cent and provided loan guarantees, 
there is conceivably a situation where public money would be at 
much greater risk than we’ve been led to believe in this 
particular arrangement. 
 
The minister goes on to say: 
 

Exclusivity is not up for discussion, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan would be willing to assist in the 
development of an ethanol project in the province. 

 
Would the minister say . . . Well let me just go on; let me just 
read a little more of his letter here: 
 

I agree wholeheartedly with the view expressed in your 
editorial that there should not be any political games in 
developing the ethanol strategy in the province. 
 
Ethanol will be an important part of Saskatchewan’s future 
economic development. To be successful, though, it will 
require government, the Opposition, communities, and the 
private sector working together to support and encourage 
the many sound projects that are currently under 
consideration. 
 
It is my hope that all parties involved can come together in 
a joint effort to establish this industry for the benefit of 
producers, investors, and communities across the province. 

 
This letter was prepared apparently, and sent to the 
Leader-Post, by the Minister of Industry and Resources. 
 
Mr. Chairman, to be successful he says it will require 
government, the opposition, communities, and the private sector 
working together. The role of the government, Mr. Minister, in 
this particular industry was to establish a level playing field. It 
was to provide the framework for private sector involvement. It 
required the removal of the tax that affected ethanol in an unfair 
way. But really, Mr. Minister, that’s all it required of the 
government. 
 
It didn’t require special deals. It didn’t require special 
arrangements or negotiations. It didn’t require loan guarantees. 
It might have. I guess we could summarize that by saying 
government money if necessary, but not necessarily 
government money. But you’ve chosen to go — you’ve chosen 
to go — the route of government money first. And I think the 
people of this province are greatly troubled by that particular 
approach. 
 
The former minister of the ethanol file says that the government 
is not going to be the lender of last resort. I take it from his 
comments that the government would prefer to be involved as a 
first resort; that they think that the only way this particular file 
will ever get off the ground is if the government takes an active 
role in it. And I don’t believe that to be true. 
 
And the other thing I might point out to the former minister of 
the ethanol file is that in his own statements he said that the 
private sector would lead. In the situation we’ve got before us 
the private sector is not leading; the private sector is being 
co-opted, and are being asked to take a position that they do not 
find to their benefit, and the people of this province will not 
find it to the ultimate benefit of themselves as taxpayers and the 
industry generally. 
 
I think some of the headlines we’ve seen in the papers recently 
talk about the need for an ethanol industry, a health industry, to 
develop in this province; to come to fruition; to participate in 
the renewal of our rural economies. I don’t think there’s 
anybody in this province that disagrees with the potential and 
the opportunity that we have here. 
 
But I’m absolutely certain, having talked to many people in my 
own constituency and in constituencies around the province, 
that they are leery, absolutely leery, of any proposal to bring the 
government into the ethanol industry front and centre — as an 



June 12, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

 

equity player, or as a high-stakes investor in some other 
fashion. And I believe that we would be making a serious 
mistake if we allowed this particular Bill to proceed without 
having a much clearer indication of what the government’s 
intentions are. 
 
As I pointed out earlier, Mr. Deputy Chairman, this Bill does 
not contain any of the details that we need to make us feel 
comfortable with this proposal. And I would suggest that we 
need to continue asking questions on this particular Bill. 
 
We have many questions, as I indicated. Some of them will 
have to do with how this industry is going to develop, some of 
them will have to do with how this industry is going to share in 
terms of the distribution of ethanol, how . . . whether or not we 
will require certain plants or . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. It now being near 5 o’clock, the 
committee will rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 


