















































Hansard: May 10, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1313 
 May 10, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan still concerned 
about the government’s intentions with respect to long-term 
care fees. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed entirely by citizens of 
Yorkton, coming from the constituency of the Deputy Premier. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of 
petitions here and I’d like to first of all read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by good people from Hague, from Warman, 
from Saskatoon, from Osler, Martensville, and I would like to 
thank these people, Mr. Speaker, for putting the pressure on the 
government to have them reconsider those exorbitant health 
care fees. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a petition on behalf of citizens of the great province of 
Saskatchewan who were adamant in their address to the 
government to reconsider the long-term care fee increase. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Sheho, Foam Lake, Kelliher, Yorkton, and 
Melville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, and this 
petition is regarding the increase in long-term care fees for 
residents of long-term care. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the communities of 
Yorkton, Canora, and Springside, Saskatchewan, and I’m sure 
they are counting on the government to cancel the long-term fee 
increases. 
 
I’m pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
on behalf of citizens of the province who continue to petition 
the government to scrap the proposed long-term care fee 
increase. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on this petition today come from many 
communities: Tisdale, Melfort, Arborfield, Star City, Rosthern, 
Gronlid, Naicam, Pleasantdale, Brooksby, Prairie River. Mr. 
Speaker, people from across the province have expressed their 
concerns to the government. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens wishing to have fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan rolled back. And the 
prayer means . . . reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the community of Briercrest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
present several petitions — many pages, in fact — of petitions 
signed by residents of the community of Maple Creek, almost 
exclusively. The petition deals with the increase in long-term 
care fees, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition — or several petitions — on 
behalf of people in my constituency that would like the 
government to cancel the premium hike on long-term care. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks in my constituency, namely 
Lampman, Estevan, and Bienfait. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present on long-term care from citizens that 
all over this province are waiting with bated breath on the 
announcement today on what’s going to be happening on the 
long-term care situation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Especially the citizens in the Yorkton area as they are the 
people that signed this petition. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I pleased to 
rise today to present petitions on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan who are waiting for the long-term care fees to be 
rolled back to the original amount. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the good people of 
Carievale, Alida, Oxbow, Carnduff, Storthoaks, the southeast 
corner of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a number of petitions on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan who hope that the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government would realize the mistake they made and roll back 
the fees for long-term care, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the petitions are signed by residents of Saltcoats, 
Springdale, Willowbrook, and Yorkton, and several more pages 
from the city of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from 
citizens that are praying that the government will do the right 
thing today and cancel the long-term fee increases. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Girvin and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition this morning that . . . from citizens who are very 
concerned about the gouging that the government has proposed 
against those who are unable to protect themselves from 
society. And the petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people 
from the constituency of Yorkton, the constituency that belongs 
to the Deputy Premier, I believe. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present petitions from citizens all over Saskatchewan who are 
very concerned with the increase in long-term care home fees. 
Their prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon, Biggar, Yorkton, 
Melville, and the constituency of Saltcoats. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition from citizens who are concerned about the 
increase in long-term home . . . care home fees. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Jansen, Lanigan, 
Yorkton, and Saltcoats. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a . . . rise to 
present petitions on behalf of citizens concerned with this 
government’s plan to massively increase long-term care fees. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Wynyard and Jansen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province concerned about the 
long-term care increases, and I have a number of pages. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Unity, 
Battleford, Yorkton, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
petitions from citizens concerned about long-term care services 
and the costs thereof. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is from my constituency, signed 
by the citizens of Shaunavon. But I also would like to turn in 
another 20 petitions along with this, Mr. Speaker, from all 
corners of the province. 
 
And I think it would be appropriate to thank the citizens from 
all over Saskatchewan who took the time to sign this petition 
hoping to get the government to change its mind on this 
long-term care fee. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 8, 17, 18, 23, 24, and 31. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you to 
all . . . through you to all of the members of the legislature, I 
want to introduce some very special guests who are here in the 
west gallery. We have with us today the members of the 
Scottish national boxing team. Maybe ask them to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Along with their team officials and 
managers and the Canadian national boxing team. I’d ask them 
to stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — They are here in Regina to take part in the 
9th annual Ken Goff Memorial Boxing Classic which is taking 
place tonight at the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts, begins at 
8 p.m. The card tonight is important because it helps determine 
both the teams for the Commonwealth Games to be held in 
Manchester, England in August. If you miss the fight tonight, I 
think they’re also fighting in Moose Jaw on Monday night. 
 
So I also would like to introduce a Regina boxer who is on the 
Canadian national team and that’s Michael Walchuk. And if we 
could ask Michael to please stand. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we wish all of the boxers 
good luck in their bouts tonight and on Monday night and . . . 
But we wish you, Michael, a special wish to do very well 
because we want you to go to Manchester and represent 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that one of the things that they will see 
when they’re here is that parliament is all about the use of 
words in bouts as opposed to the use of fists. But they may 
wonder if we’re not getting close to their boxing profession 
when we get into question period. 
 
So welcome, and we appreciate the good, hard work that all of 
you are doing. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I also would like to invite our guests 
here today and hope they have a very good visit to 
Saskatchewan. And I hope the competition is great. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Speaker, that they’ll get to witness today 
is a little bit of the jousting in the legislature. And the difference 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

between yours and ours is in yours, there’s no hitting below the 
belt and here we do that quite frequently. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, two important people who help . . . who 
represent those who keep our homes and our streets safe and 
secure. 
 
Here we have, Mr. Speaker, the new president of the 
Saskatchewan police association, Evan Bray, and the executive 
officer of the police association, Bernie Eiswirth. And I’d ask 
you all to join me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of 
the official opposition, I too would like to welcome those two 
gentlemen here this morning. We realize the importance that 
they play in our society and the risks that they put themselves 
into on a daily basis for the welfare of this province. We 
appreciate the work they do. And welcome here. Would you 
join me, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you, 40 grade 11 and 12 students from the 
school of Macklin, in my constituency. They are accompanied 
by teachers Jim Todd, John Smith, Linda Kohlman, and Carol 
Moss. I’d like to welcome them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
the Assembly, a new resident in Saskatchewan, director of 
communications for the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Sitting in your gallery, Pam Bishop, who has moved here with 
her husband and daughter. And I would like all members to join 
me in welcoming here to the . . . her to the legislature today and 
to the province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you, 60 grade 4 and 5 students from the 
Langham Elementary School that’s seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’d just like to introduce the teachers that are with them, 
Mrs. Kasahoff, and Mrs. Yellowlees, and Mrs. Kolash, and 
Mrs. Buswell. And I look forward to visiting with the class 
from Langham later on. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Mother’s Day 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
coming Sunday we again take a moment to pause and give 
thanks to a very special group of people who play an important 
role in our lives — our mothers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without our mothers we would not have the 
privilege of talking about the valuable role they play in our 
lives, our homes, and our communities as we would not be here 
to talk about it. No doubt, Mr. Speaker, we can all think back to 
those days when we may have fallen, scratched our knees, only 
to have words of sympathy expressed by, who else, our 
mothers. Or the times we arrived home from school, running 
through the door to the smell of fresh baking wafting through 
the house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many words can be used to describe our mothers 
— thoughtful, caring, loving, encouraging, and the list goes on. 
As we celebrate Mother’s Day, let it not be the only day of the 
year when we take the time to think of our mothers and thank 
them for their hard work and dedication. May it just be a 
reminder of the importance of saying thank you to those so dear 
to us every day of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party caucus, to all 
the mothers of the province of Saskatchewan, we wish you a 
happy Mother’s Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Trade Organization Finalist for International Award 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform 
the House today regarding some good news in Saskatchewan’s 
export sector. 
 
The Market Intelligence Team of the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership was recently nominated as a finalist for an 
international award in the field of strategic intelligence. 
 
Competia, North America’s leading consultancy organization in 
the field of strategic intelligence, will be presenting the 
Champion in Strategic Intelligence award on Monday, May 13, 
2002 at the Competia Symposium in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, 
Mr. Speaker. This award recognizes those that have 
implemented innovative processes that have had a positive 
impact on the field of strategic planning and recognizes the hard 
work, dedication, and innovation displayed by those people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Candace Phelps, manager of Market Intelligence and 
Information Technology, will represent STEP’s (Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership Inc.) Market Intelligence Team at 
the awards ceremony on Monday night. Other team members 
include: Carrie Sirois, Tim Owens, Kyle Mitchell, Pat Chobot, 
and two term students from Saskatchewan’s universities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this young and innovative team of professionals, 
born and educated here in Saskatchewan, are setting the trend in 
strategic planning industry in North America. The nomination 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

 

for this award acknowledges this fact, Mr. Speaker. They have 
proved that we can develop world-class expertise and 
innovation at home in our province. And most importantly, they 
have demonstrated that young people can have a successful 
career right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate STEP’s Market 
Intelligence Team on their nomination for this award and wish 
them the best of luck at the awards ceremony on Monday night. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Builder of Sport, Culture, and Recreation 
Award Winner Named 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Brad LeCuyer has been named Nipawin’s builder of sport, 
culture, and recreation for the year 2001. The award is 
presented annually to an individual who has provided 
outstanding, extraordinary service to the growth and 
development of their area of interest. 
 
Brad was nominated by the Nipawin Allied Arts Council with 
supporting nominations from Mel McCorriston, drama/theatre 
arts teacher at L.P. Miller High School, and local singer Celia 
Schreiner, for his outstanding involvement in musical theatre at 
school and for his musical volunteerism in the community. 
 
He has not only performed, but does . . . directed an orchestra, 
trained the chorus and soloist, arranged the music, and written a 
short drama. His greatest achievement was his work on the 
musical production that was featured during Nipawin’s 2000 
homecoming entitled Nipawii, about the history of Nipawin. He 
wrote the lyrics, script, and music for the production. 
 
Brad plays several instruments, dances, sings, choreographs 
dancing, synthesizes, scans music, digitally edits, and assists 
with community band development. Brad will be featured on 
the wall at the town hall as the latest person to be honoured with 
the 2001 Builder of Sport, Culture, and Recreation award. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Brad on 
this award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Registered Psychiatric Nurses Day 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as members have previously 
announced, this week is both Nursing Week and Mental Health 
Week. As an important segment of this week, the Minister of 
Health has proclaimed today, May 10, as Registered Psychiatric 
Nurses Day, a day set aside to acknowledge the invaluable work 
of these nurses who are part of our integrated health care teams. 
 
RPNs (registered psychiatric nurse) work in a variety of 
settings, including psychiatric in-patient units, long-term care, 
home care, women’s shelters and health clinics, community 
mental health programs, chemical dependency programs, and 
with individuals who have an acquired brain injury, as well as 
in acute care facilities. 
 

They are busy people, Mr. Speaker. In general, RPNs provide 
service to those who need care in the areas of mental and 
developmental health. Like their counterparts, registered nurses 
and licensed practical nurses, they adhere to a professional code 
of ethics and have a self-regulatory nursing body — RPNAS 
(Registered Psychiatric Nurses Association of Saskatchewan). 
 
And a little-known fact, Mr. Speaker, in Western Canada RPNs 
are the largest professional group of psychiatric and mental 
health care providers. And they do this work with extreme 
professionalism and compassion. 
 
Next month the RPN Association of Saskatchewan will hold its 
annual meeting and education day in Swift Current, hosted by 
the local Swift Current branch. I know all members wish them a 
successful meeting and we extend our gratitude to 
Saskatchewan’s registered psychiatric nurses. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shaun Vey Drafted to Vancouver Giants 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Shaun Vey of Wakaw began his 
skating and hockey career in 1991 at four years of age. His hard 
work and perseverance has paid off, and on May 2 he was 
drafted 20th overall in the WHL (Western Hockey League) 
Bantam Hockey Draft in Calgary. 
 
Shaun was drafted to the Vancouver Giants. Shaun is the son of 
Curtis and Bridget Vey and is presently in grade 9 at Wakaw 
School. He started out his hockey as a defenceman but later 
moved up to his present position as centre. Last season he 
played AA bantam hockey with Naicam. Next season he will 
play with the Beardy’s AAA Midget A team. 
 
Since you have to be 16 years of age to play a full season in the 
WHL, Shaun can only play five games in the next season. And 
in the fall of 2003 he can play a full season provided he makes 
the cut. 
 
During an interview, when asked what career he would pursue, 
Shaun said, all I ever wanted to do was to be a hockey star. It 
looks as though that dream could well come true, Mr. Speaker, 
become . . . Lately things have become more real for Shaun 
when he arrived home from school on May 1 and found the 
legendary Bobby Orr at his home. Bobby had flown in from 
Boston to sign as Shaun’s player agent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members of this Assembly, and I 
know the people of the Humboldt constituency, sincerely 
congratulate Shaun and wish him well and continued success in 
his hockey career. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Leap in Saskatoon Housing Starts 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As reported in the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix, the purveyor of good news, the 
headline reads, “Saskatoon housing starts leap in April.” 
 

Saskatoon’s new housing market brought some good 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

economic news to the city Wednesday, as . . . (CMHC) 
reported a big jump in housing starts for April. 
 
In Saskatoon . . . (housing) starts leapt to 100 from 50 from 
the same month (last year) . . . The number included a huge 
increase in condominium . . . starts, which rose to 41 from 
only two last year. 

 
So far . . . housing starts are up 63.6 per cent in Saskatoon 
CMA, with 324 units as compared to last year . . . 

 
“I’m surprised at the strength of the recovery on the 
multiples side, and apparently there’s more coming down 
the pipe,” said CMHC market analyst Paul Caton. 

 
Saskatoon is also largely responsible for the increase in 
Saskatchewan housing starts, which are up 40 per cent from 
the first four months of 2001. Provincial starts have 
improved to 512 from 366 last year. 

 
I’m particularly pleased to report this news as Saskatoon 
Sutherland, the constituency I’m proud to serve, is one of the 
fastest growing in all of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mother’s Day 
 
Mr. Addley: — Now, Mr. Speaker, a house would not be a 
home without our mothers. I want to remind all hon. members 
that Sunday is Mother’s Day. And I’m sure all members would 
join me in wishing our mothers happy Mother’s Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Southeast Regional Science Fair 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to extend congratulations to Shannon Lozinksy and Megan 
Howse, grade 12 students at Pangman High School, for 
receiving top honours at the southeast regional science fair in 
Fillmore for the second year in a row. This shows the 
excellence in education that is offered in rural schools. 
 
The students won the science fair with their water testing 
project entitled H2OK. The project is comprised of tests of town 
water and well water and determines which method of purifying 
water works the best. Their results show that boiled water is by 
far the better quality — better quality than water tested with 
chlorine. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in light of the facts of the information that’s 
been portrayed in this House in the last few days and the events 
of the last few months, I think that their project is very timely. 
 
In addition to the overall award, the girls also won awards for 
the best senior exhibit, first place in life sciences section, the 
Intel Computer Science Award, and the Saskatchewan 
Education and Training Employment Award for $1,000. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate Katie Wolfe of Weyburn 
Comprehensive School. Katie won the senior category for 
biotechnology for her project entitled, DNA: How to Extract 
DNA in Plants and Animals. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Sharon Lozinsky and Megan Howse will now be 
competing at the nationals in Saskatoon from May 11 to 19. 
 
I’d like all members of the legislature to join with me in 
congratulating the winners and to wish them very good luck this 
weekend in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Loss Statistics 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
Friday of the month that the NDP government dreads because 
the new job numbers are out today. And once again, 
Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada — in the entire 
country — that’s losing jobs. 
 
The NDP government killed 1,100 jobs over the past year while 
every other province in Canada has been creating jobs, and 
they’ve been doing that month after month. The NDP turns in 
the same dismal job numbers and yet they try to tell us that their 
economic plan is working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts indicate that the NDP’s plan is not 
working — it’s failing. And it’s also driving people and jobs 
and opportunities out of our province. 
 
My question to the Premier is why is the NDP continuing to kill 
jobs in this province? Why don’t they put together a plan to 
grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a Friday morning and it’s beautiful outside. It’s 
spring and there is optimism. The farmers are getting ready to 
plant their spring crops, and the difficult part of that, sir, is 
there’s 7,300 fewer of them this year than there were last year. 
But the good news to this, Mr. Speaker, is that in the 
non-agricultural area, there are 6,300 new jobs in this province. 
And that’s what’s been happening in this province in the last 
decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1987, there have been about 50,000 jobs lost 
in the agriculture sector in Saskatchewan, and it’s been a very 
difficult transition for us. But that’s very much been offset by 
52-, 53-thousand jobs in the non-ag sector. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the Leader of the 
Opposition, gets up and he rubs his hands in glee when he sees 
a negative number — which we have had some of in the year 
2001. But he won’t recognize the success that this province has 
had from 1982 . . . 1992 through to 2002 where we’ve had 
consecutive, eight years of consecutive growth in this economy. 
He refuses to recognize the good news, Mr. Speaker, but 
continues to highlight his negative attitude towards this 
province and the people in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the 
minister continues to blame the agriculture sector for the loss in 
jobs. Of course other provinces have been able to deal with this 
problem. And some of the leaders from other provinces are 
coming into town today, so perhaps the Premier and his 
government should be asking these leaders what are they doing 
right in their provinces that we’re doing wrong so that they 
haven’t seen the job loss in spite of the agriculture sectors in 
their province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba created 8,000 jobs in the past year. 
Alberta created a whopping 25,000 jobs in the last 12 months. 
Meanwhile here in Saskatchewan, we lost 1,100 jobs. We’re the 
only province in Canada, agriculture or not, that’s losing jobs. 
Other provinces have agricultural industries as well. They’ve 
diversified. This government has done nothing in the last 10 or 
11 years to diversify Saskatchewan’s economy so we don’t 
perpetually lose jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously the economic policies of the NDP in 
Saskatchewan are not working. Why is the NDP prepared to 
lose jobs month after month when every other province in 
Canada is creating jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m continually 
amazed, I’m continually amazed by the nearsightedness of the 
member, the Leader of the Opposition, who represents a rural 
riding as most of his caucus does. They should look around in 
their communities. They should look around their 
neighbourhoods. They should look at the change in agriculture 
and they should recognize the fact that there are many . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I ask them to look 
around their communities. I ask them to recognize that 35,000 
jobs in agriculture across this country were lost last year and 
that we have the largest grain-based agriculture industry and 
business in the country — and they know that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if they can recognize the difficulty and it’s I 
think . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Members, order, please. I 
would ask members to interfere less and distinguish between a 
heckle and a continual barrage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’ll try 
again and, you know, I would appreciate the consideration of 
members opposite, that they would be quiet while I’m speaking. 
 
But what I want to say, the fact that the premiers are meeting 
here in this building today to discuss yet a more severe attack 
on Canadian agriculture and on Saskatchewan farmers should 
give some cause for those folks to reflect on what’s been 
happening in that industry. 
 
But on the other side of the equation they should also recognize 
what businessmen and women in this province have achieved. 
We’ve created 50,000 new jobs outside of primary agriculture 

and we should all be very proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would say 
to the minister that the constituents we represent are pretty 
excited about a plan that the Saskatchewan Party has to grow 
this province, including rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that 
minister and that government knew back in 1999 that we had a 
large agricultural . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The statement I 
make applies to both sides. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP knew 
when they brought forward their 1999 election campaign that 
agriculture was a large component of our economy, and yet they 
made the promise to Saskatchewan people that they would 
create 30,000 jobs in this term of government. Well how are 
they doing on their province . . . promise? 
 
Well in April 2002 we have 3,000 fewer jobs, not 30,000 more 
jobs, than we had two years ago. So, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is killing jobs when Manitoba created 23,000 new 
jobs. Alberta created a whopping 109,000 jobs in that same 
period where we lost 3,000 jobs. Mr. Speaker, it’s so clear that 
this government’s economic policies are failing; they are killing 
jobs, driving people from the province. Why are they so 
satisfied with this record of mediocrity and failure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition stood in his place a moment ago . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat, the Leader of the 
Opposition stood in his place a moment ago and talked about 
the excitement that’s being generated by the Sask Party plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you about the 
excitement that’s been generated about that plan. You know 
they’ve generated so much excitement they got four people out 
to one of their meetings; they got two people out to one of their 
meetings; they got zero people out to some of their meetings. 
That’s the level of excitement, Mr. Speaker, about the plan. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that their plan that they’ve talked about 
consists of the following: you cut the taxes in an unsustainable 
way, you decimate public services, and you privatize the 
Crowns. That’s the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happens they take the plan, they take this 
plan of theirs, to 40 scheduled meetings, Mr. Speaker, they take 
it out to 40 scheduled meetings. They get four people out, they 
get six people out. I know one community they had five people 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

out but it was really four because one of them was our guys, 
one of our guys who had to see what goes on here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a plan for the future of Saskatchewan. A 
plan for the future of Saskatchewan is based on sustainable, 
competitive tax cuts, on celebrating our successes, on building 
on our strengths, and not every day bringing the negative nabob 
attitude that they bring to this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, how silly can the Premier 
get? We had huge and positive response. In La Ronge we had 
about 30 leaders of the community out, and following his 
budget, his minister had four people out to their budget meeting 
in La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have lost confidence 
in this government because they continually fail in their 
economic policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once in a while, once in a while we go to Alberta, 
and when we go to Alberta, we bring money back to 
Saskatchewan. And the NDP criticize us for fundraising in 
Alberta. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I think we’ve just about used up our 
quota of heckles for today. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I could tell I just 
about had them spellbound too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have criticized us for fundraising in 
Alberta and bringing money back to Saskatchewan. I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that when we implement our Grow 
Saskatchewan, we’ll be bringing a lot more than money back 
from Alberta, we’ll be bringing people back from Alberta to our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a plan to break 
down the barriers that the NDP have put in the way of the 
Saskatchewan economy. We’re going to grow Saskatchewan, 
and we are excited about it and the people of Saskatchewan are 
excited about the potential of this province finally breaking out 
under the yoke of the NDP and growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the meantime they have to answer the question 
why are they killing jobs and why don’t they put a plan together 
to grow the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — They put this plan of theirs in place in 
the 1980s, and what did they grow? Well they grew the deficit 
and they grew the debt. And if you want to talk about numbers 
of people who left the province, it was at record numbers when 
their plan was in place in this province. 
 
I’m pleased . . . Mr. Speaker, now the people of Saskatchewan 
and the people who observed proceedings in the legislature 
have a choice. They can believe the Leader of the Opposition 

and the Saskatchewan Alliance Party or they can believe a 
Moody’s investment house of New York City, the continent’s 
—perhaps the world’s — most significant investment credit 
rating agency in the world who just this week, based on the plan 
of this government, based on the budget introduced in this 
legislature, just this week gave the province of Saskatchewan a 
credit upgrade, only one of three provinces in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. And they said, they said, the people of Moody’s said: 
 

Over the past several years a series of modest surpluses 
combined with strong economic growth has resulted in a 
marked improvement in Saskatchewan . . . 

 
That’s Moody’s, Mr. Speaker. You can believe the Leader of 
the Opposition or you can believe Moody’s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Out-Of-Province Travel by 
Crown Corporation Executives 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not only jobs that we have leaving Saskatchewan. We today 
received the executive out-of-province travel for the Crown 
Corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister Responsible for 
SaskEnergy, the home of air miles king, Ron Clark. Mr. 
Speaker, this morning CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) is reporting that SaskEnergy President Ron Clark 
racked up $100,000 bill for travel outside Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, $100,000 outside Saskatchewan. That’s more than 
$8,000 a month. By far the most expensive travel bill of any 
Crown corporation executive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how SaskEnergy’s 
president, Ron Clarke, and his $100,000 international travel bill 
helps to keep natural gas prices low for Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just for the record, they would have had that information for 
almost a week already, so I don’t . . . maybe it took that long to 
read it, I’m not sure, but they’ve had it for almost a week. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me say that in SaskEnergy, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a president and a Crown corporation in 
SaskEnergy that largely are industry leaders, Mr. Speaker. This 
corporation has provided the lowest gas rates in Canada in four 
out of the last five years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the process, Mr. Speaker. We appoint the 
boards, Mr. Speaker; Mr. Speaker, the boards approve the 
expenditures including travel — the boards approve 
expenditures including travel of the employees and the 
executive of their corporation, Mr. Speaker; and then those 
expenditures are tabled in detail to the . . . through the Clerk of 
the Assembly to the Crown Corporations Committee. And that 
member, who I believe sits on Crown Corporations Committee, 
has an opportunity to ask questions in detail through this very, 
very transparent process, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
asks why we just brought this up. There’s so many issues that 
the NDP created, it’s so easy to have other, other issues to bring 
up. So we priorize the issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, last year the president of SaskEnergy 
blew $100,000 travelling around the world. Mr. Speaker, I was 
a pilot in the air force for a number of years, and I don’t think I 
spent a year racking up that many miles as the president of 
SaskEnergy racked up — and I was a pilot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s understandable, it’s understandable that the 
president of SaskEnergy needs to travel outside of the province. 
After all, he has to keep track of SaskEnergy’s multi-million 
dollar businesses in Mexico and in Chile, but $100,000 in just 
12 months is a little more than excessive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the NDP government think it’s reasonable 
for the president of SaskEnergy to rack up $100,000 in travel 
expenses while SaskEnergy’s international investments rack up 
millions of dollars in losses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite don’t exactly tell exactly what the facts are, Mr. 
Speaker, either in the House here or to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Just as an example, Mr. Speaker, in the Chile investment alone, 
SaskEnergy has signed up over 4,500 customers, Mr. Speaker. 
This year alone, they’re cash flow positive. Cash flow positive 
— unlike what’s been reported or what those members care to 
say, Mr. Speaker, they’re cash flow positive. Next year they’ll 
return a profit to the people of Saskatchewan. Is he against that, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Ron Clark didn’t have the corner on the travel market 
and the international travel. SaskTel President Don Ching and 
Vice-President Garry Simons also racked up huge 
out-of-province travel bills last year. Those two racked up 
$130,000 in out-of-province travel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one has to ask: how did SaskTel’s 
international investments fare last year? Every single one of 
them lost money. Millions of taxpayers’ dollars gambled and 
lost in Nashville, Atlanta, Australia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP asking taxpayers to pay six-figure 
travel expenses for Crown corporation executives to travel the 
world, gambling and losing millions on risky foreign business 
deals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again the member in 

reference to SaskTel doesn’t exactly portray the facts quite 
accurately either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Look, the agenda from that party, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 
clear. They continue to ask questions and discredit our Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, with one single agenda. That’s so 
that they can so discredit the Crowns so that when and if they 
ever became government they would sell them. It’s very simple, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can continue to attack senior executives 
within the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. You can continue to attack the 
government on its strategy around Crowns and their investment, 
Mr. Speaker. But I don’t know how you can be critical of the 
fact that they earn revenues outside of Saskatchewan, bring it 
back to Saskatchewan to pay for many of the services that those 
members on a daily basis continue to ask us to provide for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister obviously is not familiar with our policy on 
Crowns. They’re trying to use it as a fearmonger, as a 
fearmonger to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this NDP government can miscredit 
the Crowns themselves. Mr. Speaker, it seems like the theme 
song of the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) executives is I’m “Leaving on a Jet Plane,” from 
the amount of travel that they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, taxpayers in this province are reasonable people. 
They understand there’s some need to travel, for cabinet 
ministers and Crown people to travel outside the province from 
time to time. But most taxpayers will not see it as reasonable 
that the president of SaskEnergy himself racked up a $100,000 
travel bill in just 12 months. Even from the NDP side of the 
House, the Premier didn’t travel that much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan how the president and CEO (chief executive 
officer) of SaskEnergy, by racking up $100,000 in travel 
expenses, will keep the natural gas prices low for the families in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, you know what? He’s 
absolutely right. I am unclear as to what their policy with 
respect to Crowns is. What is your policy on Crowns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

Legislation Regarding Collection Agents 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It will be nice to 
read the minister’s statement that he’s unclear. It’ll be in 
Hansard; we know it’s true. 
 
My question is for the Minister of Justice. On April 9, on April 
9 the NDP introduced The Collection Agents Amendment Act 
which the government said was going to protect people from 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

abusive and unscrupulous agents. Since then, many business 
groups have contacted the minister and ourselves, registering 
their concerns about that legislation. And it’s reported in the 
April 27 edition of The StarPhoenix that the NDP is reportedly 
reconsidering this Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, for the minister, would he explain whether the 
Justice department is actually reconsidering this legislation, and 
if so, what changes are they considering? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try and 
do the right thing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the member is 
quite right that we’ve had representations from collection 
agencies and creditors about the importance of this legislation 
and how it might affect the collection of debts. 
 
We’ve also, Mr. Speaker, had representations from groups 
supporting . . . who are concerned about harassment by 
collection agencies of debtors, Mr. Speaker. Our hope was that 
this legislation would be an appropriate balance. We’re 
considering how to proceed based upon these representations. 
And in due course, Mr. Speaker, we will do what is best for the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems the 
minister isn’t quite sure where he’s going to go with this issue. 
It reminds us a whole lot of the long-term care issue that they 
had. They weren’t sure where they were going to go with that 
one either. 
 
The NDP did not consult with the people who would be 
affected by the changes in this legislation. The article in that 
newspaper quotes the minister as saying that that consultation 
was done very poorly, but they’ve heard the concerns on both 
sides. The NDP says now, and the minister admitted it, they’re 
reconsidering some of the things. 
 
My question for the minister is, Mr. Speaker: if the NDP is 
reconsidering this Bill, why do they keep bringing it forward on 
the legislative agenda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know 
that this and a number of other pieces of legislation we’ve 
introduced into the legislature this term are as a result of 
national measures of meetings between federal, provincial, and 
territorial ministers, Mr. Speaker, on which industry 
representatives are consulted widely. 
 
It does appear to be the case that, that in this consultation 
process not all of the collection agencies’ interests were 
presented to the Government of Saskatchewan, even though, 
Mr. Speaker, every single one of them received an indication 
that this legislation was coming forward, the terms of that 

legislation, and they had the opportunity to respond. Some 
chose not to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point of the matter is here, that we are 
reconsidering this piece of legislation. I said that from day one. 
Immediately, I was asked to meet with representatives. I met 
with them. We are reconsidering it. And in due course, once 
we’ve taken into account all of the interests of the people of the 
province — business and consumers — we will make a 
decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this is specifically a very 
ill-thought piece of legislation. As the minister just mentioned, 
he’s received a lot of input from business people, not just the 
collection agencies themselves but from business community, 
business associations, who state very specifically that it’s totally 
unfair to businesses to allow a person to purchase something 
and not pay for it. The end result, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
business is out just as much as if the article was stolen. 
 
Why will the minister not pull this piece of legislation? It’s 
ill-thought. It’s mis-thought. And it should not be brought 
before this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know it’s Friday 
and this is the last question, but surely the member can do better 
than that. 
 
I’ve mentioned it three times, Mr. Speaker. We will be looking 
at this legislation, be making a decision. And we will be making 
the decision which is right for both business and consumers in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Long-Term Health Care Fees 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, with the 
introduction of this spring’s budget, a fee increase for residents 
of long-term care was proposed. The proposal was to have 
taken effect on October 1 of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people recognize the real financial 
challenges that we face in providing health care and recognize 
the new resources that our government has added for health and 
added for long-term care. However, the specific proposal to 
alter long-term care fees generated significant public concern, 
uncertainty, and misunderstanding. That concern and 
uncertainty was expressed in conversations, in letters, and in 
petitions to this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government places a high value on listening to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Therefore, having heard the 
concern and uncertainty, we placed this proposal on hold and 
under review on Monday of last week. We have used the 
intervening time to further dialogue with Saskatchewan people. 
This dialogue included a very significant meeting between our 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

 

seniors’ advisory council, a large number of representatives of 
people with disabilities, the Minister of Health, and myself. Mr. 
Speaker, this was a pivotal meeting. 
 
In the dialogue and through our discussions, several important 
principles emerged as priorities for Saskatchewan people. We 
heard agreement that those with a greater ability to pay should 
be asked to contribute more than those with less ability to pay, 
as the current system now provides. Many, in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
suggested that more could be required from those with higher 
incomes. 
 
But we also heard that, in the case of our seniors, a lifetime of 
work and contribution to our province must be recognized. And 
as a community, we have a responsibility to support those in 
need of this care. We heard that ability to pay must be the 
principle of our income taxation system and not the first 
principle of establishing long-term care fees. 
 
We also heard very clearly that those who are in long-term care 
as a result of an earlier disability in life should not be subjected 
to fees that inhibit their ability to continue in active work. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we heard that in the special circumstance of 
long-term care where daily needs and housing are combined 
with medical and nursing care, the medical component should 
be provided on the basis of need. 
 
The proposal advanced with our budget, Mr. Speaker, did not 
find the right balance of these principles. It did not pass the test 
of fairness in the eyes of Saskatchewan people. 
 
In our meeting with the seniors’ advisory council and the 
representatives of people with disabilities, the Minister of 
Health and I heard very clearly that our existing schedule of 
fees, for the most part, does achieve the correct balance and 
fairness. The existing schedule does include the basis of ability 
to pay; it does offer flexibility for individual circumstances. It 
does not touch savings or assets. It provides dignity in the 
situation of involuntary separation, and it has built in modest 
increases to the fee schedule. 
 
Having listened, Mr. Speaker, we are acting accordingly. The 
proposal to change the long-term fee structure in long-term care 
is today cancelled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The current fee structure, Mr. Speaker, 
will remain in place and unchanged. The routine fee 
adjustments and personal expense allowances will continue to 
be based upon adjustments to old age security benefits paid to 
seniors. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, given the benefit of the dialogue that we 
have had with Saskatchewan people, no change for the fee 
structure is planned. And I further commit that no significant 
change will be proposed in future without first a public 
consultation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(11:00) 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this decision has financial 
consequences. To maintain the existing fee structure will 
require an additional $7 million for a total of $344 million in 
this budget year. It means that our taxpayers will be asked to 
provide 77 per cent of the costs associated with caring for the 
8,900 of our citizens in long-term care. 
 
Because the demand for these new dollars does not occur until 
October, we will be monitoring our revenues very carefully 
over the next several months. 
 
This week’s credit upgrade from Moody’s, the signs of strength 
in many areas of our economy, and the trending upwards of oil 
and gas prices may well provide us the financial room to meet 
this requirement for extra income. With the first quarterly 
financial report over the course of the summer we’ll have then a 
much more accurate picture. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the circumstances that our revenues do not 
improve significantly or sufficiently, we will look to our winter 
gravel stockpiling project in the Department of Highways to 
find the resources necessary for long-term care. I am relatively 
confident today, Mr. Speaker, that we will not be required to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard the voices of Saskatchewan people. 
We have heard the voices of our seniors. We have heard the 
voices of people with disabilities. We have listened, Mr. 
Speaker, we have learned, and we have acted. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is what good government is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, today the people of 
Saskatchewan should be very proud of what they have 
accomplished. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, today is the culmination of an 
effort not only by the people of Saskatchewan to make this 
insensitive government listen, but it’s a result of an effective, 
efficient effort on behalf of an official opposition to bring the 
issue to the public . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier today . . . the 
Premier today articulates all of the issues that we have 
articulated in this House over the last four or five weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we recount the history of this initiative by 
the government, we must remember that this issue was the only 
issue that was leaked to the official opposition before the 
budget was tabled. Mr. Speaker, it was pretty obvious to us at 
that time that someone within the centre and ranks of 
government understood that this program and this proposal was 
wrong and hurtful to vulnerable people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we raised it as an issue and a concern before the 
budget was even tabled in the hope that this government, who 
claims to be listening to people, would understand that this 
proposal was wrong. But what did they do? They went forward 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

and put it through at the budget. They steadfastly, day after day 
when we raised the issue, the Minister of Health stood in his 
place and said, it’s the right thing to do, and that this was the 
way they were going to proceed. 
 
Day after day the same questions were asked on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people, and day after day this so-called listening 
government refused to listen. 
 
And it was only when the pressure mounted to an unbelievable 
level that finally this government took the wax out of its ears 
and started to wake up to the fact that what they were doing was 
wrong despite the fact that the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle bellowed from his seat, it was the right thing to do 
and he was proud of it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that they take this 
money out of the Minister of Highways’ budget because he’s 
the guy that was so sure that he was on the right track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have to understand 
that when they see a government taking the wrong path, they 
have the opportunity in a democracy and the obligation and the 
responsibility to stand up and let them know that they’re on the 
wrong track. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan did that 
on this long-term care issue. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan were right. They continue to be 
right, and come the next election, they will also be right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 44, The 
Animal Products Amendment Act, 2002, to now be introduced 
to read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I move that Bill No. 46, The 
Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 47, The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 48 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 48, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act. 
 
The Medical Profession Amendment Act responds to a number 
of issues raised in consultations with the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan 
Association of Chiropodists. 
 
First, this Bill will allow the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons to regulate podiatric surgeons. Podiatric surgeons are 
trained to provide basic foot care services, similar to 
chiropodists, but their advanced training also permits them to 
prescribe drugs, order diagnostic tests, and perform surgery. 
 
Currently, podiatric surgeons are not legally permitted to 
practise in Saskatchewan. However, under this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, podiatric surgeons will be granted title protection and 
will be registered, licensed, and regulated by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. Bylaws will set out the specific 
services they can provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other amendments to the Act allow greater 
flexibility in recognizing the credentials of psychiatrists. The 
Act will remove the reference to specific countries for training 
of psychiatrists. As a result, instead of the emphasis being on 
the country a psychiatrist comes from, the emphasis will be on 
credentials and quality of the training. 
 
The Medical Profession Amendment Act also includes 
provisions to clarify important issues related to physician 
incorporation. Under this Act, the earnings of locums and 
residents can be included as part of the corporation’s earnings. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, The Medical Profession Amendment Act 
will improve discipline procedures for the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. Currently, the college’s ability to 
discipline or assess the competence of physicians is limited to a 
person registered under The Medical Profession Act. 
 
The amendments introduced by this Act will correct this 
situation and allow the college to discipline former members for 
up to two years after they are no longer registered in the 
province. The amendments will also allow the college to deal 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

 

with a physician who is registered in Saskatchewan and in 
another jurisdiction and who has been disciplined in that other 
jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Medical Profession Amendment Act shows 
that we are committed to working with our health care partners 
to ensure our system remains one of the best in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Medical Profession Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to speak on 
No. 37, An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981. 
 
As the minister outlined many of the changes that they are 
considering in this Bill, I assume that the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons has considered these amendments and accepted 
the changes that are to be made as far as regulating podiatric 
surgery, psychiatry and so on, Mr. Speaker. It seems that it’s 
just a matter of setting up the bylaws and the professional body 
to regulate these areas of medicine. 
 
And it’s interesting to note that they’re considering looking at 
the accreditation of an individual psychiatrist rather than where 
the professional is coming from as far as another country. 
 
Also in the Bill I also notice under the explanation of practice, 
they are also to define what a practice of medicine, surgery or 
midwifery is. And these are all very interesting subjects and 
timely subjects that the people of Saskatchewan are very 
interested in. 
 
And I would like to at this time just let our health critic take this 
information in this Bill and speak to the stakeholders of the 
province, and to check and double-check what the provincial 
. . . with the people in this province whether this Bill is 
necessary and all the Acts that are . . . and changes in the Bill 
are necessary in bringing this area of medicine up to current 
standards. 
 
So at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Prescription Drugs 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce amendments to The Prescription Drugs Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments are a result of 
consultations with many groups such as the Saskatchewan 
Pharmaceutical Association and the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of Saskatchewan. 
 
For more than 25 years The Prescription Drugs Act has enabled 
the Saskatchewan drug plan to help Saskatchewan residents 
with their prescription drug costs. 
 
The current administrative system allows the drug plan to 
collect information for some but not all of the prescriptions 

filled in the province. Information is captured for formulary 
drugs dispensed to residents who are eligible for coverage under 
the drug plan. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, information cannot be collected about 
prescriptions for First Nations residents, veterans, members of 
the Armed Forces, and others whose drug costs are paid for by 
the federal government. In addition we cannot collect 
information about prescriptions for drugs that are not benefits 
under the drug plan. As a result we do not have a complete 
record of prescription drug information for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
(11:15) 
 
The proposed amendments will allow Saskatchewan Health to 
collect information on all prescriptions in Saskatchewan, 
regardless of who pays for the prescription. 
 
This information will allow doctors and pharmacists to quickly 
check whether a patient has obtained prescription drugs from 
any other physicians or pharmacies. Mr. Speaker, these changes 
will help prevent situations where harm or drug abuse could 
occur as a result of getting prescriptions from several different 
doctors at the same time. 
 
The amended Prescription Drugs Act will enable Saskatchewan 
Health to proceed with system developments that will provide a 
much more complete record of all prescriptions in our province. 
As part of our action plan for Saskatchewan Health, we set a 
goal of establishing better information systems that health care 
providers could access, with appropriate patient consent, in 
order to have more accurate and complete information about 
patients’ medications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we move forward in this direction we know that 
privacy is an issue. I want to assure the people of the province 
that our systems employ a high level of security. Prescription 
information has been collected and submitted electronically for 
more than 12 years. The Saskatchewan Drug Plan has a proven 
track record of confidentiality. 
 
All collection, use, and disclosure of personal health 
information are strictly controlled in accordance with current 
legislation and department policy. Additional information 
collected under these amendments will be subject to the same 
strict control. When proclaimed, The Health Information 
Protection Act will provide additional control over access to 
and disclosure of the information. 
 
The Prescription Drugs Act will serve the people of the 
province well into the future. Mr. Speaker, with that I move 
second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the collection of data dealing with the use of prescription drugs 
for the purposes of preventing abuse of those drugs, I think and 
my colleagues agree, that it’s a very worthwhile concept and 
application of this kind of data. 
 
It’s wrong when individuals take prescriptions from perhaps 
multiple doctors to try and gain a large volume of a particular 
drug for uses that would abuse those kind of drugs, Mr. 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

Speaker. And we do know that that happens in our society and 
that we need to take steps to stop that abuse. And using the 
knowledge and data available from prescription drug 
applications and dispensing is one of the ways that can be used, 
Mr. Speaker, to try and control these problems. 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, there are other problems, and the 
minister touched on it a little bit when he said that it would be 
appropriate to seek patient consent to utilize the information 
collected in this data, because in the Act, Mr. Speaker, it says 
that the minister may authorize the use of this information 
outside of what is in the regulations that are currently in place. 
It says: 
 

for any other purpose authorized by the regulations. 
 
And the regulations are established, Mr. Speaker, by the 
minister. 
 
It also says that describing . . . 
 

. . . prescribing additional purposes for which personal 
health information may be recorded in the database. 

 
So it gives the minister a fair latitude and his department a fair 
latitude to make a determination on what that data is going to be 
used for. 
 
I think it is very important that the patients whose data is being 
used must give their consent. So I guess the question is, Mr. 
Speaker, how do they give that consent? Is it assumed that 
consent is given by the fact that they have requested 
prescription drugs and that they . . . the government will then 
utilize that data unless the patient becomes active in some 
manner to say, I do not want my information used? 
 
Or will the government take the other approach where they have 
to approach the patient and say, can we utilize your data, and 
seek consent from them in that manner? If they do it that way, 
what kind of a description will be given to those patients as to 
what that data will be and how it will be utilized, Mr. Minister, 
so that the patients can make a coherent decision with full 
knowledge of what they are giving up and what that data will be 
utilized for, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Nowhere in this particular Act does it describe how that consent 
will be sought from the patients. And I think we need to be 
conscious of the protections of privacy in this kind of a piece of 
legislation. 
 
We also need to be conscious though that there are those who 
would abuse the system and we need to control that, to stop 
that, Mr. Speaker. So we need to strike a balance here, but that 
balance must include patients having the knowledge to make an 
informed decision and give an informed consent if they so wish. 
 
That is not yet clear, Mr. Speaker, whether that is in this piece 
of legislation or not and I’m sure that there are . . . I know that 
there are people, Mr. Speaker, out there that are concerned 
about these issues. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
that we adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Corrections and Public Safety 

Vote 73 
 
Subvote (CP01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today I’m 
joined by Neil Yeates seated to my left. Neil’s the deputy 
minister of the department. Karen Lautsch is his executive 
assistant, seated next to him. Behind us is Don Head, directly 
behind me, the executive director of corrections division. 
Maureen Lloyd, who is the acting director of youth justice 
services, is seated behind the deputy minister. And behind the 
bar we are joined by Tom Young, the executive director of 
protection and emergency services and Nick Surtees, the 
executive director of licensing and inspections. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the officials here. I think this wasn’t quite what they 
had planned when they looked at the week at the start. I think it 
was supposed to be Ag that was here, so I appreciate them 
making the difference in their plans to be here. Also welcome to 
the minister. This is the first time that he and I have met since 
he’s been a minister, and congratulations on that. We will try 
and make this an easy morning for you, as easy as possible. But 
then again, we may not. 
 
I would like to, first off, ask the minister to sort of give his 
vision as to the purpose of corrections in Saskatchewan. And 
also along with that, if he has any visions that are in his mind 
that haven’t existed in the department before and changes that 
he intends to bring into the department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 
member for the question. Certainly one of the key reasons we 
have formulated this new Department of Corrections has been 
to try and deal with the issue of how we deal with adult 
corrections and young offender issues — youth criminal issues 
— and try to find a paradigm that works better in terms of 
bringing the two together into a more consistent approach. 
 
One of the reasons that this is particularly timely are the 
changes that have been made to the federal legislation which 
will be brought in in 2003, early 2003 they will take effect. 
There’s an opportunity for us at provincial level to respond to 
that and this is one of the things that certainly this department 
will move forward with. 
 
The second set of issues around the creation of this department 
that we are very interested in moving forward on are the public 
safety issues, particularly surrounding emergency measures. 
This department has responsibility for the Sask911 program as 
well as a variety of other pieces that used to be in Municipal 
Affairs that have now moved over here so that we can have a 
better coordinated response at a community level and a 
province-wide level in terms of emergency measures. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It seems to me there’s two areas of 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

 

responsibility that you’ve assumed. One is to work out the 
situation between adult offenders and young offenders, and 
public safety. Does rehabilitation not play a part in your 
department? And I’d like to hear the minister comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly rehabilitation 
is a key principle of what we believe in within the corrections 
system. There are really two sets of issues that, of course, are 
brought into balance within the Department of Corrections. One 
is the question of holding criminal offenders responsible for 
their actions and making sure there’s an accountability, that 
they are called to account for it. The second is working with 
them to rehabilitate them so that they can be returned into the 
society. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. So there’s two parts to it. And I want 
to go down both of those. One that you referred to was 
accountability and one was rehabilitation. Those are both fairly 
major topics and we need to discuss both of those I think in 
some substantial detail. 
 
I would like for the minister to explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan what exactly happens in a prison setting that 
holds prisoners accountable for the deeds that they’ve done, and 
these deeds that they’ve done against all the rest of society. And 
I think society takes this very seriously, so I think this answer is 
fairly critical to what the public’s looking for from your 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly in terms of the 
approach which is taken in corrections on the accountability 
side, one of the most significant of these is the general loss of 
freedom. When a person commits a crime, they are found guilty 
of that, and they are sentenced to one of our correction 
facilities. They lose their freedoms. This is just a key principle 
of the way that we deal with offenders. 
 
Certainly as the offenders are brought into the prison setting 
there is a regime, a discipline to it. There is an approach that we 
use in terms of dealing with a stricter set of rules for our 
prisoners than we would with ordinary citizens. This is part of 
the corrections setting. 
 
Certainly one of the other pieces that we do is attempt, on an 
individual basis with prisoners, to identify what kind of 
programming needs may be there to assist in rehabilitation. I 
think it’s important to recognize that at the provincial level 
there is a difference between the provincial and federal system 
in that we have a relatively short time period to work with 
offenders in. 
 
This is a case where of course in the . . . in our system we’re 
generally dealing with relatively short sentences. In the federal 
system they deal with the much longer ones and so their 
approach in terms of their focus can be more . . . longer in 
breadth than ours is. So these are, these are some of the general 
areas that we work with them in. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. Three areas of accountability — loss 
of freedom, discipline, and programming. It seems to me that 
essentially only number one even gets close to an accountability 

issue. 
 
The disciplining that seems to be referred to, I don’t think the 
public would see that in any way, shape, or form as being 
holding them accountable for what they’ve done outside of the 
prison, before they got there, to society. 
 
And I would like for the minister to go down that road a little 
bit. Essentially what he has said is that the only way they’re 
held accountable is a loss of freedom. That is the only thing that 
he’s listed in that last dissertation; that is, actually holding 
someone accountable. Is that all that happens to prisoners — 
just their loss of freedom? Is that the only accountability that 
exists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly it is the courts 
that determine what is the appropriate response in terms of 
holding offenders accountable. 
 
What we deal with in this department is, once the courts have 
sentenced an individual to the correctional centre, we deal with 
them in terms of the secure custody and through that. 
 
There are a number of other measures within the justice system 
which are designed to hold individuals accountable, both to 
their victims and to the community at large. And this is 
something that may be better pursued, in terms of the 
discussion, with the Attorney General and the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
But certainly within the correctional system itself, once they 
have been turned over to us, this is the approach that we take in 
terms of holding them accountable. Certainly the biggest piece 
of this is in terms of the loss of freedom for that time period 
defined by the courts. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Are individuals that are put in an institution 
— and I realize that it’s for a shorter period of time than the 
federal system — are there any situations where they are 
required to do some public service, do some work? You know, 
if you want to be negative about it, you may call them chain 
gangs. I don’t think we’re looking at having them chained by 
the ankle and going out and digging ditches. 
 
But on the other hand, you know, so they’ve lost their freedom. 
Do they languish there in their loss of freedom? Or are they 
required to do work that is actually beneficial, both to society 
and also in their own work experience, and maybe provide 
some job opportunities when they get out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly with low-risk 
offenders we do have the opportunity to have them participate 
in work gangs. This is often the case in Prince Albert and 
Saskatoon where we do have work gangs that offenders may be 
assigned to, to go out and work within the community. 
 
Certainly one of the things we need to do is to make sure that if 
they are working in the community that they are a very low risk. 
This is not a case that we want to have high-risk offenders 
working in the community. Much of our focus within the 
corrections system is of course on making sure that when they 
are turned out of the system, that they have had the opportunity 
to participate in programming to make them . . . to deal with 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

whatever issues they may have. 
 
I think we’ve gone through this list before — certainly there’s a 
large number of them — one group of which is the area of life 
skills and vocational training in order to make sure that when 
they do find their way back into society that they are able to 
deal with the issues and that they do have skills to help them 
from reoffending. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I think most people in 
Saskatchewan are somewhat aware of some of the work effort 
that is done by the low-risk individuals. I know they’ve done 
some work in my community. 
 
And I know also in the past when the Seager Wheeler farm 
situation was in development there were work groups that came 
out and did some work there. Obviously those were lower risk 
people because they could have walked off and there were also 
other civilians there, so if they were particularly dangerous — 
probably not there. 
 
So what happens to those individuals that are considered of a 
variety that they can’t be allowed on those sorts of work 
situations? Is there anything productive that they have to do? 
And I have no problem saying, that they have to do. Because I 
think society expects that. These people need to be held 
accountable; they can’t just be allowed to languish there. 
 
So I’m hoping there are some significant work programs that 
they need to be involved with, under probably much higher 
custody than the programs that we see in many of our 
communities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, one of the issues that 
obviously we need to deal with first with these offenders is, 
when they come into the system, we need to assess what their 
level of need is and in many cases, it is a case of we need to 
start back at the beginning and deal with very serious issues in 
terms of anger management or in terms of substance abuse 
before we move on to dealing with the employment skills 
issues. 
 
Certainly there are shops at our present facilities to help them 
build skills. There are a number of different program that they 
can participate in. We have everything from woodworking and 
welding, spot welding. We have a metal fabrication shop in 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert, and indeed, at Pine Grove at the 
women’s centre, there is a fabrics operation that these prisoners 
can participate in. 
 
But certainly with the short amount of time that we have to deal 
with them, it is most important that we make sure the 
programming is identified not just in terms of skills building for 
after-release employment, but that we are able to deal with 
some of the very real issues that may have been contributing 
factors to them being sentenced in the first place. And certainly, 
the largest among these is the area of substance abuse. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I don’t think that the people of Saskatchewan 
would find that answer very satisfactory. Because what we 
basically said, that you’ve got one group that from time to time 
gets to do some work outside and that, for the most part, is in 
summertime. And in Saskatchewan that leaves a whole lot of 

time where they probably aren’t out there. 
 
The people who are of somewhat higher risk, you’re saying 
they’re there for a short time so they’re being assessed. And 
then you talk about the programs that are there. Programs that 
exist in Saskatoon, for example, are a very small welding shop 
— not significant training possibilities there — and a 
woodwork situation that isn’t that great either. And when you 
look at the inmate population, it obviously isn’t significant. 
 
So I’m still on that. So you have these people then that are of 
somewhat higher risk and you say you have them for a short 
time so that’s the excuse for them not having to get into any 
kind of a work program. 
 
Why isn’t the department setting up some programs where one 
of the very first things you do when you get into a prison 
situation, correctional situation, is you’re put on some sort of 
job and you have work to do? And it may be under some fairly 
severe custody situations where they’re watched very closely. 
But I find it unconscionable that just because you’re a higher 
risk you’re then sort of let off the hook and you languish there. 
 
Why doesn’t the department have some work that they need to 
do? Comes right down to the middle of summer, why aren’t 
they planting gardens and having to do some work hoeing those 
things? They’re there. They need to do some work. That’s part 
of accountability — that’s part of accountability. 
 
We have those kinds of things in our communities when 
individuals have some fairly light sentences given to them, 
where they are allowed to do some community service. That’s 
accountability, because they have to get out there and do some 
work for, you know, the crimes they’ve committed. We’ve said 
that some of the light-risk individuals have some of that 
opportunity as well. 
 
Is the department planning anything for those of more serious 
nature? And I think society would demand that, would expect 
that much more than from the other ones, because these are the 
people that have committed the most serious offences; and 
we’re saying in this discussion this morning, if I hear you 
correctly Mr. Minister, that in fact those are the ones that get off 
easiest. And that seems totally contrary to what everyone 
expects. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that, very 
much, the response I’ve given does meet what the 
Saskatchewan people want us to be doing. What they want to 
make sure of is that when these people come into the facility — 
not that we have them breaking rocks or licence plates — what 
they want to make sure is that we’re dealing with the issues that 
got them sentenced in the first place. 
 
These are often the most serious of the issues that are causing 
them to cause the crimes — whether it’s anger management, 
whether it’s substance abuse. These are the issues that need to 
be addressed first. Whether or not we make them make licence 
plates or grow gardens, these are different issues. What we need 
to make sure is that the high-risk offenders are dealt with in 
terms of their problems so that when they are released from the 
community that they can enrol in programming to go and learn 
the skills to go and work. 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

 

What has led them there is very . . . I think it is a mistake for us 
to say what is leading these people into this situation is the fact 
that they don’t have a skill set. And having them on a chain 
gang out cleaning a ditch, I don’t think is going to address the 
most significant issues as to why they’re creating . . . why 
they’re causing the crime. 
 
So very much, I think, the approach taken by this government is 
the approach that Saskatchewan people want, which is that we 
are going to have these individuals held accountable. We’re 
going to ensure that the programming is available, that they can 
deal with that, and that then we move forward. 
 
I don’t think Saskatchewan people want high-risk offenders in 
their communities. This is the purpose for closed custody 
facilities. Now where we have lower risk or where we’re able to 
move them forward in terms of teaching them skills and 
involving the community, we can certainly do that. And we do 
that through the work gangs. 
 
But I think for us, the first approach that we need to deal with 
are the very serious issues that have led these individuals into 
their criminal activity and have caused them to be sentenced. 
 
The second piece that I think we need to identify here is that we 
are dealing with a provincial corrections system and that the 
federal corrections system is another area. So the type of 
criminal behaviour we’re dealing with here, we have to assess 
on an individual basis. We need to understand that the most 
serious of the criminals are receiving Criminal Code sentences 
and they’re ending up in the federal system. 
 
So let’s separate this out. This does not mean that we don’t have 
high-risk offenders within our facilities. We do, and those are 
dealt with in terms of the appropriate response. But I think 
having them go forward and do gardening or work on work 
gangs in the community is not what Saskatchewan people want. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And the minister seems to be 
trying to misinterpret what we were saying. 
 
Those work programs that were out there with the low-risk 
offenders works out fine. Obviously we’re not expecting 
people, high-risk offenders, to go and do gardening work in 
communities. That wasn’t said before. They could very well 
take care of gardens for their own facilities. All sorts of work 
they can do to maintain their own facilities, and they can do that 
under high supervision where they’re not part of the 
community. And yet I’m finding from the answers I’m getting 
this is not happening. 
 
Now the minister is saying, Mr. Chairman, that, you know, we 
have to deal with these other issues first. Yes, those issues need 
to be dealt with. Just to put them on a work gang and not deal 
with anger management, and say you’ve put in two years less a 
day or whatever else in work, but no anger management, isn’t 
going to deal with the rehabilitation. 
 
But I think we’re getting the sense that this department isn’t 
quite sure where it’s going. Because obviously if you’re going 
in with anger management, you’re not going to be doing 10, 12 
hours a day on that particular course. You’re probably going to 
be lucky if you get one or two or three hours a day with that. 

What do you do with the rest of the time? That’s where the time 
comes in to go ahead and do some work. We’re talking about 
accountability. We haven’t got down to that yet. 
 
So just to sort of underline where this discussion’s going, if 
someone was taking an anger management course in a week, on 
an average, how many hours a week would they spend in an 
anger management course? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly there are a 
number of different programs and an offender, a prisoner, may 
well be involved in more than one. 
 
It would not be unusual for us to have somebody involved in a 
program for anger management that may take up to 20 hours a 
week. It would not be unusual for an offender to also then need 
to participate in a substance abuse program, or perhaps life 
skills, in addition to work that they may be doing in the facility 
in terms of the kitchens or the laundries or any of these other 
issues. So this is very much the approach but we have to deal 
with it on a case-by-case basis. 
 
The question of us having them growing their own gardens in 
the correctional centres, I guess is something we could look at. 
But frankly, I’m not sure that this is really what Saskatchewan 
people want us to be moving over to. 
 
The other thing that I think we need to make sure that we are 
cautious of is that if there are . . . is that we need to be careful in 
terms of how we are arguing in terms of the type of work that 
they’re doing so that we do not end up with the kind of 
competition — which I know is where we would end up — in 
terms of a debate on this floor as to what the prisoners are doing 
versus what the private sector should be doing. 
 
So this is a case of us finding a balance. But first and foremost, 
what we are concentrating on is making sure that these people 
have the programming put in front of them, that they can 
participate in it, so that when they are released they can 
participate in society as a functional human being in the way 
that we expect. That’s our first priority. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — There’s a lot of vague answers, Mr. 
Chairman, coming out of this particular discussion. 
 
I think at the end of this particular time we’ve just realized that 
there are some programs that people take part in. They may be 
one program; they may be involved in two programs; they may 
be up to 20 hours. So if we start using all the maximums, they 
might be busy for about three, four, five days of the week. If we 
take an average of that, they probably have something to do for 
about two days of the week. And the rest of the time, there 
needs to be something else that they need to be doing. 
 
And I guess the part that I find most disconcerting is that it’s 
again the ones that are the most dangerous ones, are the ones 
that are least likely to have to do something which we would 
say, that’s accountable. So far, it’s just a loss of freedom. And I 
think from society’s point of view that’s more of a safety aspect 
for them to have them off the streets. 
 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

Question we had earlier on, and I think the minister may have 
mentioned this term. He started off with a loss of freedom one, 
then he talked about discipline. And I would like for him to 
discuss to some extent, when you have these individuals that 
have basically run amuck in society in a prison situation, when 
those individuals do not abide by the rules and regulations 
within prisons or the correctional system, what measures are at 
the disposal of the department or of the people that work there, 
more specifically, to go ahead and deal with that? What 
discipline? 
 
And call it punishment if you will and I have no problem using 
that term. If they’re in that particular setting and they’re 
misbehaving and they’re wrecking equipment, they’re 
threatening individuals, they’re mean mouthing the people that 
are supposed to provide the supervision, there needs to be some 
punishment. Nothing else but punishment. 
 
What aspects . . . What is available to the people who work in 
Corrections to provide some discipline, punishment to those 
individuals that step way out of line from the behaviour patterns 
prescribed for the inmates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well clearly, Mr. Chairman, it will 
depend on the type of situation that the individual finds himself 
in. 
 
But there is a long . . . a fairly broad list of things that can be 
done in terms of disciplining the prisoners if need be. This can 
range from everything from loss of specific privileges, 
confinement for up to 10 days; restitution may be ordered, loss 
of remission on time served, suspension of loss of remission. 
There’s a long list of these items including, if it is a serious 
offence that we’re dealing with within the system, certainly it 
may lead to more charges. This is the . . . This is the result and 
the individuals know that these are the potential penalties. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. We’ve had the list of discipline 
measures that are there and I think that’s one of the questions 
that I did have is exactly what was available to the people 
working in Corrections when they have an inmate there that just 
refuses to be co-operative. 
 
And I think we need to have a lot of respect and thanks to 
people who work in Corrections because there’s always a very 
real sense of danger that’s there for them. 
 
And I guess that sort of leads me, without having planned this, 
into the next question. Are there any records kept as to the 
number of people working in Corrections that are actually hurt 
or injured, you know, by working with their particular clientele? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly these are 
difficult jobs and the individuals that participate in them are 
very exceptional individuals. These are hazardous places to 
work and we know that. 
 
I do not have with me today the exact number that the member 
asked for. I can certainly return to the House with that in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The concern I guess people always have is 
what happens with the individuals who sort of break out. And 

I’m wondering if you could give us a rundown of the specific 
correctional institutions that we have in Saskatchewan and the 
record of escapes from each one of those in, let’s say, the past 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly I can provide 
that list to the Assembly. Very simply put, last year there were 
16 escapes; and of the 16 escapees, there were 16 
apprehensions. 
 
Today, as the members are aware, yesterday, three prisoners 
escaped from the Saskatoon Correctional Centre, two of whom 
were caught and appeared in court this morning. On this, one 
remains at large but of course there is a warrant out for that 
individual’s arrest. And given our record, that person will be 
apprehended and returned to the system. 
 
If the member wants I can provide him with the list by facility 
very quickly. Last year Regina saw three escapes; Saskatoon, 
seven; P.A. (Prince Albert), one; Battlefords, five; and there 
were no escapes from either Pine Grove or Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I believe in the previous 
year Saskatoon also led the list. And the numbers I have were 
nineteen from Saskatoon, five from P.A., and four in Regina in 
2000-2001. Whatever the numbers, Saskatoon seems to be 
substantially higher than the other institutions. What is the 
reason for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — This is a good question the member 
asks. It’s a difficult one to answer because of course it’s hard to 
predict who is going to escape. 
 
In this particular case it appears that there is some correlation 
between the likelihood to escape and the relative age of the 
offender, and in this case Saskatoon has a tendency to have 
younger offenders — not young offenders but younger 
offenders — in that facility. And certainly looking at the lists, 
this appears to be something of an issue. 
 
So that may be one of the correlating factors. In terms of the 
others, it would be hard to establish any direct correlation. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I want to link that in with gang 
activities in correctional facilities. When these escapes take 
place, are they linked to gang activities? For example, the three 
that escaped recently from Saskatoon, were those members of 
the same internal prison gang? So is gangs or gang activity 
linked or a factor in escapes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, certainly it’s difficult at 
this point — because this most recent escape is under 
investigation — to comment as to whether there is a 
relationship to gang activity. 
 
What I do want to comment on though is that when you take 
into account the fact there are nearly 11,000 admissions into the 
prison system during the year, then we are talking about 16 
escapes. This is an extremely small number, although certainly 
we would like to see that number at zero. 
 
In terms of the gang relation, there is some gang activity and 
gang members in our correctional centres. But whether there is 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

 

a correlation between that and escapes, at this point, it would 
appear that there is not. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’m wondering, while we’re on 
that particular topic, if the minister would like to comment, and 
I’d appreciate if he would, on what actions are taken within 
correctional facilities to sort of combat the gang activities. 
 
I mentioned . . . I think when your cohort, the other minister of 
the other section of law and justice basically was up the other 
day, we discussed that just a little bit, didn’t get into it in detail. 
But it did seem somewhat surprising when you go by a 
correctional facility and you may see, you know, coloured 
ribbons tied to various pieces of equipment indicating a certain 
gang has sort of taken charge. 
 
What tools do corrections officers actually have to combat gang 
activity or is it one of those things that just happens and they 
say, we have to live with it? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, the gang activity within 
the prisons does seem to reflect that same kind of trend within 
the community. There are gang members — we have about 120 
gang members in the correctional centres today. 
 
Certainly we work on a strategy with the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) and the city police in the appropriate 
centres to try and identify who are the gang members and how 
they should be dealt with. 
 
Part of the way of dealing with them is obviously to try and 
keep them separated. We deal with a number of different issues, 
including making sure that the gang colours are not permitted 
within the jails. And really we attempt to deal with this in terms 
of a gang management strategy that we do work on collectively 
with the police in the community. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ve spent a fair 
bit of time dealing, I think, for the most part with adult 
offenders, and we may get back to that in a minute or two again. 
But we’ve spent a fair bit of time relating this to how the 
community feels, how the public feels, how much security they 
feel, the sense of injustice that exists there. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could comment — 
and this is moving a little bit to the other part of your 
department, which is the public safety one — a discussion at 
some length on the use in various communities of citizens on 
patrol. Different groups in different communities go by 
different terms. I know from time to time the department 
probably has some concerns that this gets close to being a 
vigilante group, but if we could get a report on how active these 
sorts of groups are across the province, how many communities, 
what support there is, and I’d like a fairly lengthy discussion I 
think in the next half hour or so, on that issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if I 
have an answer to fill the next half hour. Really this is an issue 
that we would probably be better dealing with through Justice. 
In terms of separation of the department, we tend to deal with 
people after they’ve been sentenced. The policing aspect is 

really dealt with more through the Justice department. 
 
Although I think it is fair to say that the NDP government 
supports these community activities where neighbours are 
banding together to make sure that they have community watch 
programs in place and work with the police on reducing crime 
in their community. That’s certainly something our government 
supports. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. I guess I’ll have to save my half-hour 
for a different minister and I guess that’s going to be the part 
that will take some while getting used to, exactly who’s taking 
responsibility for which aspect. 
 
Electronic monitoring — it would seem to me that should fit 
under Corrections. And I’m wondering where the department is 
at with that, how many individuals are on electronic monitoring, 
and exactly how this is being used and how effective it’s being 
found to be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Chairman, on any given day there 
are about 145, 155 people in the province who are under 
electronic monitoring. The decision as to whether a person 
receives electronic monitoring is one made by the courts and 
not by the correctional system itself in terms of a parole issue. 
This is something that the court will decide and direct. 
 
It is generally felt though that there is some success with this 
program and, indeed, we are seeing some pressure on us to 
increase the availability of electronic monitoring units that are 
available through Corrections. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’d like for the minister to outline 
what the costs are, let’s say on a . . . per individual, to use the 
electronic monitoring so we have some idea how effective this 
is as far as a cost-effectiveness issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, we do have . . . 
The cost in fact is I am told $7.22 a day to have a person under 
electronic monitoring. This is certainly a relatively inexpensive 
way but obviously it needs to be a fairly cautiously used tool 
also in terms of the type of offenders which are under the 
electronic monitoring. 
 
The relative cost at seven dollars and a quarter is certainly less 
than what we see spent on the supervision of federal offenders, 
which is about $36 a day. So that probably puts it a little bit into 
perspective. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The minister 
mentioned that it was an issue as to what type offender would 
get this and what type wouldn’t; and I would like for him to 
elaborate on that because it would be interesting to know 
exactly what you have to do to qualify, or what you have to do 
to make sure you don’t qualify to be on that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the type of 
offenders that are generally found to be using, ordered to be 
using the electronic monitoring tend to be increasingly ones that 
are receiving conditional sentences within the community. 
 
So again the courts decide who will be put under the electronic 
monitoring program. In this case we are finding increasingly 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

where there are conditional sentences issued that they may 
order the electronic monitoring to be in place. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. We’ve spent a moderate amount 
of time on the accountability issue and we may get back to that. 
In fact we probably will here in some time. 
 
But I’d like to follow the other route for some time, and that’s 
dealing with rehabilitation and how successful we are. And I’d 
like for the minister to comment on that and then we can 
probably go into that issue and deal with it part by part to see 
what aspects are working and how effective they’re being. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, there are about 
4,300 people that are involved in the programs that we do have. 
There’s about an 83 per cent completion rate. 
 
What is interesting is a recent study that has been done shows 
that there is a 17 per cent reduction in recidivism in . . . among 
individuals who have completed the substance abuse program. 
 
So it does I think show that the programming does have some 
impact. And certainly again, as we’ve discussed in the past, it is 
up to the individuals to make sure they are taking the 
appropriate choices when they are released. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — If that particular part of the program seems to 
be so . . . such a significant part of it, and I think we can 
understand that because a lot of crime is almost like . . . as if 
initiated by substance abuse where that is the key factor that 
kicks off a criminal activity, if we don’t consider that a criminal 
activity in itself. And I’m wondering what exactly is the process 
when someone is put in a correctional centre where they can or 
cannot, or can choose or can choose not to become involved in 
that program. I sense from the minister’s last answer that that is 
a choice that’s sort of given. 
 
What options are available to someone coming into the system 
as far as taking those courses are concerned? And what are the 
results of not taking it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I want to start 
with where I left off. When I talk about the recidivism rate, I 
mean that once the individual is released the choice is theirs as 
to whether they reoffend. This is what I meant very clearly to 
say. 
 
Within the correctional system though, again the choice of 
participating in programming, where it’s not court ordered, is 
up to the individual. One of the pieces that will strengthen our 
ability to deal with individuals are the changes that we are 
proposing under The Correctional Services Act, where 
individuals will need to earn the remission of their sentence, not 
simply have it imposed. 
 
So participation in programs will be a key part of earning that 
remission. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay. And I would like the minister to 
discuss that part about the . . . I believe he used the term 
remission of the program, as far as shortening the time 
sentence, I believe is what he’s referring to. 
 

To expand on that on some extent, I think this is maybe an 
aspect that would have a lot of . . . or maybe has a lot of public 
support. How new is that initiative and exactly how does it 
operate? And I think we need a fair discussion on that aspect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, under the 
current system I think members will be aware that when a 
person is sentenced they are required to serve fully two-thirds 
of that sentence, after which they may lose additional time. As 
we’ve talked about in terms of the penalties that are in place, 
we’ve suggested that they would lose a time for discipline 
problems within the system. 
 
This will change the system. The proposal that we have made 
under The Correctional Services Amendment Act will require 
the prisoners, the inmates, to earn the time for remission. Now 
this will . . . We are still working on what the exact criteria will 
be and certainly we can have a discussion about this when we 
get into the discussion of the Bill under committee. 
 
But the view is, is that if prisoners are participating in programs 
— successfully completing them — that they are participating 
without incident within the facilities — that they are living in 
the facilities without incident — they would then earn a 
remission on their sentence, rather than have the automatic 
one-third that would have to be taken away from them for bad 
behaviour. 
 
So this really changes the equation. It flips it so that the onus is 
on the inmate to earn the remission, rather than have it simply 
granted out front. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think that’s an initiative 
that we would probably have to say is one of the bright lights 
that have come out so far in the discussion when we’re dealing 
with accountability — the concept that you go into the facility 
with the understanding you are going to do the time that is 
assigned to you. 
 
I think the public has long been very upset with the concept that 
someone would get a certain number of months in the facility, 
and as soon as that was given there, you multiply it by about 
decimal six and you said, that’s when I’m getting out. And you 
know the thought was you always got out — or almost always 
got out — with that, you know, decimal six times what you 
were given. 
 
And the public was very upset with that because they said that 
the time that was given is part of the accountability factor that’s 
there. 
 
(12:15) 
 
So I think this change of direction is very good because I think 
most of us in society, whether we’re talking about the various 
jobs that we have or we’re talking about a classroom, whatever 
else, you earn special kinds of considerations. Getting less time 
than what you were assigned for your criminal activity is 
something that very definitely should be earned not just 
automatically given. So there’s no doubt that you have my 
support on that particular aspect. 
 
Now having said that, one of the statements that you’ll often 



May 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

 

hear out on the street is that correctional facilities are largely 
open doors because the justice system funnels people into there 
and because there’s a lack of space, they get funnelled back out 
just to keep the ones coming in the front door with a place to 
stay. 
 
Now if you follow this through, I would assume that you would 
have a larger prison population on every . . . on any given day 
because if we won’t have that, then we’re making the 
assumption that every single inmate has . . . will earn off 
one-third of the time. 
 
Now will this increase the number of inmates in any particular 
day? And I’m sure that you have records that indicate, based on 
behaviour — because this will be operated on a behaviour 
pattern — what that will be and what concerns that creates for 
the correctional system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, certainly there 
are potential facility management issues here in terms of the 
impact that such a program might have. But I want to be very 
clear about this. The revolving door policy that was in place in 
the justice system, the corrections system — or perceived to 
have been place — in the ’80s in terms of that approach really 
has changed as community standards have changed. 
 
And I think that this is something that we are seeing in terms of 
the way that the judges are dealing with it, the courts are 
dealing with, the prosecutors’ offices are dealing with it. 
Certainly we are seeing that there was an increase in the number 
of inmates who are held in our secure facilities, but they are 
held there. 
 
This is not a case where we are looking at temporary absence 
policies in order to manage the spaces. 
 
So we are going to work our way through this. We don’t 
anticipate there is going to be a significant impact in terms of 
the approach. But if so, I can tell you that it would not be our 
preferred approach by any means to move to a facility 
management policy in terms of dealing with these officials . . . 
or these, sorry, these inmates. 
 
Our approach very much here is one to encourage the inmates 
to participate in the programs. And we find that, for the most 
part, they are interested in doing so. Successful completion is 
certainly something we aim at and I think, as we mention, some 
83 per cent of the prisoners do participate and successfully 
complete the programs that have been identified for them. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, when you said 80 
per cent of the people complete the program that has been 
identified for them, what . . . how would you describe those 
other 20 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, these aren’t 
the finest citizens that we are dealing with. Certainly these are 
folks who have refused to participate in the program. They 
understand what the consequences are. We think that the 
changes we’re going to make under The Correctional Services 
Act will show them very clearly that failure to participate is 
going to have a consequence to them. 
 

Once release date comes, there is . . . this then moves back into 
the other system and we have to assume that they are not going 
to reoffend. If they do, then the consequences are there. And 
certainly they should understand that the result is, is that they 
may work their way through the system and end up out of the 
provincial correction system at some point into a federal 
correction system. And I think that that is something that they 
just need to understand. 
 
There are, unfortunately, a group of people that just refuse to 
participate and refuse to look at rehabilitation, and this is . . . 
this is one of the difficulties we face. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I’m somewhat relieved at 
some of the directions where you’re saying that that open door 
policy or revolving door policy — the door shouldn’t be open 
— the revolving door policy that the public has in mind is one 
that you’re trying to work . . . move away from. 
 
However, I want to go back to an issue just a question or two 
back. You did admit, Mr. Minister, that there would be some 
increase in the daily number of people in there with changing 
this policy. And I know that your facilities now are stretched to 
the maximum. At least it’s my impression, and having done a 
brief visit, it seemed that way. So how are you going to 
accommodate that even if your prison population on any given 
day goes up by an average of let’s say 5 per cent? I don’t think 
you have the room for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, this is a 
good question and certainly a fair question in terms of how we 
deal with it. The prison population fluctuates, as we know, in 
terms of on a seasonal basis; it fluctuates on any given day 
there’s a different number of people within the system. There 
will be some pressure put on the facilities. 
 
I know I’ve been asked this by people as to how we’ll deal with 
it. We need to really see what the impact of the numbers are 
going to be. And there is as you know a correlation between the 
length of sentences, the type of sentences, the number of people 
who are going through. And this is just one of those things that 
we believe can be managed within the current facilities. 
 
Certainly we don’t want a surplus of space in the jails. It would 
be nice if we had the crime rate down so that there were fewer 
there, but we are not prepared to embark on a policy where we 
are moving people out of the system on a revolving-door policy 
to manage that. 
 
The facility management issue is certainly significant. I think, at 
some point, we will have an opportunity to discuss this in terms 
of Regina and some of the issues there; and we are going to 
need to continue to look at how this particular piece balances 
off with some of the facility management issues we have. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the minister 
keeps underlining the fact that they are not going to work with 
this revolving door, and I hope that that’s the case. We will 
definitely keep a very close eye on that because I think the 
public is very definitely on a different side because their 
personal security is very much at stake when you run that 
revolving door type of a situation. 
 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2002 

 

Mr. Minister, I’d like to sort of conclude, I think we have time 
for two or three more questions, and I have a couple of general 
questions that I would like to, you know, put today and get into 
some more specifics on another day. 
 
At the start I basically asked where you were going, and we 
discussed the fact that you were working on the adult and young 
offender situation and also public safety. Those were the issues 
that you mentioned right at the start. The one . . . (inaudible) . . . 
question that I did ask, and it wasn’t included in the answer, is 
where do you see your department going in the next three to 
five years should Dame Fate be fortunate enough for you and 
unfortunate enough for us to have you there that long. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, certainly one of 
the things that we are interested in doing here and one of the 
reasons for the creation of a new department is really to find a 
more integrated approach, a better paradigm for corrections that 
focuses in particularly on how we deal with adult offenders and 
young offenders. 
 
And over the next year we will be working on a corrections 
policy that brings us so that next year when we’re in this 
discussion again, certainly that we can talk about how this 
relates to the new federal Act on young offenders, and how we 
move forward. 
 
The public safety issues are significant for us as I think the 
public interest in issues around emergency preparedness has 
certainly changed over the last six months. And this is one of 
the areas that we need to spend some time working on. I think 
we’ll have an opportunity in future discussions to have some 
talk about where we move on that, and perhaps we should save 
those discussions for another day. 
 
So with that I’d like to thank the member for his questions. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials 
for this time. Hopefully next time they’ll have a bit more of an 
opportunity to prepare themselves than they did for today, but 
we’ll . . . we’ll enjoy our time next time, I’m sure. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with wishes to all the 
mothers in the Assembly for a happy Mother’s Day and to those 
who aren’t mothers, that they’ll celebrate a happy Mother’s Day 
on Sunday, appropriately. I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:30. 
 


