















































Hansard: June 11, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1959 
 June 11, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
once again today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
the good city of Humboldt who are concerned that the 
government may close down the Humboldt territory operations 
office of Sask Housing and they’re praying that the government 
do not do that. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
the city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise again today to 
talk about the closure of the Humboldt territory office for the 
Housing Authority: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan to maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Humboldt 
and St. Gregor. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon, I 
have a petition about . . . from people concerned about the crop 
insurance program. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Tisdale and Archerwill. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Langenburg, Spy Hill, and Inglis, Manitoba. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
the crop insurance program and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ogema, Bengough, 
Weyburn, and Parry. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition dealing with 
crop insurance, signed by the good citizens from Marquis: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from workers concerned about having permanent injuries and 
not being covered by workers’ compensation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizens by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and equitable 
treatment be given to those injured and disabled people and 
their families and be diligent in this most urgent matter. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Waldeck, Blumenhof, Neville, 
Cadillac, and Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

in the Assembly again today and bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Spiritwood and Lloydminster. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 11, 18, 24, 59, 132, and 157. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 64 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: (1) how many legally registered 
drivers reside in Saskatchewan; (2) how many of these 
drivers have vehicles registered in their names; (3) in 
reference to SGI’s safe driver rewards program, how many 
people will receive a discount under this program and what 
is the number of people at each rebate level; (4) what will 
the dollar value be of these reductions; (5) how many 
registered drivers in Saskatchewan will not qualify for any 
reduction under the program because of their past driving 
record; (6) are company vehicles eligible for this program; 
and (7) how much is budgeted for the promotion of this 
program and what is the detailed breakdown of these 
promotional costs? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 64 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: in the year 2002, how many 
productions by Minds Eye productions already have or will 
take place in Saskatchewan, and how many have or will 
take place outside of Saskatchewan, and where were these 
productions made? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have another 
question. I give notice that I shall on day no. 64 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: after CIC took an equity position in 

Minds Eye productions, how many productions by the 
company took place in Saskatchewan in 2001, and how 
many took place outside of Saskatchewan, and where were 
these productions made? 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 64 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what was the 
total compensation paid by Crown Capital Partners to Gary 
Benson in the year 2001? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 64 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water: will the 
conservation development authority be moved to the 
Environment portfolio from Sask Water? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a delegation from Namibia’s 
Office of the Prime Minister. This distinguished group of 
people is here working with Saskatchewan officials for a couple 
of weeks. 
 
To you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the rest of the 
Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, I would like to 
introduce them to you and I would ask them to stand as I 
introduce them. 
 
First, Mr. Gerson Tjihenuna. He was the Undersecretary of the 
Cabinet Secretariat and Policy Analysis Department. Mr. 
Steven Isaack, Director of Management Services Directorate. 
Mr. Dicks Kandando, Director of Policy Analysis Directorate. 
Mr. Mathew Kaholongo, Chief Policy Analyst of the Cabinet 
Secretariat Directorate. And Mr. David Tiboth, Efficiency 
Analyst with the Management Services Directorate. 
 
Saskatchewan is collaborating with Namibia under a twinning 
arrangement, Mr. Speaker, that flows from the Institute of 
Public Administration of Canada’s partnership for public sector 
capacity building for governance and social development, 
which is funded by the Canadian International Development 
Agency. 
 
Under this project, Saskatchewan and Namibia will collaborate 
on seven projects and they are: the policy analysis and 
foundation, job classification plan development, 
gender-sensitive school curriculum, HIV/AIDS (human 
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome) curriculum, distance education, land valuation 
processes and tools, gender based policy analysis. 
 
I want to welcome each and every one of you to this great 
province of ours and hope that your time spent here is enjoyable 
and productive. And I would ask all members to help me in 
welcoming these distinguished people to our Assembly and to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I would like to join 
the member from Melville in welcoming our guests from 
Namibia. We hope you enjoy your stay in Saskatchewan. We 
hope that you enjoy the proceedings this afternoon. And we 
hope your travels throughout our province will be safe. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
legislature, 50 students and teachers and sponsors who are in 
the west gallery. There are 28 grade 8 students and 22 grade 7 
students from Argyle School, just a number of blocks west of 
the legislature. And they’re accompanied by teachers, Mrs. Lori 
Godwin and Mr. Dave Boan, as well as chaperone, Mrs. Barb 
Burwell. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege this afternoon to introduce to you and to all 
members of the House, a group of 28 grade 7 students seated in 
the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These grade 7 students have come from the community of 
Preeceville, specifically Preeceville School, to be present early 
this morning and this afternoon here in the Legislative 
Assembly and continue on this afternoon with tours throughout 
Regina. 
 
I want to thank teacher Jodie Ross for organizing and bringing 
these students to Regina, and also some chaperones. And of 
course the bus driver, Mr. Jerry Lisitza, and Carrie Konkel for 
taking the time to bring 28 students to Regina. 
 
I hope you’ve enjoyed the morning and I look forward to . . . 
I’m sure you’ll look forward to the question period as you and I 
have discussed earlier on today. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome the group from Preeceville. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my 
colleagues in the legislature, 29 grade 4 students from St. 
Josephat School. They are seated in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And these students are here for a visit with their 
teacher, Mrs. Pack, and parent chaperone, Mrs. George. And 
I’m looking forward to meeting with them after question period 
for a photo and some soft drinks. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I recognize some of the children. St. 
Josephat School is right next to the . . . very close to the mall 
where my constituency office is. And although I don’t see too 
many on these days, I certainly see some them in the fall as they 
come around and hang around at my place once in a while. 
 
But anyway, I’d like to welcome all these grade 4 students from 

St. Josephat School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you my very much younger sister, Audrey 
Langhorst, who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. And she’s 
here today with her husband, Bruce Langhorst. Audrey is in the 
process of retiring from SaskPower and Bruce is in the process 
of trying to retire from farming. 
 
And I ask all to welcome them to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also join with you 
in welcoming Audrey and Bruce Langhorst from the Battlefords 
to our Assembly this afternoon. 
 
But I do want to introduce to you seated in your gallery, Darcy 
Vany of Regina. Darcy graduated this spring from the 
University of Regina and received her Bachelor of 
Administration. I’d ask her to please stand. 
 
She wants to remain in Saskatchewan and is now marketing 
assistant with tappedinto.com. Her parents farm north of North 
Battleford and have not been receiving the rain which most of 
our province has been blessed with the past week. 
 
So I’d ask all members of the legislature to join me in 
welcoming Darcy this afternoon and wishing her well in her 
career in Saskatchewan. And also wishing her parents well as 
well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And, Mr. Speaker, if I may also ask your 
indulgence, I would ask that the members for Nutana and 
Meewasin kindly take very good care of their seats because 
there are two gentlemen in the east gallery who will soon be 
occupying them. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to join my 
colleague from the Battlefords in welcoming the person that he 
didn’t introduce, Grant Karwacki, to the Legislative Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
As all members will know, Mr. Karwacki was nominated in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Nutana to represent the Liberal Party 
in the next general election and he received that nomination last 
Thursday evening at the Albert Community Centre, and I 
understand that the crowd could have been a little larger. 
 
Anyways, Mr. Speaker, those people who are involved in 
politics in our constituency, particularly those people from the 
NDP (New Democratic Party), are looking forward to the 
rumble in the jungle of Nutana in the next provincial election. 
And I want to assure Mr. Karwacki that the candidate is going 
to float like a butterfly and sting like a bee in the next general 
election. 
 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce my daughter Alison, who is seated in 
your gallery up here. Alison, I’d like you to stand up. She 
wasn’t here on day one of this session when I gave my maiden 
speech. She actually was in Ontario, western . . . She studies at 
the University of Western Ontario. She had a national 
scholarship. But she hopes to come back home and pursue a law 
degree in environmental sciences here. 
 
So to all of you, I’d like to introduce Alison. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company Production 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday was the 
opening in Regina of the Saskatchewan Native Theatre 
Company’s new production entitled The Alley. This company is 
based in my constituency of Saskatoon Idylwyld, and I’m 
happy and pleased that audiences across the province — and 
indeed across the country — will be able to see this production. 
 
Maria Campbell, a well-known First Nations writer is the 
author and creator of this fresh and challenging piece. In 
collaboration with the 2002 Circle of Voices participants, Ms. 
Campbell has created a play that allows its audience a glimpse 
into the lives of two ancient characters of Cree mythology: 
Weesakeechak and First Grandmother. 
 
However, one should not expect to witness these two characters 
as they would normally appear in folklore and legend. As a 
skateboarder and a retired downtown lady, representations of 
Weesakeechak and First Grandmother interact with the 
homeless youth of a prairie city. The story takes a hard look at 
the challenges faced by young people caught in an urban 
landscape, carrying the intergenerational burden of colonialism. 
The story also looks at the key to liberation as being held in the 
teachings of our past. 
 
Maria Campbell uses a combination of story, song, and dance, 
and Indian humour to entertain, educate, and empower. 
 
The last showing of this wonderful play is tonight at 8 p.m. at 
St. Andrew’s church hall and I would encourage all members to 
take in this delightful yet profound drama. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Squadron 888 Air Cadets 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Wednesday, June 5, I had the honour of attending the annual 
ceremonial review of Squadron 888 Air Cadets at the Wakaw 
Recreational Centre. Mr. Speaker, Korean War veteran Mr. 
Wilfred Paintednose conducted the review from the One Arrow 
Reserve. And after that many awards were presented to 
individual cadets. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Squadron 888 Air Cadets consist of both male and 
female Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal youth. The cadet 
squadrons throughout Saskatchewan provide a great 
opportunity for youth between the age of 12 and 18 to 
participate in character enhancing activities through group and 
individual projects. The focus is on learning personal 
responsibility, self-discipline, respect, courtesy, building 
friendships, and experiencing the joy of achievement and the 
pride of success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two cadets earned their pilot licence at this year’s 
ceremony and it was a very exciting and rewarding moment for 
them. Mr. Speaker, the cadets are a valuable organization in 
assisting in the development of personal character and the 
contributions that they make to the betterment of our society. 
And I salute them as well as their many instructors, 
commanding officers, and mentors. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Improvements to Saskatchewan Highways 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year the 
government has committed almost $300 million to improving 
Saskatchewan highways and I am pleased to report to the House 
today on some of the projects that have either been completed 
or are currently underway. 
 
At the end of May a 12-kilometre resurfacing project was 
completed along a section of Highway 7 near Tessier and 
Zealandia. 
 
There are also three projects of note, Mr. Speaker, that began in 
the last couple of weeks. A surfacing project has begun on the 
outskirts of Arcola on Highway 13 and will cover 11.6 
kilometres west to Kisbey. An increase in truck traffic on this 
highway has led to a great deal of rutting and rough sections, 
and the surfacing project will upgrade this section of highway 
to a standard that can better handle the heavy traffic. 
 
Another resurfacing project currently underway is a 
17-kilometre section of Highway 16 east of Paynton. 
 
The last project of note, Mr. Speaker, is the construction of the 
Kincorth bridge. Work is now under way to construct a concrete 
overpass on Highway No. 1 West over the CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway) tracks near Kincorth, approximately 16 
kilometres west of the junction with Highway 21. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just three examples of the more than 700 
kilometres of highways that the province will be reconstructing 
and paving this year. And apparently the opposition can’t stand 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — The government of Saskatchewan is fully 
aware that highways are lifelines that connect people of this 
province to one another and lifelines that will also drive 
economic development. That is why this government is fixing 
the roads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

 

Leask Couple Receive National Farming Award 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. John Cote and Barb 
Stefanyshyn-Cote of Leask were chosen as Canada’s 
outstanding young farmers in St. Hyacinthe, Quebec. 
 
The young couple were recipients of Saskatchewan’s 
Outstanding Young Farmers Award and advanced to represent 
Saskatchewan for Canada’s outstanding young farmers 
program. 
 
Seven couples representing the seven regions in Canada were 
judged on their farming operations, community involvement, 
dedication to the industry, and environmental considerations. 
Every year two couples are chosen to share the honour. The 
Cotes share the designation with a Quebec couple, Gilbert 
Beaulieu and Johanne Dube. 
 
The judging process involved interviews, an application form, 
and a presentation of their respective operations. The 
candidates’ operations included specialty crops, hogs, dairy, 
poultry, fruit, and greenhouse production. 
 
John and Barb operate Lumec Farms Ltd. northwest of Leask. 
Their successful management has enabled them to increase 
operations to 3,300 acres. The Cotes have used their education 
and resources to improve farming techniques while preventing 
soil erosion. 
 
Seven hundred and fifty individuals attended the evening gala 
to witness the recipients receive a silver belt buckle and lapel 
pin. The two winning couples also receive an expense paid trip 
to Toronto for the 2002 Canada’s young farmers banquet and 
presentation. 
 
The OYF (outstanding young farmers) program brings together 
positive people in our industry from coast to coast, Barb 
explained. She invites anyone interested in the program to 
contact them. 
 
Congratulations John and Barb for your outstanding dedication 
to the agriculture industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maclean’s 2002 University Rankings 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the 2002 Maclean’s guide 
to Canadian universities has just been released and 
Saskatchewan’s two universities have done very well. 
 
In the six years since the guide has been published, the 
University of Regina has risen from 11th to 7th in the overall 
ranking for comprehensive universities. The University of 
Saskatchewan has also followed this trend rising from 15th to 
11th in the medical-doctoral category. 
 
One of the reasons for the increase at these two facilities is the 
extensive recruitment effort by both campuses to find new 
professors and instructors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this improvement in our rankings in Maclean’s 
suggests that our provincial investment in post-secondary 

education is improving the quality of the university experience 
and is being recognized across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our universities and students are setting the 
groundwork for a great future. This government will continue to 
strive to meet the standards in excellence and ensure that a 
post-secondary education in Saskatchewan is not only attainable 
but extremely reputable. 
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating our universities for such an impressive showing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Saskatchewan’s First Woman Sheriff Retires After 25 Years 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to recognize 
today Weyburn’s sheriff, the province’s first woman sheriff, 
who retired last week after 25 years of service. Wendy 
Dammann, who served for more than 25 years, has hung up her 
sheriff’s hat for the last time. 
 
Wendy grew up on a farm near Froude and in 1969, when she 
realized that there were sheriffs in Saskatchewan, she decided 
that’s what she wanted for her career. And in 1977 she became 
the sheriff in Weyburn and held that position for some time. 
 
She was only one of 13 sheriffs in Saskatchewan at that time, 
and today there are only eight sheriffs in the province. 
 
In 1987 Weyburn and Estevan merged their regions, and 
Wendy became the sheriff to serve both of those regions. 
 
Wendy had a few words to say last week upon her retirement, 
and I’d just like to quote them: 
 

I did my job for 25 years without having to duck and no 
one blackened my eyes. 
 
I tried to treat people the way I like to be treated and over 
the years I’ve developed a few friends along the way. 

 
Wendy now plans to take some time for herself and to have 
some fun even though she says that she will certainly miss her 
job as sheriff. She plans to travel, play golf, fish, hunt, and 
camp. 
 
And so on behalf of all residents of Weyburn and surrounding 
area, I’d like to thank Wendy for her commitment and service to 
her community and to thank Wendy for a job well done and 
wish her well in her retirement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Development Museum Centennial Project 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan’s 100th birthday is in 2005, and the Western 
Development Museum is offering everyone in the province a 
unique opportunity to make a permanent contribution to the 
celebration by creating a major exhibit called 1905 to 2005, 
Winning the Prairie Gamble. 
 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

It is to be displayed in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, North Battleford, 
and Yorkton, and will give everyone the opportunity to record 
their personal stories, the stories of their families for survival 
and success, whether related to family, community, business, or 
social history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our individual stories collectively will make our 
provincial story. And what I like about this project, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this collection of historical stories from our 
pioneer years is going to be collected and stored on computer. 
And when you think about it, we began with the Red River cart 
and the sod hut and now we live in a wired, high-tech, largely 
urban world. We’re going to preserve the history of one 
generation with the tools of the next generation, and I think 
that’s very appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s a terrific way to honour our past as we look forward to a 
great future. And anyone interested, Mr. Speaker, can call 
1-888-821-2005 and take part in this project. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Efforts to Secure Support for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day in the 
House NDP ministers either give the wrong answers or no 
answers at all. And now even the Premier has fallen into this 
habit. 
 
Yesterday the Premier said he knew nothing at all about a 
federal ag package. He said, and I quote, I “am not privy to any 
details that the federal government may be planning to 
announce.” Yet as it turns out, the NDP Agriculture minister 
has a lot of details and he gave them to the Leader-Post 
yesterday — in the afternoon, right after the Premier had said 
they had no knowledge of any package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t the Premier give us a straight answer 
yesterday? Why is the Premier reluctant to give this House 
honest answers in the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me remind the House 
and the Leader of the Opposition, if his memory is this short, 
that yesterday he asked me the following: 
 

. . . has the Premier been informed by the federal 
government when the announcement of a new farm aid 
package is expected? And will it include any trade injury 
and drought relief as well as a new agricultural policy 
framework? 

 
And my answer of course, Mr. Speaker, was that it is, no, I have 
not been informed by the federal government, by the Prime 
Minister, the Minister of Agriculture, or the Minister of Trade, 
or anyone from the federal government about any detail or 
plans to announce the federal program. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Speaker. Today I pick up, today I pick 

up a statement by the Broadcast News — the Broadcast News 
— and I read here that in a conference call from Rome, federal 
Minister Agriculture Lyle Vanclief confirmed a federal 
announcement is coming very soon. And get this, Mr. Speaker. 
He also confirmed any aid package will be cost shared with the 
province. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a fine situation when the federal 
government of Canada chooses to inform the provinces of 
Canada of agricultural policy in a news conference in Rome 
through Broadcast News — I have to read the Broadcast News. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very peculiar way to run a country. And 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, I have decided this morning, I am this 
afternoon leaving this province to attend to Ottawa to attend a 
meeting with the Prime Minister tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, out 
on the farm the folks there will be saying the Premier has 
finally woken up after the horse is out of the barn. He’s done it 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier goes around blaming other people. 
Mr. Speaker, he blamed . . . he and his colleague blamed the 
Federation of Agriculture. Today he’s mad at the federal 
Minister of Agriculture for making an announcement in Rome 
because this government has no contact, no input, no 
negotiations with the federal government. They sit back and 
wait for the federal government to make an announcement in 
the way that the federal government chooses to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where has our government been? Where has our 
Premier been? Mr. Speaker, where was the Minister of 
Agriculture, where was the Premier, while these decisions were 
being made? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have been in Winnipeg, 
Manitoba. I have been in Williston, North Dakota. I have been 
in Saskatoon. I have been in Dawson City. And tomorrow, I 
will be in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Agriculture has been across the 
country meeting with ministers of Agriculture, meeting with 
ministers of Agriculture and meeting with farm leaders across 
the country. Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s time again for the Leader 
of the Opposition and, if I may say, the Leader of the Liberal 
Party in this province to stand and confirm their position in 
support of Canadian producers and Saskatchewan producers. It 
is time for them to stand up again and say they stand with 
Canadian . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. The floor goes to the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, as I was 
saying, it is time for the Liberal leader and the Leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party again to join producers across Canada and 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

 

state their unequivocal support for a trade injury payment from 
the national government, 100 per cent funded by the national 
government. 
 
And while we’re on the question, Mr. Speaker, of agricultural 
policy, have we heard a word of policy? Have we heard a word 
of policy, except the agricultural critic of the opposition sitting 
in the corridor and saying to the people of Saskatchewan, we 
wouldn’t know what to do. Mr. Speaker, it’s time they came 
forward with some policy and it’s time they stood with 
producers — stood, I hope, with the Liberal leader of 
Saskatchewan, stood with this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the 
Premier says he’s been everywhere, but he’s been everywhere 
except where it counts — speaking on behalf of the agriculture 
industries of Saskatchewan, speaking on behalf of the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier allowed his Agriculture minister 
yesterday to blame Bob Friesen and the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture for the information he received. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we understand that that isn’t true either. Because Bob Friesen 
says that none of the farm groups discussed any of the numbers 
that the Minister of Agriculture was quoting yesterday. In fact, 
he said the only person that gave out any numbers was the 
Premier’s Minister of Agriculture — that’s what Bob Friesen 
said today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it that we can’t get a straight answer from 
this government? Why is it this government knows . . . doesn’t 
know what’s going on? Mr. Speaker, when is the NDP going to 
stop blaming everybody but themselves for their own 
incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Less than a month ago, that member, the 
Leader of the Opposition, heard what the Canadian Federation 
of Agriculture had to say about support for farm families. He 
said, Mr. Speaker, and the member of the opposition heard him, 
he said the trade injury in Canada should be paid for by the 
national government. 
 
And I can affirm today, Mr. Speaker, as I did to the media and 
to this House, we had a conversation on Friday with four 
provincial Ag ministers and the national farm organizations. 
And we put the hypothesis to the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture that if in fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s a cash payout of 
7, 8, or $900 million of which trade injury is involved, will the 
farm organizations say that they’re going to buy in? And they 
said that they’re prepared to take the package, is what they said, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what I said to the media; that’s what I say 
to the opposition. 
 
And I say to the member of the opposition, you need to stay . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been talking for 
weeks — and in fact, it’s now months — about the damage that 

will be caused by the US (United States) farm Bill. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the story in today’s paper, as inspired by our 
Minister of Agriculture, says that any package will address 
drought, it might address water projects, research and 
development, and provide new . . . money for the new 
agriculture policy framework. 
 
But there is no mention of injury payments to address the US 
farm Bill. No mention of that whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. And 
that was the whole point of this exercise. That is why we stood 
with the NDP in meeting with the federal government to 
provide federal support for Canadian producers to compensate 
for injury caused by the US farm Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened to that idea? Why has that been 
lost? Why has this government not stuck to its guns and insisted 
that the federal government provide compensation for injury 
caused by unfair trade? Mr. Speaker, now how do they propose 
to fight the US farm Bill? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this side of the House, we 
have been very clear about the subsidy and the US farm injury 
to Canada for the better part of two years, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
been on our page. In fact, in September . . . or in February of 
this year, when we submitted our document to the national 
government, we had included in it, Mr. Speaker, the importance 
of having trade injury. 
 
And the only people, Mr. Speaker, in this House who we’ve had 
to take kicking and screaming and dragging on the subsidy fees 
has been the member from Rosetown-Biggar. He’s the guy who 
we . . . 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, finally, Mr. Speaker, he’s on board, 
he’s on board now, did a 180 and we’re glad to have him here. 
 
But I hear him say today, Mr. Speaker, that gradually he’s 
slipping and he’s getting ready to leave which is not unusual, 
Mr. Speaker, for the Saskatchewan Party and the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I would tell that NDP 
government we have not slipped one millimetre and we are far 
ahead of them on any agriculture issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen this movie 
before and, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t have a very happy ending. 
The NDP wasn’t at the table when the feds came up with the 
AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program and, 
as a result, that program was a disaster for Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
The NDP then wasn’t at the table when they put the CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program) program together, and again 
Saskatchewan producers got the shaft. 
 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

Now it appears that Ottawa is coming up with another program 
and again the NDP government was not at the table, and again 
we can expect it to be a disaster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new program, according to the Leader-Post, 
does not address trade injury caused by the US farm Bill, and 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, according to the Leader-Post article, 
may be asked to pick up a portion of the bill. That’s 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. How did the NDP let that happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, not only has this government 
in Saskatchewan been at the table for the last year, Mr. Speaker, 
building a new agricultural policy framework and a brand new 
farm safety net in Saskatchewan; not only haven’t we been at 
the table, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been leading the parade in terms 
of what should happen in Canada on agricultural policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ve said, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said that 
we need a brand new safety net in Saskatchewan. Why? 
Because it doesn’t work. 
 
And the last time we had an agricultural debate on policy 
framework as it relates to safety nets, members from that side of 
the House were there and we weren’t back in Saskatchewan for 
10 minutes and they were gone, Mr. Speaker. And that’s where 
they’re aiming to do again. 
 
There’s only one group of men and women on this side of the 
. . . in Saskatchewan today who are pulling the train, Mr. 
Speaker, and the train on agriculture is well on its way. And the 
engineer, Mr. Speaker, of that train is right here. And the 
caboose, Mr. Speaker, the caboose of that train is right there — 
antiquated and out of date. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, they are so far ahead of the 
parade that they’re the circus and they’re the clowns, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan people are ending up paying the price for NDP 
mismanagement and incompetence. We’re getting a flawed 
farm program thanks to that NDP government. 
 
Last month taxpayers have been forced to pay for three separate 
reviews under this NDP government. The NDP is reviewing the 
breakdown that led to the privacy scandal. The NDP was forced 
into reviewing the actions of a former minister, the 
Environment minister. And now the NDP is spending $50,000 
— taxpayers’ dollars — to review why the SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) minister couldn’t get his story straight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe we need just one big review. It’s called an 
election. That will give Saskatchewan people a chance to pass 
judgment on our government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, how many more times are 

Saskatchewan people going to have to put up with the NDP’s 
mismanagement and incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was hopeful, I was 
hopeful as I left . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was hopeful today that as 
I left the province to attend to Ottawa to meet with the Prime 
Minister, I might be able to go to Ottawa and say that I come 
with the unanimous support of the political parties of 
Saskatchewan, as I go today with the unanimous support of 
Western premiers and Territorial leaders. Given the comments 
made by the Leader of the Opposition today, I’m not at all sure 
I can go saying that there’s unanimous support for the province 
of Saskatchewan and the producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you see, Mr. Speaker, each time that this group of men 
and women don’t like an answer . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, today the Leader of the 
Opposition stands in this House and calls for an election. I hear 
a number of his members calling for an election. 
 
Well here we go again, Mr. Speaker. They make a commitment 
to the people of Saskatchewan. He went to the people of 
Saskatchewan in the last election saying: I believe in fixed 
election dates. Fixed elections dates — that’s what he said he 
believes in. Well now he doesn’t believe in fixed election dates. 
Now he wants me to call one next week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you when I call an election in this province 
at the appropriate time, there’s going to be lots more of New 
Democrat members on this side of the House and lots few 
Saskatchewan Party members on that side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Claims by Government Agencies 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again is for the minister responsible for SGI. Last 
Friday, Mr. Speaker, when the minister announced that he was 
asking SGI to conduct a review of their surveillance and 
investigation policies, he said he was also going to ask them to 
find out why he was given, quote, “incomplete information.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, very specifically to the minister: was the minister 
on June 6, or at any time prior to June 6, briefed by SGI 
officials with regard to the use of firms or individuals to 
conduct investigations on people with SGI insurance claims? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s June 6 or prior to June 6. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I think I was fairly clear in 
my statement in the House the other day, that I listed off all of 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

 

the things that I would be asking for as the minister responsible 
for SGI, Mr. Speaker. And in the course of that review, that will 
be made public and available. 
 
The only circumstances, Mr. Speaker, that may not be made 
public — and I’ve indicated this as well — is if there are 
specific cases that are dealt with. But the issue that the member 
raises will be dealt with in due course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that of all the 
questions we’ve had so far, this minister still doesn’t know what 
he was told on any particular day. No wonder in the House we 
go from day to day getting those ridiculous answers that we get 
from him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was the minister responsible for SGI briefed on 
SGI’s special investigation unit and its activities, or the use of 
surveillance by SGI, in the investigation of insurance claims on 
or before June 6? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that member to suggest 
that we don’t know what’s going on from day to day, Mr. 
Speaker, lookit here. I’ll let him calm down, I’ll let him calm 
down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look at the Leader-Post of June 11, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

In the midst of criticizing government’s policies on 
investigations, Heppner (this is in the quote) was also 
forced to backtrack on some of his own prior statements. 
 
In previous interviews Heppner had said that SGI shouldn’t 
investigate people suspected of fraud without those 
people’s permission. 
 
Later he refused to state the Saskatchewan Party’s position 
on fraud investigations. But (Mr. Speaker) by Monday, he 
said if the evidence warrants investigation, surveillance 
should be run (Mr. Speaker). 

 
He seems to change his position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s a sort of a 
backhanded compliment when the best answer that the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — . . . when the best answer the minister can 
have is to read out what the member of the opposition said. 
Surely he has some few ideas on his own. The Minister of 
Agriculture didn’t today; the Premier didn’t today. Let’s try the 
minister for SGI again. 
 
Was the minister responsible for SGI briefed on SGI’s special 
investigation unit and its activities or the use of surveillance by 

SGI in the investigation of insurance claims on or before June 
6? Surely the minister knows what he was told on a particular 
day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was 
absolutely clear in what I asked for in that review, Mr. Speaker. 
I said that when I stood in this House, Mr. Speaker, I was not 
provided with complete or accurate information, Mr. Speaker. 
And I apologize to this House, and I apologize again today if 
that’s what the member wants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve also asked for the review which will answer the very 
question that that member asked today, and I’m not going to 
interfere with that process right now. He will have his answers 
very quickly, Mr. Speaker, and most likely next week 
sometime. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s really amazing that the minister has to 
have someone else in charge to tell him what he’s supposed to 
have known — what he’s supposed to have known. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again very specifically to the minister: did SGI 
officials or members of the minister’s staff brief him at any time 
prior to or on June 6, on the number of insurance investigations 
conducted annually by SGI’s special investigation unit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I suggest 
that that member should have been briefed by some officials 
about whether or not people who commit fraud in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, should be investigated, Mr. Speaker. And thank 
goodness he’s finally changed his position. And I assume that’s 
the position of the party opposite now, Mr. Speaker, that they 
believe when people are suspected of fraud that they actually do 
get investigated, Mr. Speaker. Because clearly that’s SGI’s 
position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered the question. I’ve been clear. The 
review will include and answer the very question that that 
member asks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it didn’t cost the taxpayers $50,000 for me to admit that I had to 
change my position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Now, Mr. Speaker, does the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Does the minister actually need a $50,000 
review to have someone tell him what he knew? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if that member’s 
stating now that because he changed his position we should stop 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

the review, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. I wish he’d stand up and 
say that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member surely knows that the review includes much more 
than that, Mr. Speaker. It includes a review of whether or not 
the surveillance and the in-depth investigation procedure that 
SGI follows is appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I believe that Price Waterhouse will provide that review to 
us next week sometime. It will be made public with the 
exception of . . . the exception of specific individual cases. The 
member just needs to wait till sometime next week, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a traditional 
question about how many angels can dance on a head of a pin. 
Now I guess we need to know how many bureaucrats does it 
take for that minister to hide behind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, was the minister specifically told by the members 
of his staff, or SGI officials, that SGI only conducted between 8 
and 10 investigations annually? Or did the minister make up 
that assumption? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, I stood in the 
House and apologized because I didn’t have complete 
information, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t have complete information. 
And some of it was inaccurate, as I indicated, and I apologized 
for that. And that’s why we’ve asked for the review — to 
ensure that . . . to ensure first of all that the procedures around 
surveillance and investigation, around cases that we believe 
may be fraudulent, Mr. Speaker, are dealt with appropriately. In 
addition to that, I’ve asked them to review — as a third point, 
Mr. Speaker — that they also provide for me information as to 
why I didn’t have that complete information. And that member 
will have that information sometime next week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Isn’t it amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the best 
this minister can do when he doesn’t know something is to say 
his bureaucrats didn’t give him all the information and they 
gave him wrong information. How weak can that minister be 
that he can’t figure it out on his own that he doesn’t have all the 
information? Surely he should be able to ask that from his 
bureaucrats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI has hired PricewaterhouseCoopers to find out 
why the minister was completely incompetent in answering any 
questions about SGI surveillance on insurance claimants. The 
SGI president says his two-week long review will cost 
Saskatchewan taxpayers $50,000 to find out why the minister 
can’t read his own briefing notes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $50,000 for a report to explain an NDP minister’s 
incompetence — incompetence, Mr. Speaker — is questionable 
when it is already quite evident to everyone else in this 
province, including the members of the civil servants, who the 
minister’s blaming for this whole mess, that the minister is the 
one who can’t run his department, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister just stop blaming the 
bureaucracy and admit he had it all wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 
be clear that I’m absolutely not blaming the bureaucracy, Mr. 
Speaker. I said, Mr. Speaker — I said, Mr. Speaker — that the 
information that was provided to me was incomplete, Mr. 
Speaker. Some of it was inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. I believe . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — What I did say, Mr. Speaker, is the 
information I received was incomplete. Some of it was 
inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. And I said as a result of that, Mr. 
Speaker, that I would have a review conducted, Mr. Speaker — 
unlike those members, who would form some vigilante group 
and get rid of people willy-nilly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, thank goodness, I want to 
say again to the people of Saskatchewan and reinforce their 
position and our position, Mr. Speaker, that we agree on this 
finally — that people who commit fraud, who ripped off the 
people of Saskatchewan, should be investigated, Mr. Speaker, 
and appropriate action should be taken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 204 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2002 (Votes of Confidence) 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move 
first reading of Bill No. 204, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2002 (Votes of 
Confidence). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and provide 
responses to written questions 287 through 303. I’d just like to 
inform the Assembly that this far surpasses last year’s total. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses for questions no. 287 right through 
to 303 inclusive have been tabled. 
 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Mr. Peters: — I move Bill 301, The Conference of Mennonites 
of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2002, be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Chair: — I thank the member. Before we put that motion, 
we will go through it clause by clause. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Sunnyside Nursing Home 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The Conference of Mennonites of 
Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Speaker: — Would the member move that the Bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title? 
 
Mr. Peters: — I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Sunnyside Nursing Home 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 
that Bill No. 302, The Sunnyside Nursing Home Amendment 
Act, 2002 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would report . . . I 
now move that the Bill No. 303, The Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the House to 
move to government business. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 13 — Forest Fire Suppression Program 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of 
my remarks today I will be moving a motion seconded by the 
member for Regina Northeast: 
 

That this Assembly praise the heroic efforts of our forest 
firefighters, and that it recognize the government’s forest 
fire suppression program, developed over a number of 
years, a program whose efficiency is a model for the rest of 
the country. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the members of the Assembly well 
know the important role that forestry plays in our provincial 
economy, and that the suppression of fires in our forest fire belt 
is key to having that forest economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the things that most members may not understand 
is some aspects of the forest fire suppression program that we 
have in the province, which is a model throughout all of 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very dedicated forest fire suppression 
crews and program made up of both members of the 
Department of Environment and Resource Management and 
First Nations people throughout our province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We do an excellent job of fighting fires within our 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know the challenges we face this 
year, and many recent years, with forest fires within our 
province. And the timely and very aggressive nature in which 
we tackle those programs and fires within our province, Mr. 
Speaker, make a significant difference to our communities, to 
our economy, and of course to the North in general, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to talk for a few minutes a little bit about the efforts put 
forward by both the government and the forest suppression 
crews in tackling the problems we have with forest fires across 
our province this year and in future and past years, Mr. Speaker. 
We have a budget totalling $130.022 million in this province to 
put forward towards fire suppression, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

very, very significant commitment by the people of this 
province to our forest fire suppression crews, our program, and 
in fact the forest industry in our province. That was an increase 
of $9 million this year alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, we have a program dealing with reforestation. That is 
very important that we, in the aftermath of both logging and the 
lumber industry, but as well in the fire industry . . . or in forest 
fires, Mr. Speaker, that we have a reforestation program. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about the activities of our forest 
fire crews throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. On any given 
day, from about the first part of April all the way through to the 
end of September, Mr. Speaker, we have forest fire crews on 
various stages of alert in various parts of the province, based on 
a number of factors. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about what those levels of alert are, so 
people understand the conditions under which these men and 
women have to be ready on a moment’s notice to attack a new 
fire, or in fact, Mr. Speaker, may be called in in an already 
existing fire if it gets out of control — moving beyond the 
parameters and limits of those who are already involved in 
fighting that fire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a red alert is when a crew must be ready to depart 
from their predetermined staging point five minutes after 
receiving a call. So they must be ready to leave within five 
minutes after receiving a call. So those members must be 
packed, ready to go, and actually sitting, ready to move. And 
that includes both initial attack fire suppression teams, as well 
as aircraft that would be on red alert, ready to go on just a 
moment’s notice. 
 
A yellow alert has crews ready to depart from that 
predetermined point, Mr. Speaker — or in fact, aircraft — 
within 30 minutes. A blue alert means they must be ready to 
move and be on the go within 60 minutes. And a green alert is 
really when crews are on a stand down situation where the 
forest fire hazard is very, very low. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker —or Mr. Speaker, pardon me — that 
gives very little time for these crews to do much of anything but 
sit and wait for that deployment, Mr. Speaker. Fire crews are 
made up of personnel who are fully trained. They’re 
experienced firefighters, in most cases, in this province. They’re 
geared to fighting sustained fire actions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we also have initial attack crews where their job is to go in 
and in the very early stages of a fire, maybe after a lightning 
strike, try to contain that fire or in fact put it out before it gets 
out of hand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Each crew will have seven firefighters as a minimum, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m told. And they will in fact be able to deploy on a 
moment’s notice. 
 
We have a number of different types of fire crews within the 
province, Mr. Speaker, and I think we should reflect a little bit 
on the entire structure of the fire crews in our province. We 
have what we call a crew fire, which there is usually one to ten 
firefighters involved with. We have a sector fire which will 
have anywhere from 11 to 50 firefighters involved, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
And then we have a division fire which will have anywhere 
from 51 to 150 basic personnel involved. A campaign fire, Mr. 
Speaker, will have anywhere from 150 plus personnel involved 
and will have many, many support mechanisms attached to it 
because that would be a project fire which would take a 
sustained period of time to put out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have within our province as well to assist the regular 
departmental firefighting crews, a number of northern First 
Nations firefighting crews, in fact 52 of those crews that are 
established contacts within communities in both northern and 
First Nations communities. And their jobs are no different than 
the firefighters employed by the Department of Environment 
and Resource Management on a regular basis, on a full-time 
basis. They work with those individuals putting out fires 
throughout the North. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very, very important to 
understand that we have a very active firefighting contingent 
within our province, and in fact have the ability to fight several 
forest fires simultaneously, which we are often called upon to 
do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the equipment that the department both has on 
hand or in fact leases or rents out to suppress fires in our 
province include both fixed-wing aircraft in three different 
types of aircraft, Mr. Speaker; what is known as trackers, which 
basically are an aircraft used to drop retardant on a fire to try to 
prevent it from spreading beyond the parameters it’s within 
now. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Now we have what are known as CL215 water bombers, Mr. 
Speaker, which are designed aircraft to drop water on a fire. 
They, in fact, swoop down upon a lake and using the force of 
their engines, fill a compartment with water with a scoop 
coming down, Mr. Speaker, and go and drop that water on the 
fire and can return to the lake; and they do that for several hours 
consecutively in order to attempt to contain and put out a fire. 
 
And last but not least for fixed-wing aircraft, we have what we 
call bird dog aircraft and these aircraft are small fixed-wing 
aircraft where there is both a pilot and what is a called a bird 
dog officer in it. And that bird dog officer is responsible for 
being above the, in a plane, above the fire zone and directing 
the operations of the air attack vehicles — or aircraft, pardon 
me, Mr. Speaker — the CL215s and trackers, as well as 
directing, to some degree, the crews on the surface, Mr. 
Speaker, fighting the fire with more conventional means — 
shovels, backpacks, and . . . water backpacks and hose, axes, 
and other fire suppression hand equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to help those individuals maintain a 
barrier around the fire but also give them notice if the fire 
happens to be coming behind them or if high winds are moving 
flames in an area which would be very close to them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the firefighters in our province, on an annual basis, deal 
with many, many fires and . . . individuals who’ve had the 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

 

opportunity to use their skills both here and in other parts of the 
country. 
 
I just want to talk about where we were in the province as of 
June 10. We had a total of 18 — or pardon me — 19 fires 
burning, Mr. Speaker, throughout the province. We have a 
year-to-date with . . . where fire hazards are high to extreme 
throughout most of the province. The rain in the recent days has 
done some good in the southern part of the province, in the 
Cypress Hills area. But throughout most of northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, fire is still a very, very serious 
issue. 
 
In addition to our fixed-wing aircraft, SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) has at its disposal a 
number of helicopters, which both move personnel around in 
the fires and within the fire area, Mr. Speaker, but they also 
have the ability with buckets, as well, of scooping up water and 
dropping water on various fires. And they are used quite often 
in very tight areas around communities. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker — Mr. Speaker, pardon me — our 
firefighter crews have been doing an excellent job in containing 
some very, very difficult blazes this spring within the province 
of Saskatchewan. And they are doing that at a period of time 
when we have an unprecedented dry period in the province and 
our resources are stretched, quite frankly, to the max. And those 
individuals, working very long hours, very little rest, have been 
doing what they can to save portions of our northern forest as 
well as the communities in those areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You don’t have to look very far but to look at the situation 
that’s been faced by some of our communities this year — 
Nipawin as an example. A fire, it starts in the community of 
Nipawin, spreads into the forest area adjacent to Nipawin and it 
had the potential to do a significant amount of damage to the 
community and the surrounding forest area. 
 
Now the firefighters, both from the local firefighter crews in 
those communities — Nipawin and neighbouring communities 
— did a terrific job. But in doing . . . in fighting that fire, Mr. 
Speaker, they soon realized that without help from the outside 
that fire would spread beyond their ability to control it. 
 
So they called upon the province for assistance. The province 
responded with both fixed-wing and helicopter aircraft to assist 
in putting the fire out, Mr. Speaker. And in fact were able, with 
the help of Saskatchewan Environment Resource Management 
and the air support group, to contain that fire from spreading to 
nearby homes, properties, and an old folks home or seniors 
home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So communities across Saskatchewan are both able and willing 
to use provincial resources as they’re required to help support 
their community firefighting initiatives when it fact those fires 
get out of hand, Mr. Speaker. And that is a significant benefit to 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have many, many, many reasons why it 
is important to have a professional fire suppression program 
within the province of Saskatchewan. We have a very active 
forest industry and the loss of that forest industry would be 
devastating to the economy. We have many communities in the 

forest fringe or within the forest of Saskatchewan and most of 
our northern communities are surrounded by heavily wooded 
forest area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the suppression of fires that start in northern Saskatchewan 
or in the forest area and that . . . (inaudible) . . . suppression 
saves both property and lives, Mr. Speaker, not to mention the 
wildlife habitat and wildlife within those areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan fire suppression 
provides not only jobs but it provides a safety element that 
many, many communities in Saskatchewan count on from their 
municipal governments. But of course no municipality in 
northern Saskatchewan would have the capacity to in fact tackle 
fires that would start within their municipality. So it’s very, 
very important that the province have an active forest 
suppression program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today there will be more than 300 individuals 
involved in forest fire activities in our province that will be 
actively fighting fires today. Now on any given day, Mr. 
Speaker, we will have several hundred individuals waiting to 
attack fires that have acquired throughout northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year ago this government made a budgetary 
decision to increase the number of firefighters in the province 
by 88 new positions. This government understood the 
importance of firefighting in our province, understood the 
importance of fighting those fires, and understood that new 
resources were required. 
 
When we brought forward a budget, Mr. Speaker, that added 
those 88 new firefighting positions to the province of 
Saskatchewan, what did the members opposite do, Mr. 
Speaker? They voted against it. They voted against 88 new 
forest fire positions, Mr. Speaker. They voted against protecting 
our forest industry by voting against them. They voted against 
the protection of northern communities when they voted against 
it, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they voted in favour 
of endangering communities in the North and endangering the 
forests of our northern province . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was a shameful moment. 
 
Mr. Yates: — And it, as the member has mentioned, it was a 
very shameful moment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those 88 positions were obviously needed 
this year. We’re facing one of the most difficult forest fire 
seasons we’ve faced in many, many years. 
 
But what do we hear from the members opposite day after day 
after day? Mr. Speaker, we hear from them, well where are we 
going to find the money to fight the fires? If we don’t have 
enough money in the budget what are we going to do? 
 
Well we heard the Minister of Finance say that the most 
important thing is fighting the fires, Mr. Speaker. And if we 
need to, we’ll find the money, the Finance minister said. We 
have in past years, in difficult years, and we will this year. This 
is not about playing politics; it’s about putting out fires. 
 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

And the Minister of Finance is absolutely right. It’s not about 
playing politics; it’s about putting out fires. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what we employ a very dedicated and very professional 
firefighting suppression crew and program for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what do these members do? I think it’s 
important to talk about what they do do in periods where we 
may have what would be known as a green alert or a very low 
firefighting or fire start-up possibilities. 
 
Well then these firefighters in provincial parks in the North 
provide maintenance work for park activities. They will haul 
garbage, fix picnic tables, clean up park areas, but they’re still 
only minutes away from being able to respond to a fire in their 
area. 
 
These workers will work in, as an example, Candle Lake Park, 
cleaning up the park, hauling wood, doing other work, 
grooming trails where people would walk normally. Doing 
other work that needs to be done. These are very valuable 
employees even in the times of year where we may not face a 
high fire hazard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And these employees are needed to be there during the time of 
the year when forest fires are most prominent, Mr. Speaker. 
They need to be on ready alert, they need to be available on 
very short notice. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they don’t sit there in times of low fire hazard. 
They do provide other work for the province, beautifying our 
parks, making them more enjoyable for our tourist environment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these members need to, or these employees 
need to be recognized for their dedication in particularly tough 
seasons and times, where they will work many times 16 to 20 
hours a day without rest, with very little opportunity for 
comfort. They will be stuck in fire camps where there is very 
little other than bare necessities, and they will have to operate in 
that environment for sometimes many, many days. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it is very important that we recognize the efforts of 
these individuals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to return again to the recognition a 
year ago that the Minister of Finance and the members of the 
cabinet came to when they realized we needed to add to our fire 
suppression crews. And we needed to add 88 new positions in 
order to adequately deal with what has become the average or 
the norm of requirement for our fire suppression. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that they understood and knew 
when they made that decision that these people in low fire 
hazard years were utilized in fact to beautify our parks and to do 
other work that enhanced our tourist industry. 
 
And in fact when we had difficult years like we are facing now, 
that their efforts were to ensure that we would have a future 
tourism industry in Saskatchewan by protecting our forests, 
protecting our northern communities, and protecting a way of 
life for many northern people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the cabinet was wise when they chose to 
add 88 new positions a year ago and I often have speculated as 

to why the members opposite would want to put at risk the 
economic well-being of northern Saskatchewan, why they’d 
want to vote against protecting our tourism industry, they’d 
want to vote against protecting our forest industry, why they’d 
want to vote against protecting northern communities. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very obvious. This 
opposition likes to vote against anything that’s good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they want bad news 
because bad news in fact gives them a political platform in 
which to stand and talk about how they would make everything 
better. They’d fix absolutely everything. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So they say. 
 
Mr. Yates: — So they say. They promise everybody 
everything. They don’t say how they’ll pay for it, Mr. Speaker. 
But when the government makes wise decisions in adding new 
firefighters to protect northern communities, the economy, and 
in fact the tourism industry, what do they have to say, Mr. 
Speaker? Well they vote no. They vote no. 
 
So I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. It’s hard to understand where the 
opposition comes from when they make decisions that are 
totally inconsistent with what’s good for the well-being of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And then they pretend and make the . . . or take the position, 
Mr. Speaker, that in fact they’re representing the people of 
Saskatchewan. Well, they vote against firefighters. We see them 
going sideways on an agricultural package of trade injury for 
the people of Saskatchewan today. We see them going soft on 
crime and saying people shouldn’t be investigated for fraud, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Yates: — It’s unbelievable. Any time you try to do 
anything on a positive note, Mr. Speaker, they simply go 
sideways on it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know. The members opposite, they 
can talk about fire suppression and what they’d do. But I’d like 
to hear later on this morning what they’re going to say about the 
firefighters in our province. 
 
I’d like them to answer the question, Mr. Speaker, why they 
voted in favour of . . . against, pardon me — voted against — 
adding 88 new fire suppression jobs in the provincial fire 
suppression system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the members opposite 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I hear somebody over there 
yelling that if the fires hadn’t got started, they wouldn’t be 
needed. That’s a foolish remark. Clever statement. Clever 
statement if I ever heard one. Clever statement. 
 
So his solution is we shouldn’t have fires. But, Mr. Speaker, 
when you live in fantasy island . . . or you live on fantasy island 
where there are no trees, then you don’t have to worry about 
forest fires. 
 
(15:00) 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

 

But when you live in the real world, well we have a good 
portion of our province that relies on the forest industry and the 
forest for its livelihood and life, Mr. Speaker, we have to deal 
with the reality of our problems. We can’t live in fantasy island 
like the members opposite and promise everything and have to 
deliver nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting back to talking about the efforts of our 
heroic firefighters in the province, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite clearly don’t understand the issue. They’re saying if 
you didn’t have the forest fires, you wouldn’t need the fire 
suppression crews. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that would probably be true if we lived in a 
country or in a province or for that matter we lived in the 
middle of the ocean and there were no trees, Mr. Speaker. But 
that member that’s suggesting we don’t need forest fires . . . 
suppression crews to deal with forest fires in a province that has 
forests through over half the province, Mr. Speaker, it’s like 
telling the member opposite . . . me telling the member opposite 
that he should be able to go swim in the ocean amongst a bunch 
of sharks, Mr. Speaker, and offer himself up for bait — offer 
himself up for bait, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite might do that though because that would 
be logical to his statement about not needing forest fire crews if 
we didn’t have them, you know. Well, Mr. Speaker, even . . . as 
the member over here has said, Mr. Speaker, even sharks have 
some discretion. They probably wouldn’t eat him either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan forestry plays a major 
role. So we do need forest fire suppression crews and we do 
need crews that are motivated to do their jobs and the crews we 
have in Saskatchewan are very motivated. They’re very well 
trained and they believe in what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker, 
and they work very, very hard at what they’re doing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the members opposite should 
take more consideration for the needs of the province and less 
consideration on trying to make political heyday when they vote 
against motions that are brought forward or budgets that are 
brought forward that are helping build the Saskatchewan 
economy, protecting communities, and in fact protecting all of 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for those reasons I am very, very proud 
today to stand and move, seconded by the member from Regina 
Northeast: 
 

That this Assembly praise the heroic efforts of our forest 
firefighters and that it recognize the government’s forest 
fire suppression program developed over a number of 
years, a program whose efficiency is a model for the rest of 
the country. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise today in the House and second the motion as 
presented by my esteemed colleague from Regina Dewdney. 
 

Forests are a very important part of the Saskatchewan industry 
and the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker. And I think we 
. . . we’re all aware of that, that the forest industry plays a very 
major role in Saskatchewan and has for a large number of years. 
And I suppose I could go back to the days when my grandfather 
spent some time in the forest . . . in the saw mills and the forest 
back in the ’30s and ’40s. But I think I’ll save my colleagues 
that misery of bringing them up to date on some of my family 
history. 
 
But Saskatchewan has approximately 35 million hectares of 
Saskatchewan . . . of forest that represents about 60 per cent of 
the Saskatchewan land mass. 
 
So as you can tell, Mr. Speaker, from, just from those stats 
alone, that the forestry is a very important industry to 
Saskatchewan and to all of Saskatchewan, but of course it plays 
a major role in the North where it is a source of employment for 
a number of people. 
 
And as we have experienced in this province over a number of 
. . . last number of years, a few number of years here now, 
we’ve experienced some dry conditions. Not the same can be 
said today for the southern part of Saskatchewan after having a 
wonderful, wonderful rainfall over the last few days, but the 
same is not true for the northern part of our province. Much of 
our, even our agricultural land in the northern half of the 
province is suffering from drouth. But of course the forest 
reserve is too. 
 
And as a result of that, we’ve experienced a significant number 
of fires this summer, and this spring and this summer so far in 
the forest reserves. And I think it certainly indicates the need to 
have a crew, a system in place, a readiness, a preparedness to 
take on those forest fires when they do attack our forest 
reserves. 
 
And the need to have that crew in place and have people in 
place and have a plan in place, a plan of attack in the event of 
forest fires, simply makes good sense as far as most people is 
concerned because it protects a very valuable resource. 
Thirty-five per cent of the forest supports forestry development 
that generates more than $580 million into the provincial 
economy annually. 
 
Forest management of the Crown lands in Saskatchewan is the 
responsibility of Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. Saskatchewan Environment proves assets that 
other provinces and federal agencies and rural municipalities. 
 
Fire management costs average 24 to $28 million annually. And 
over the last 10 years, the average of 785 fires burnt more than 
465,000 hectares annually. So it is a problem. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I suppose it’s been enhanced in the last few years 
because of the dry conditions. So with that in mind, the 
provincial government in its wisdom — and I would say it was 
quite wise — went in the budget year of 2001-2002 had set 
aside an additional $5 million in funding for forest fire 
suppression. 
 
And we’ve seen that wisdom really come into play this spring 
with the dry conditions. We’ve seen the outbreak of a number 
of forest fires. And we’ve seen the equipment and the 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

manpower that was not only trained — adequately trained to 
meet the needs — but they were in place to meet the needs, and 
they did a wonderful job of attacking the fires. 
 
Of course this . . . as dry conditions prevail, forest fires are 
something that man will have a very difficult time fighting. 
With all the latest technology and all the latest equipment, man 
can control it in some cases, and in some cases even put the 
smaller fires out. But once they get a hold, it’s awfully hard to 
do much more than simply control them, and wait for mother 
nature to bring around the weather conditions that will bring 
rain and really put out those fires. 
 
I’ve, on a personal level, back in 19 . . . probably I think it was 
1985-86, lived in a northern agricultural area of the province 
and at that time, lived about 12, 15 miles from the Porcupine 
Forest Reserve where we were experiencing a spring very 
similar to this — a very dry spring. And a fire broke out just 
into the forest reserve, just north of where I lived. And in no 
time, because of the dry conditions and the dense undergrowth 
and the products that were there in the forest to fuel the fire, the 
fire was off and running in no time. 
 
And I was really amazed at how quickly the department at that 
time was able to react to the fire. They in very short order had 
assessment of the fire. They were moving equipment in, they 
had manpower moved in within 24 hours. And they brought in 
heavy-duty equipment from miles away in very short order and 
went to work fighting the fire. 
 
And I admired that they just didn’t simply go into the bush and 
start fighting the fire helter-skelter. They had a plan. They put a 
plan into place and they moved according to that plan. And very 
effectively they were able to surround the fire and contain it. 
Was it put out immediately? No it was not put out immediately. 
It took time to finally get the last of the embers out, I guess you 
could say, but they moved very effectively on that and it was 
simply because they had a plan in place. 
 
And I think that’s what many members opposite missed, 
particularly last year, when they voted against the government’s 
initiative to increase the funding for forest fire suppression by 
$9 million, because they all stood up and voted against that. 
 
But yet it seemed to me it was short-sightedness on their part 
because a forest fire can do a lot of damage, not only to the 
forest itself but indirectly and directly to the businesses 
involved in the commercial aspect of forestry, but also to 
personal property. For those who may have cabins, or may have 
resort areas in the forest reserve, the forest fire can do a lot of 
damage to that, which would of course lead to job losses. 
 
And then once a fire has gone through there would be the need 
to replant and re-establish that forest which would, once again, 
increase the costs to our society and to our economy. 
 
So I find it very short-sighted on their part that they were 
unable to support an initiative that would be in the best interests 
of Saskatchewan people, and the best interests of our economy, 
and in the best interests of our forest industry. 
 
And I want to, once again, say how pleased I am that the 
government had the foresight to establish an . . . extra funds in 

the forest fighting suppression budget and that these funds are 
put to very valuable use in maintaining, not only the equipment, 
not only maintaining the staff, but to continue to train new 
recruits and prepare them for the . . . prepare them with the 
ability to fight forest fires with the latest of technology and 
training and equipment. And many of the fires that have 
occurred utilized fully the trained and expertise that the 
firefighters provided from the 2001-2002 budget and other 
initiatives. 
 
Firefighters, Mr. Speaker, are civil servants and they are 
devoted to keeping our province, our property, our families safe 
every summer. They do their job. They live and spend their 
money in our communities and have earned every ounce of 
respect from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it is not an easy job, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not only a 
dangerous job because of the dangers of fighting a forest fire in 
the reserve but it’s also a trying job because you’re always on 
call waiting for the outbreak of a forest fire, and the crews have 
to be physically and mentally ready for that eventful happening. 
 
It’s interesting that when . . . there is a system in place to 
address forest fires as they break out, and the determination is 
made when a fire is spotted as to a few different things. First the 
size of the fire, the location of the fire. The location of the fire 
can then be transcribed to the . . . through the information outlet 
already available to the department to establish the types of fuel 
that is in that area that would cause the fire to perhaps take off 
real quickly, or perhaps the fuel isn’t there to feed the fire in a 
robust way so that they have a little bit more time. 
 
But because of the experience and the understanding of the 
forest itself by our department and their expertise, they’re able 
to determine whether the fire is in a location where it’s going to 
be very tough to get at, it’s going to be very tough to fight, it’s 
going to be fuelled with explosive fuels that will cause the fire 
to burn quite rapidly. Or they may be fortunate enough that the 
fire will be in a location where it doesn’t have access to that 
type of fuel and therefore will take a little longer for it to really 
catch hold. And they know those things and they know how to 
address them. 
 
And as a result of that, they have a fire line organization that is 
comprised basically in four categories, and that’s the fire crew 
which consists of one to five firefighters. Then they have the 
sector fire which consists of 11 to 50 personnel basically, and 
then they have the divisional fire which will consist of 51 to 
150 basic personnel. And then they have the campaign fire, and 
of course that would be the big one — it was consuming a lot of 
hectares — and that would consist of 151-plus firefighters. It 
will depend on the situation and what the requirements are. 
 
So it’s a bit of a plan that they have in place and then I think 
that we all benefit because there is a plan in place based on 
experience, based on the knowledge of the forest, and based on 
the ability of our firefighters to answer the call quite quickly. 
 
And we are experiencing, as I said earlier, some dry conditions 
in Saskatchewan this summer so we have had a number of 
forest fires in our forest area. And as of Monday, June 10, there 
were 19 forest fires burning in the province. Seven fires had 
already been extinguished in the past 24 hours and two new 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

 

fires had erupted over that same time frame. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, it’s sort of an ongoing battle with the 
. . . with mother nature and our forest firefighters, is that they 
gain on one hand but because of conditions, they have a new 
outbreak somewhere else. And I know many of the forest fires 
. . . fighters pray every day for rain, which of course would help 
the fire situation. But a lot of times with rain comes lightning 
and lightning strikes, and the emergence of a new fire. 
 
So it’s sort of a double-edged sword, but I’m sure that all the 
forest firefighters would take the chances with the lightning in 
return for the rain. 
 
But the total number of fires to date this year in Saskatchewan 
has been 394. And this total is up from last year. Last year at 
this time it was 372, so you can see that there’s an increase in 
the number of fires. 
 
The five-year average for this date was 258. So you can see it’s 
significantly up; not quite double but certainly long ways down 
the road to being double. And so there’s certainly a demand put 
on our resources to fight those fires. And we’re answering that 
demand fairly, fairly well. 
 
There are 1,055 firefighters working and patrolling these fires. 
And that’s a fair amount of people that are consumed just trying 
to protect our forest, and they do just a tremendous job of that. 
And it’s not only do I believe that, but there’s certainly been 
those who are involved in the forest industry and those who are 
involved in making their living in the forest that certainly 
appreciate the efforts put forward by the Saskatchewan 
firefighters. 
 
And I have here a letter from Weyerhaeuser dated September 
10, 2001. It’s addressed to the minister, Buckley Belanger, 
which says: 
 

. . . Mr. Belanger: 
 
I have been reviewing the forest fire . . . (stats) for the 2001 
season and (I) wish to offer my appreciation for the 
outstanding performance . . . (of) your department and, 
particularly, Murdoch Carriere’s Forest Protection Branch. 
 
As of this week, there have been more than 750 forest fires 
in the province, significantly more than either last year or 
the five-year average. Despite these numbers, 
Weyerhaeuser has experienced only two fires of any size: 
the Raven Fire on the Pasqua-Porcupine FMA and our 
Roderick Fire on the Prince Albert FMA. By our measure, 
neither of these is considered serious and salvage (has) is 
being planned, where timber quality is acceptable. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to endorse the initial attack 
strategy adopted by the Branch and express my thanks to 
all of those firefighters, pilots, spotters, who have 
contributed to this season’s success. By limiting the loss of 
commercial timber, as well as property lying within the 
forest, Saskatchewan’s forest resources will continue to 
support jobs, local economies, and preserve recreational 

opportunities for all. 
 
Signed by Mr. Steven M. Smith, vice-president, Saskatchewan 
operation of Weyerhaeuser. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a glowing endorsement of the 
fine, fine job done by the firefighters in our province here where 
they’re recognized by those people who are on the front lines 
and making their living in the forest industry, such as 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks 
by saying what a pleasure it is for me to join with my colleague 
from Regina Dewdney in seconding this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
certainly a pleasure to rise this afternoon and talk about 
provincial firefighting, and certainly the forest firefighting that 
goes on in the province. And certainly on this side of the House 
we’re very proud, Mr. Speaker, of the heroic efforts that we’ve 
seen many times this year, many times this year, Mr. Speaker, 
by provincial employees as they try to protect Saskatchewan’s 
forests. 
 
And we’ve heard on a daily basis, almost a daily basis, Mr. 
Speaker, sometimes in this House but often in the media, that 
forest fires have reached a significant higher level, become a 
significant problem this year, Mr. Speaker. We know that in the 
parkland area that the blessings that have been bestowed upon 
southern Saskatchewan, as we’ve noticed, Mr. Speaker, in the 
last few days, the rains that have blessed the southern part of the 
province have certainly not been quite as plentiful in the central 
part of the province and certainly not in the Far North. 
 
And that’s a problem, Mr. Speaker, that’s a significant problem. 
Because what it does then, Mr. Speaker, is that it increases the 
challenge significantly for those men and women who, who 
have been charged with the responsibility of protecting our 
provincial forests. 
 
As someone who lives in the central part of the province we’ve 
noticed — I’ve certainly noticed, Mr. Speaker, and some of the 
members on this side of the House who also live in the central 
part of the province, Mr. Speaker, as do a couple of members on 
the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker — have had the 
opportunity to notice that becoming a professional firefighter 
for the province of Saskatchewan requires a significant amount 
of training. 
 
And those of us in the central part of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
get the opportunity to be able to witness that on a first-hand 
basis. Certainly we’ve noticed in the central part of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, that those men and women who pilot the 
water bombers, who pilot the chemical bombers, and who pilot 
the bird dogs, Mr. Speaker, have been active since early spring, 
since when there was still snow on the ground. 
 
Before the firefighting season even started, Mr. Speaker, these 
men and women have been very aggressive and very 
progressive in updating their skills and getting their skill level 
to the point that should firefighting in this province reach a 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

significant level, that they will be prepared to be an active 
participant in the aggressive attacks that are needed to put out 
forest fires in this province. 
 
We need to commend, Mr. Speaker, those men and women who 
have taken on this significantly risky type of profession. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity many times to witness the 
bombers as they attack a fire. Usually they’re brought in when a 
fire is in a significant state of advancement in a forest. 
 
These fire bombers, they come in and they fly at low levels in 
air that is significantly turbulent, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
fire. The fire itself causes a lot of air disturbance, and they fly 
these planes into that, those situations, trying to attack a fire that 
is causing significant damage, significant damage, Mr. Speaker, 
to an extremely, extremely important resource in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now one of the unfortunate downsides, Mr. Speaker, is that 
these men and women are forced to work, when they’re using 
the bombers, the water bombers, the chemical bombers, they’re 
working with virtually some of the most antiquated equipment 
in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I meet with these men and women and we talk about the 
risk that’s involved in forest firefighting and the equipment that 
they’re using, they’ve mentioned to me several times, Mr. 
Speaker, that some of the water bombers are reaching 30 years 
of age. That’s a lot of hours that’s on those planes, fighting 
fires. Planes like that are no longer in use. The mechanics are 
having a hard time finding parts for those planes any more and 
have actually become quite — and we should be very proud of 
this, Mr. Speaker — have actually become quite ingenuitive in 
being able to keep those planes aloft to protect our 
Saskatchewan forests. 
 
As we all should know — and we should know this very well, 
Mr. Speaker — is that the large water bombers are using an 
engine that’s of World War II vintage, World War II vintage, 
Mr. Speaker. And so we need to congratulate those people that 
are willing to take on this huge responsibility of working with 
equipment that’s extremely old and is becoming extremely hard 
to even find parts for them. 
 
But we’re going to congratulate them because, rightly so, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, these people have taken on not only the 
responsibility of protecting Saskatchewan’s forests in very 
dangerous situations, they’re doing so with very old equipment. 
And so we want to congratulate those people for the effort that 
they make in protecting our forests and the lack of effort by this 
government in making sure that the people who fly this 
equipment have the newer and the more appropriate type of 
equipment to be able to fight forest fires in this province. 
 
Because as we look back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the tenure 
of this NDP government, we need to examine their priorities 
and what this NDP government felt was most important for 
them. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why this government, this 
NDP government, would choose the priorities that they did, and 
would actually think the antiquated equipment that they’re 
providing for our forest firefighters and forest firefighting 
pilots, most specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why they would 
choose to increase the risk of this very dangerous job by 

choosing the priorities they have in the last decade or so. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, it is firmly believed on this side of the 
House and we certainly know that it’s a very popular position 
on this side of the House that within the province, this 
government has made some very, very questionable decisions in 
the past decade, and one of them was not to continue to upgrade 
the water bombers in this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this 
government were to put together a plan where they would have 
replaced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of those plans every other 
year . . . All they had to do was every other year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, replace one of those large water bombers, some of the 
most antiquated equipment in the world, forcing — forcing — 
our civil servants to work with some of the worst equipment in 
the world. If they’d replace even one bomber every year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the past, more than a decade now — it’s 
certainly been almost 12 years that this government has been in 
power — they could have replaced six of those planes, paid for 
each one over a two-year period. It would have certainly 
reduced the cost to the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management. 
 
And that way we’d have been upgrading equipment on a regular 
basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that what would happen is that 
our forest firefighting pilots, those pilots who put their — 
actually to a degree — put their lives on the line to protect our 
provincial forest would have the appropriate equipment to be 
able to do that first initial attack that is so crucial and not have 
to depend upon the ultimate skills of the aircraft mechanics, Mr. 
Speaker, every winter to try to hold this antiquated equipment 
together. And that’s a sad state, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
government would put the lives of men and women at risk with 
equipment such as this. 
 
They know very well that with a readjustment of their priorities 
over the past decade that we’d have more up-to-date equipment 
in this province. I’m not saying that they could have gotten . . . 
replaced them all. 
 
Certainly, when the Saskatchewan Party becomes government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be taking on that role to ensure 
that forest fires in the . . . forest firefighters have the appropriate 
and up-to-date equipment that is extremely crucial, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And so then we need to, we need to remind ourselves that the 
firefighters out there are certainly, certainly looking forward to 
the day when the election is called because then they know the 
Saskatchewan Party is committed to protecting the lives of 
forest firefighters in this province. And certainly on this side of 
the House, we’re looking forward to that as much as they are. 
 
Now we know, too, that this motion speaks to the firefighters, 
those men and women who put on . . . also put on the ground, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And certainly, from my perspective, I can 
speak to this on a very personal level. Where I live, many 
young men and women are involved, work for Department of 
Environment and Resource Management as forest firefighters. 
These are young men and women who have taken on this role 
with a significant amount of enthusiasm. They’re proud of the 
work they do — they’re very proud of the work they do, Mr. 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

 

Deputy Speaker. 
 
My friends and neighbours have children that work for 
Environment Resource Management fighting fires. They do an 
outstanding job and we’re very, very proud of them. 
 
(15:30) 
 
But on top of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not only, it is not 
only employees in Environment Resource Management who 
fight forest fires. These are the people who fight forest fire in 
the provincial forest, we certainly understand that. But when the 
fire spreads outside, outside the provincial forest, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, more than, more than the firefighters who are 
employed by Environment and Resource Management have 
become involved in the control and the erasing of fires. 
 
And certainly we’re well aware and we’ve certainly heard of the 
fire very close to the town of Archerwill, how the local 
volunteer fire department became involved in that and were 
involved to a very large degree and we need to applaud, we 
need to applaud them also, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Because it is men and women such as these who believe so 
firmly and are so proud of their community they simply 
abandon their regular careers and came out to protect their 
community and protect the resources in their community, hand 
in hand, hand in hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 
professional firefighters that are employed by Environment and 
Resource Management. 
 
Because I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that where I live, my 
home farm at Paddockwood, Saskatchewan, that my son is also 
a volunteer firefighter with the Lakeland and district fire co-op. 
And he often . . . he has often this spring, because of the 
extremely dry conditions in our area of the world, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, up in the Lakeland area, along the parkland, the forest 
fringe, is that they’ve been called out to several fires this spring. 
 
And they have worked in concert with the professional 
firefighters of the Environment and Resource Management. 
And because of that co-operation, because of that proud 
co-operation that all firefighters have, is that they have been 
able to do an outstanding job of controlling and bringing it to a 
rest many of the smaller fires that have gone on in the forest 
fringe area of the province. 
 
And that not only happens, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Certainly I 
mentioned Archerwill and in the Lakeland part of the country, 
Emma Lake, Christopher Lake, and around Candle Lake — this 
happened there but we know this happens everywhere. This 
happens right across that forest fringe where the fires also 
involve private lands and that both sets of firefighters, whether 
they be private or public, are out there working in concert to 
bring under control these devastating fires. 
 
And the fires, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year have been 
extraordinarily devastating. And we only need to follow the 
news media on a regular basis to know that this year has been 
one of the worst when it comes to forest fires and the extent that 
the forest fires have moved on to private lands. 
 
And the damage, that cost, is going to be horrific financially. 

Certainly insurance companies are going to have to really suck 
it up this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of the financial 
load that it’s going to place upon them. But that’s why we buy 
the insurance. 
 
But unfortunately, unfortunately for the province though, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t carry into the provincial forest and 
that resource is going to be lost forever. At one time back in the 
’80s we certainly had a salvage program that worked very well 
to be able to go into those forests that had been ravaged by fire 
and to just salvage the timber as best that could happen. 
 
And of course we’ve seen in the late ’90s now what has 
happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this NDP government 
has chosen that that is . . . not to do that any more. And that is a 
significant loss. That’s a significant loss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because we know the results of the opportunities that could 
arise from salvage operations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
significant when we look at the overall fiscal picture, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We know that the costs of a fire are significant. Once you start 
putting water bombers in the air, once you start putting 
rotor-wing aircraft in the air, once you put the bird dogs in the 
air, Mr. Deputy Speaker, plus all the men and women who are 
on the ground, Mr. Deputy Speaker, mopping up behind to 
ensure that the fire doesn’t get out of control again. There’s a 
significant cost to this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of this cost could be 
recouped. And this government has chosen not to take 
advantage of that, all the hard work that men and women in this 
province provide to save our forests so that we ensure that 
there’s still going to be lots of green forest in this province. But 
there’s still an opportunity for salvage operation. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as an aside to this, some 
entrepreneurs in the Prince Albert area wanted to get involved 
in a salvage operation in a provincial forest where a fire had 
gone through and they saw a significant opportunity there to 
salvage that timber that has now been lost. 
 
In fact what they were able to discover — and of course 
entrepreneurs do this, is that that get out their pencil, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and work out the numbers — is that the PST 
(provincial sales tax), Mr. Deputy Speaker, the PST that would 
have been collected by this province on the extraction of 
salvaged timber after a forest fire had gone through, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, would have paid for the fire, would have paid for the 
cost to this government for that fire. 
 
So the government would have recouped the cost of that fire 
and jobs would have been created in this province. And 
certainly that’s a significant loss. And so that’s too bad that this 
government doesn’t have the foresight that when tragedy strikes 
in a situation such as this, that we can’t try to do the best we can 
with getting a little bit of good out of the evil that can take place 
in a situation such as this. 
 
Now certainly, certainly we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
fires are extremely expensive and that the people who are 
involved in firefighting in this province do their utmost to 
ensure that a fire is brought under control and extinguished as 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

quickly as possible. They know that putting . . . doing this will 
actually save the province money. And so we want to applaud 
those efforts. 
 
But unfortunately, unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
we’re not finding that same level of enthusiasm from this NDP 
government. As we look back in this year’s budget that was 
brought by the Minister of Finance in late, late March is that 
this government thought so little of forest fighting measures that 
need to take place in this province that there was a huge cut, 
huge cut, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this province. 
 
And when the Minister of Finance was asked about it he said, 
well they were, you know, they were just kind of hoping that 
maybe there wouldn’t be quite as many fires this year as last 
year. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all the 
Minister of Finance had to do was leave these hallowed halls of 
. . . in Regina here and go up to the provincial forests and he 
would have known that we needed, we needed, those finances 
to remain in the Department of Environment and Resource 
Management’s budget in case there was a season such as this. 
Exactly as we pointed out in March. 
 
We pointed this out in March, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those 
resources were going to be desperately needed, the northern 
forest was very dry, that the parkland area was very dry. And lo 
and behold, the Saskatchewan Party was right again. And so 
then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it starts to beg the question as to who 
is best equipped to look after a budget in this province — 
whether it’s the present Minister of Finance or whether it might 
be more appropriately the member from Canora-Pelly. He 
seems to have a much better grasp of the realities of what’s 
needed in the budget. 
 
And certainly we are, on this side of the House, we are looking 
forward to that day when we start looking after budgets in this 
province. Because there will be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will 
be the appropriate amount of finances available for firefighters 
in this province to be able to aggressively attack fires. And they, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are also looking forward to that day. 
 
As we look back at this province’s budget and their attitude 
towards firefighting in the provincial forests, Mr. Speaker, last 
year in the previous budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was $40 
million — $40 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker — set aside as a 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund, a Forest Fire Contingency Fund, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they only needed to use . . . 
this NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, only needed to use 
about $6 million of that. So it begs the question, what happened 
to the other $34 million? Well as we went through the budget 
with a fine-tooth comb — lo and behold, there’s significantly 
fewer dollars in the Department of Environment and Resource 
Management’s budget. 
 
So it begs to the question that the $34 million must then be 
clawed back by the Department of Finance. And you kind of 
begin to wonder if they have to claw the $34 million back from 
forest firefighting to balance their budget, the priorities of this 
government. It makes it awfully tough on forest firefighters in 
this province to be able to protect one of our greatest resources 
when this government continues to attack their budget. 

And so then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to understand very 
clear and people of Saskatchewan need to understand very 
clearly, when it comes to protecting our environment, when it 
comes to protecting our natural resources, the NDP government 
will be second to everyone. They will be second to everyone, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they have shown very clearly that 
their commitment to protecting our resources and making the 
best of our resources is not on their radar screen. 
 
They seem to be more interested in being involved in the 
private business, challenging private business, competing with 
private business. Taking tax dollars from private business to 
compete against private business seems to be their number one 
priority. And in the meantime they’re withdrawing funds from 
. . . funds such as the Forest Fire Contingency Fund that is so 
desperately needed to protect one of our largest and natural 
resources, one of our most beautiful resources, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And so then it really begs the question that the priorities of this 
government sets when they establish their budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I start to wind down here in 
talking about this, we certainly need to look at the program that 
is in place. This province has been very clear and this NDP 
government has been very clear that we need to congratulate . . . 
they want to congratulate themselves for a program whose 
efficiency is a model for the rest of the country. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it begs the question then, if using 
30-year-old water bombers is an efficiency model for the rest of 
the country, it must be a sad state of affairs for the rest of the 
country. But we know that not to be a fact. We know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that other provinces are significantly ahead of 
the province of Saskatchewan in upgrading their equipment. 
They have decided that they must be a lot more progressive in 
replacing their firefighting equipment in a progressive manner. 
And it has to be done on a yearly basis. 
 
And this government has decided that what they’re going to do 
is replace equipment on an ad hoc basis. And of course what 
we’ve seen is what’s happened and, as I’ve mentioned earlier, is 
that we’re now using water bombers that are almost 30 years 
old, some of the oldest equipment in the world. 
 
And unfortunately because of this government’s lack of 
commitment to forest firefighting this side of the House is not 
quite, not quite so enthusiastic to congratulate the government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now certainly they talk about a program, which is basically ad 
hoc because it seems to change on a fire-to-fire basis. And they 
talk about a model which seems to be adapted on a year to year 
basis. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government, this NDP 
government, needs to understand is when you set a program in 
place, it needs to stand the test of time. It needs to stand the test 
of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not something that can be 
subject to the whims of a budget, to balancing the budget. And 
that’s what’s, that’s what’s happened this year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that the forest fire control program has been hit 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

 

hard, hit very hard by this NDP government in their efforts to 
have a so-called balanced budget. 
 
Now this was just one area, of course, they tried to use to 
balance the budget. They came up with a fictitious bank account 
also to help balance the budget. And that certainly is not 
supported by anyone out there, including the Provincial 
Auditor, that this budget is balanced. 
 
So if they needed to take this kind of monies out of firefighting 
to balance the budget it really begs the question as to priorities. 
And the priorities of our resources on this side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, are very clear to everyone, very clear to 
everyone. It is the resources, it is the resources of this province 
that will provide the economic clout that this province needs to 
crawl out of the doldrums that have been created by almost 60 
years of NDP involvement in Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
And certainly we’re looking forward to the day in the very near 
future . . . And, of course, we heard from the Premier today that 
on this side of the House we’d better be careful what we ask 
for. But we’re going to continue to ask for an election on this 
side of the House because it is motions such as this where on 
one hand the government wants to congratulate forest 
firefighters, when you look at the rest of the motion, they want 
to take credit, they want to take credit for the efforts of the 
forest firefighters, and I think that’s extremely inappropriate. 
 
(15:45) 
 
These men and women who risk life and limb to protect one of 
our most beautiful resources is suddenly having to compete 
with the government, compete with the Government of 
Saskatchewan, when it comes to accepting the roles that are 
played here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So then it begs the question then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
government more interested in patting themselves on the back? 
And I guess we saw that again today — patting themselves on 
the back — although sometimes we’re a little concerned on this 
side of the House how the hand might get to the back or where 
that hand has been previously. 
 
But certainly what we need is some forthrightness — some 
forthrightness and good government in this province. And after 
the next provincial election we’re certainly going to have that 
opportunity and we’re going to look forward to that. We’re 
certainly looking forward to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this 
side of the House. I know that the members on the other side, 
they aren’t quite as excited about the next provincial election as 
we are but certainly on this side of the House we are. The 
people of Saskatchewan are excited about it and I know that the 
forest firefighters are certainly excited about it and they’re 
looking forward to the day when they’re going to have a 
significant upgrade in equipment that is appropriate to protect 
the natural resource that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
But as we looked at this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we did 
see a shortfall in it and that’s unfortunate because as many of 
the motions that have come in the past — and this one moved 
by the member from Regina Dewdney, seconded from the 
member from Regina Northeast — is that they only seem to 
want to go so far. They’re a little concerned of taking 

responsibility for their actions, and certainly we’ve seen that 
many days in this House this year, last year, and the year 
before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this government, when 
something goes wrong they’ve always been able to find 
someone else to blame. 
 
And certainly we’re very concerned that even though this 
motion talks about praising heroic efforts, the significant heroic 
efforts of the firefighters in this province, is that they seem to 
want to stop short at doing just that. They want to add on to it 
that we need to congratulate the government that they want to 
take credit — the want to credit, or some of the credit, or a lot 
of the credit actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker — for the efforts of 
men and women who believe that Saskatchewan’s forests are a 
significant and proud resource in this province. And maybe 
what, what this government needs to do is take some 
responsibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for their actions. 
 
And so maybe as we work our way through this session — and 
certainly we’re a long ways into this session now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; it’s now day no. 59 and we’re probably about halfway 
through the session — and maybe by the time we get to August 
this government will have a much better understanding of their 
responsibility for the decisions they make. 
 
And certainly we haven’t seen that, haven’t seen that yet this 
year. We have ministers who — certainly the Minister of 
Environment and Resource Management . . . And I think it’s 
important at this time to remind ourselves that officially, today, 
we’re probably on our fourth — our fourth — minister for 
Environment and Resource Management in the year 2002 and 
it’s only the middle of June, it’s only the middle of June, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It makes you wonder as to what kind of continuity is going to 
be with this government. So can this government get their 
priorities straight? Can they take responsibility for their 
actions? Or are they simply going to continue to shuffle 
ministers around as soon as they get in a little bit of hot water, 
especially when it comes to issues such as this where they’re 
actually taking money out of the Department of Environment 
and Resource Management to help the Finance minister cook 
his books, so to speak, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And if that’s what it’s going to take is to attack the resources of 
our forest firefighters in this province, then on this side of the 
House we say shame — we say shame on you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because on this side of the House 
we recognize the weakness of this motion — it could have went 
a little farther — that I think it’s important that we strengthen it. 
This motion needs to be strengthened. And we need to, we need 
to remind ourselves — and this motion has done that; certainly I 
have done that very clearly today, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that 
we need to praise the heroic efforts of our forest firefighters in 
this province. 
 
And certainly I’ve also mentioned the volunteer firefighters in 
this province who have worked significantly with the provincial 
forest firefighters to protect our forests, and we need to 
congratulate them also. But I think it’s important at this time 
that we strengthen this motion. 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

And so then I move, seconded by the member from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood: 
 

That the following words be added after “country”: 
 
That this Assembly urges the provincial government be 
more forthright in accounting for the necessary cost of 
fighting forest fires in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once 
again, it’s a pleasure to stand in the House and speak to forestry 
issues as my critic area is forestry. And I want to take pride in 
being able to second the amendment that was put forth by the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers and I believe that it was a 
very good amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the . . . or Deputy Speaker, pardon me — 
when the member from Saskatchewan Rivers and I get a chance 
to speak, especially on forestry issues, we kind of speak from 
the heart for the simple reason that where we’re situated in the 
province of Saskatchewan, in what we call the central north, 
that’s basically where the agricultural portion of the province 
ends and the forestry part of the province starts. 
 
Now I know for a fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers and myself, for that matter of fact, 
have been in contact with forestry fighting and forestry fires of 
the nature that’s been going on in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to reiterate on that, around my 
hometown of Spiritwood there was a number of forest fires that 
took place in the past two or three months. And I know the 
forest firefighting unit from Spiritwood put in countless and 
endless hours, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fighting the forest fires that 
are in that area. There were days, Mr. Speaker, that when you 
walked up to them at a coffee shop and talked and their eyes 
were beet red for the simple reason they were out in the smoke 
for hours and hours and hours. 
 
And one particular incident comes to mind which happened to 
be not that far from my family farm. And there was a fire that 
was started there. They don’t know how it was started, maybe a 
cigarette or whatever. But it started and it started burning 
toward a family farm. Now the farmer there decided to call 
some neighbours to help fight the fire. He phoned the fire 
department in Spiritwood and they came out to help him fight 
the fire. But with the winds that were about that day and the dry 
conditions that was experienced in that area, the fire started 
getting away. 
 
And the call came out to my brother and my two sons that was 
. . . happened to be at the farm at the time to bring a tractor and 
a cultivator up there to help the fire brigade put out the fire. 
And they spent probably six or seven hours out there, Mr. 
Speaker, with machinery, with graders, with local Spiritwood 
firefighting units up there. And after six or seven hours of hard 
fighting, they finally got the fire under control. 
 
It burnt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for some days after. All the hot 
spots were still burning so it was a constant effort by the local 
farmer to go out there every day with water and put out these 
fires. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite stand and say 
that we should congratulate the volunteer firefighters of this 
province, we on this side of the House and everybody in the 
province of Saskatchewan agree with them. You know, if it 
wasn’t for the local and the volunteer firefighters, a lot of these 
fires would get away and they’d never be able to put out. 
 
But I also want to say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that both the 
members that spoke on this motion today from the city of 
Regina, I doubt very much if they’ve had any contact regarding 
forest fighting or been in a position where they’ve had to go out 
and fight fire from a local basis. But maybe they have. 
 
But I know the members that are from this side of the House, a 
lot of them because they’re from rural Saskatchewan know 
what it’s like to fight forest fires and be involved in forest 
fighting. A lot of the volunteers that are situated and dealing 
with forest fires are also from the rural area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with the amendment that my colleague from Saskatchewan 
Rivers put forth is exactly what he mentions, in the fact that the 
government didn’t go far enough. 
 
And to reiterate on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember one 
of the comments that my colleague from Carrot River 
constituency asked the Finance minister in regards to forest 
fighting and how much up to date has it cost the taxpayers of 
the province in regard to forest fighting in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, we heard it on the radio about 
Alberta and how much on a daily basis they were spending on 
forest fighting. And I think the number from Alberta just on that 
one fire alone was probably in the neighbourhood of about $1.2 
million a day they were spending. 
 
And I know myself and members from the North were 
constantly phoned regarding how much is it costing the 
taxpayers of the province. And I think that’s why the member 
from Carrot River constituency asked the question to the 
Finance minister, is how much is it going to cost? And I 
remember the Finance minister saying approximately — and I 
don’t know where he got this number from — but he said to 
date was somewhere in the neighbourhood of $17 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know from a report that was put in 
the Leader-Post that there was — I’m just going to read here 
how many fires there was in the province — 372 fires so far this 
year, Mr. Speaker. And at the same time last year there were 
just 294. So there’s a significant increase in the amount of fires 
this year to date as compared to last year. 
 
Now when you look at how many fires that were in the 
province of Saskatchewan and you look at the cost that the 
Finance minister has given us as far as a dollar figure of 17 
million, something doesn’t seem to add up. 
 
One would almost think that it’s way more than 17 million. So I 
wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just where our Finance minister 
came up with this figure of 17 million. Especially when you 
look at Alberta, when they’re spending 1.2 million a day on the 
forest fires in Alberta, and there wasn’t near the forest fires in 
Alberta that there is in Saskatchewan. 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

 

Another point I want to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact 
that to date this year, the North — and again I’m reiterating on 
the fact that the member from Saskatchewan Rivers and myself 
are from the North — that we’ve had no rain, or little rain. And 
that’s from spring till now. 
 
And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the wintertime we had 
very little snow. In fact around the Big River area, which is also 
part of my constituency, there was forest fires there that were 
burning in the ground and they burnt all winter. 
 
Now normally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the amount of snow 
that we should be getting, those forest fires wouldn’t have been 
burning during the wintertime. But they did because we weren’t 
getting any moisture. You add that to the dry conditions of the 
spring and no fire . . . or no water or rain or precipitation in this 
year’s area, and the fires are that much more hazard to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the forest contingency fund that was put in 
place in 2000 and 2001, I believe was in the neighbourhood of 
$50 million. Last year, according to the budget, they put in a . . . 
that there was going to be $40 million in the forest contingency 
fund. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year’s budget, if I recall right, 
there was no entry of any forest contingency fund. So that $40 
million that was set aside last year for forest firefighting is not 
there this year. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Now in regards to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 40 million 
that was allocated for forest firefighting last year, they used 
approximately 7 . . . or, pardon me, $6 million. So some $6 
million from 40 million gives you a figure of 34 million still left 
in the forest contingency fund of the year 2001. 
 
But as again, Mr. Speaker, I point out that the Finance minister 
did not have that entry in his budget this year. So where did the 
34 million go? 
 
That begs the question of why the member from Carrot River 
stood in the House and asked the Finance minister questions in 
regarding how much has it cost to date and how are they going 
to pay for it. For the simple reason, where is the money going to 
come to fight the forest fires that have been accumulating in the 
province of Saskatchewan this year? And, Mr. Speaker, the 
Finance minister didn’t give us a clear answer, other than it was 
costing 17 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that it cost a lot more than that 
because last year they spent somewhere in the neighbourhood 
of $40 million on forest fighting — 6 million from the 
contingency fund, plus the other fund that they had for forest 
firefighting. With the fires that have accumulated this year are 
up somewhere near of 100 more fires and they’ve got less 
money to fight forest firefighting this year, where is the money 
going to come? And that’s what the people of Saskatchewan 
want to know. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would think that the deputy . . . or the 
Finance minister, the deputy, could come out with a better 

answer than 17 million that have been spent to date. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, around the town of Spiritwood in my area, 
there’s been a number of fires, as I mentioned at the start. One 
that kind of hits home is the forest fire that was at Turtle Lake. 
Now in that fire at Turtle Lake, there was a number of cabins 
lost. I think there was a total of 56 cabins taken at that time, 
plus three homes from the adjoining reserve. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t know how the fire started. All we 
know is that it took a large portion of the Horseshoe Bay resort 
area and it burns it right to the ground. In fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the member from Lloydminster lost his cabin in that 
so-called fire. And I also know a good neighbour of mine from 
Medstead lost his home in that fire also. And that was his home, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker; it wasn’t a cabin. 
 
When you lose a cabin, yes it’s a great loss. But you don’t have 
the personal belongings in a cabin as you do in a home. And 
when this gentleman and his wife lost their home from Turtle 
Lake, everything was gone — everything. And that’s a great 
loss. 
 
Now that fire would have still been burning had it not been for 
the voluntary firefighters of the Turtle Lake area and the 
voluntary fire department from other areas that joined together 
with the water bombers and whatever have you to contain that 
fire. And they did a great job. And that’s the case with all forest 
fires in the area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the province we 
need the help and the work of the local firefighters plus the 
other firefighters in putting out the fires that we have in the 
province today. 
 
Another fire that hit close to home, Mr. Speaker, around 
Spiritwood was the one at Belbutte where just a fire was 
burning — they were going to cook some marshmallows and 
wieners for some kids — and the wind come up. And as you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when you light a fire it creates 
its own wind. And it started circling and the fire got away and it 
started burning an area that was coming toward the town of 
Spiritwood. And again the local fire department went out there 
and spent countless hours putting out this forest fire that was 
coming towards Spiritwood. 
 
And this is the case, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And I couldn’t understand why 
the minister of SERM at that time — mind you as the member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers said, they flip-flop back and forth; 
we don’t know really who is the minister at one given time — 
that they should have come out with a ban on forest fires or 
fires of any sort in the province of Saskatchewan a lot earlier, 
being the fact that it was so dry in the North that the chances of 
forest fires and fires of all natures was going to be extensive. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to forest firefighting in the 
province of Saskatchewan, one has to look at the forest itself. 
 
Now we know in the province of Saskatchewan we have a 
problem with the embargo between Canada and the United 
States and it also hurts the province of Saskatchewan because of 
the embargo and how our softwood lumber issue was hurting 
us. Then on top of that we have forest fires that are containing a 
lot of that wood. 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

One of the things I want to point out to the members is the fact 
that a lot of the salvage wood that is left standing now in areas 
where the forest fire has gone through — what is the present 
government going to do with all this wood standing there? 
There is some good use from this wood. But there’s a time 
period of about approximately two years when that salvage 
wood has to be dealt with. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a lot of wood 
operators out in the province of Saskatchewan, and specifically 
the North whether it be Beauval, La Loche, Chitek Lake, 
Meadow Lake, or whatever, that would like to get their hands 
on this salvage wood and make it . . . put it to some good use. 
 
Well I think the problem is going to be, Mr. Speaker, that by the 
time the government deals with coming up with a study or a 
survey of what they’re going to do with it, it’s going to be long 
past the two years, and again that salvage wood is not going to 
be utilized. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, when you look at the 
amount of fires and the amount of wooded areas that has been 
burnt in the province of Saskatchewan, there is a lot of salvage 
timber that we could be utilizing. But again, it’s going to take 
initiative from the government to get off their butts and do 
something to look after it right away. 
 
It brings to the fact the wood product area up in Meadow Lake, 
and there was a mill up there, it was called Clearwater mill. 
And they were set up some, I believe it was six or seven years 
ago, strictly to look after salvage timber, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And for the first couple of years they were granted salvage 
timber to keep their forest industry going. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it wasn’t that long ago, some two or three years ago, 
that they shut down. 
 
Why did they shut down? Well they couldn’t get their hands on 
any salvage timber. Why couldn’t they get their hands on 
salvage timber? Because the government was standing in their 
way. 
 
These members up there were set up to look after salvage 
timber. By the time the paper work that the government had to 
do to grant Clearwater mill the objective to get that wood was 
way past two years. So therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
wood was not of any use to them. And therefore they couldn’t 
get the wood to keep their mill going and subsequently in the 
city of . . . or the town of Meadow Lake, there is no more 
Clearwater mill products. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just north of my town of Chitek . . . 
of Spiritwood, in a town of Chitek Lake, there’s a proposal on 
the table by, put forth by the government, that they’re going to 
set another mill up at Chitek Lake to deal with salvage timber. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the timber rights that were lost back 
then to Clearwater mill is going to be the same for the Chitek 
Lake people. Now when you look at Chitek Lake, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s right in the heart where there’s been forest fires. 
If the mill was set up and going, that timber mill could be 
utilizing this salvage timber as a result from the forest fires 
that’s been going on this year. 
 

But again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s going to take the initiative 
of the government to put forth a plan so that our forestry 
products are utilized. And that seems to be the problem. We 
have an industry and a resource base sitting out there, and when 
something like forest fires damages it, then the government sits 
on their behind and does nothing with it. Well that’s wrong, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There’s lots of small timber companies out 
there that would like to get their hands on it and could utilize 
this and put it to good use. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, forest firefighting as the colleagues from 
the opposite side mentioned about volunteerism and stuff, I do 
want to say that all members here do agree with the fact that the 
initiative of the forest fighting people from all over the province 
should be hailed and thanked for the job that they do, especially 
the volunteer people. 
 
And I’m no different, Mr. Speaker, being a forest fire myself 
. . . fighter myself at one time and fighting some local fires. I 
know what it takes to be a forest firefighter and the job and the 
requirement that they do to protecting our forests. 
 
So there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to say that from the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers put forth an amendment, 
and I do want to take this time to second that amendment 
because it was a very good amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And therefore at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to of course 
stand in here to support the motion and to oppose, of course, the 
changes that were made by the members. 
 
And of course the motion as has been read is the following: 
 

That this Assembly praise the heroic efforts of our forest 
firefighters and that it recognize the government’s forest 
fire suppression program developed over a number of 
years, a program whose efficiency is a model for the rest of 
the country. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I stand with the rest of the government 
members to pay tribute to the tremendous abilities and record of 
our forest firefighters in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
have utilized the word heroic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it is 
indeed heroic when you consider the dynamic situation that the 
forest firefighters have to contend with. There is tremendous 
danger that they have to contend with. There is a lot of hard 
work and sweat in the heat out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There is also the help that they generate in regards to the 
community from the smoke, you know, that comes in as well as 
the hot fires that sometimes threaten many of our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about quality, you know of our people, 
I don’t spend any time like the Saskatchewan Party in talking 
about the problems and trying to make backhanded 
compliments in the great work done by our people. I’m 
straightforward in saying that indeed they are the best, not only 
in Canada, but also in North America. And I’d like to start that 
out, Mr. Speaker, by looking at the commendations that have 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

 

been made over the years. 
 
I know from an historic basis, as a person who fought forest 
fires in my hometown area of Cumberland House when I was 
16 years old and watching, you know, the evolution and the 
development of it from the ’50s on to the present, it is indeed 
been a tremendous success story. 
 
I looked at the amount of praise that have been given to our 
forest firefighters, not only from internal in our province, but 
external. So I’ll start out by reading some of the compliments 
that have been made about our forest firefighters. 
 
And as we developed the new program, starting with the big 
fires back in ’95 and 1998, we did some new improvements at 
that time. But even by that time, by 1998, we had a tremendous 
record and also acknowledgement by others that indeed we 
were leaders in forest firefighting. 
 
Here’s an example of it in a letter written on June 23, 1998 by a 
Lester Rosenkrance, the director of office of fire and aviation 
from the United States Department of Interior, the bureau of 
land management from Boise, Idaho. And this is what he had to 
say. He’s writing to, of course, the director, Murdoch Carriere, 
who is a Cree Métis, of course, from Cumberland House, from 
my hometown. 
 
(16:15) 
 

Dear Murdoch: (he says) 
 
WOW! What an experience! The recent trip of our BLM 
delegation to Saskatchewan was remarkable in many 
respects. First was the friendship and kindness you and 
your organization showed to us at every step of the way. 
Second was the high degree of professional expertise and 
pride that everyone we met exhibited. Third was the 
opportunity to see not only your organization and facilities, 
but the beautiful and broad land of northern Saskatchewan 
area. 

 
So here you are, Mr. Speaker, somebody from the United States 
recognizing the tremendous work and organizational efforts of 
our forest fire suppression crews, you know, throughout this 
province. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that many of our people 
fight forest fires across Canada. They are asked to go into 
Alberta; they’re asked to go to BC (British Columbia); they’re 
asked to go to Ontario, Quebec, and other areas. 
 
But they’ve also been asked, as I said before, to go to the 
United States. Some of our forest fires have gone to California 
and many of the northern States. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
first, you know, strong example of the quality of our people 
when you get international recognition. 
 
Now I look at this other one from Australia and New Zealand. 
This is a certificate of an appreciation on behalf of the forest 
management . . . forest fire management group of Australia and 
New Zealand. And it says: 
 

In recognition of your role in fostering international 

cooperation and understanding through the sharing of 
knowledge with the 2002 Australia/New Zealand Forest 
Fire Management Group’s Wildland Fire Management 
Study Tour. 

 
So here you have two other countries recognizing the 
significance and quality of our forest fire management group 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would say, as well, that I mentioned in my preview to the 
international context the recognition from different provinces. 
Here you have from the Minister of Natural Resources from 
Ontario and also the director of fire management over there, 
saying: 
 

On behalf of the Province of Ontario, we want to offer 
sincere appreciation and gratitude to your agency for the 
invaluable assistance provided during our summer forest 
fire emergency. 

 
National and international resource sharing agreements are 
extremely important of course, you know, from our viewpoint. 
It says here that: 
 

. . . Ontario would have been in extreme difficulty this year, 
had it not been for the quick and generous assistance of the 
best forest fire emergency support network in the world. 

 
Here again, I will look at another document from the BC Forest 
Service. It says: 
 

In appreciation for your assistance and resource sharing 
support in combating many of the 4083 wildfires in British 
Columbia in 1994. 
 

Again we have some internal type of appreciation, a certificate 
of appreciation: 
 

. . . bestowed upon the Saskatchewan Forest Fire 
Management in recognition of your support at our annual 
Officers Convention, March 22nd, 23rd and 24th (at) 
Melfort, Saskatchewan 

 
By the Saskatchewan Association of Conservation Officers. 
 
And again, another certificate of appreciation by the same 
conservation officers in March to April 1, 2001 convention 
which was held in Moose Jaw. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we recognize the tremendous excellence and 
quality of our people. And I’d like to, as well, look at the 
dimension, not only from the international experience that we 
have had in regards to forest firefighting and letting them know 
some of our skills and our organization abilities, but also in 
regards to the issue relating to the economic sphere. 
 
A lot of people recognize that in Saskatchewan we have 
approximately a $700 million forestry industry. And I know 
how very important forest firefighting management is to the 
industry. The industry also in return knows that information. 
And they have been, of course, looking at the evolution and the 
development of it over the years. They recognize the support of 
the forest firefighting units within government and the numbers 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

of volunteers that are out there. 
 
So I would like to start out by saying that as we’re doing the 
recognition internationally, there is recognition from the 
different forestry companies. And here is an example of one. It 
says, from the vice-president in Saskatchewan, Stephen Smith, 
this was written in September 10, 2001, from Weyerhaeuser and 
it’s written to the minister, the member from Athabasca. It says: 
 

I have been reviewing the forest fire statistics for the 2001 
season and wish to offer my appreciation for outstanding 
performance by your department and particularly Murdock 
Carriere’s Forest Fire Protection Branch. 

 
Now just in case those people figure that it is last year, I would 
like to read another letter, in March 2002. A lot of people 
recognize that there are a number of fires this year, an 
additional number of fires. But for the member’s information, 
just on that point, when I listen to the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers and I listen to the member from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, they did not know the history of even 
the past 10 years when they were complaining about the amount 
of money, which I will deal with right after this. 
 
But I would like to say that even this year, as they were trying 
to give a, you know, a backhanded compliment, you know, to 
what’s taken place this year, I would like to show you for the 
record what the business community has to say from the 
forestry industry. And again, this is from Stephen Smith, 
vice-president Weyerhaeuser. Again, to the minister . . . And 
also, this letter is directed to the Minister of the Environment, to 
the Minister of Economic and Co-operative Development, and 
also to the Minister of Finance. And I might add that the 
Minister of Finance on this year’s budget added another 9 
million, contrary to what the Saskatchewan Party members had 
said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — It says in the letter, “I wish”. . . and I quote: 
 

I wish to begin by providing a strong endorsement for 
Saskatchewan’s forest fire detection and forest fire fighting 
capability, as well as its demonstrated success, particularly 
in recent years. 

 
He said . . . I said that before I was reading the Weyerhaeuser 
statements of 2001. Now I am reading Weyerhaeuser statements 
of 2002 for the information for the Saskatchewan Party 
members. 
 
Just on that point. As I was listening to the Sask Party members, 
here they were last year when we made an exceptional record 
on forest firefighting last year and we had approximately $50 
million in the budget. And we looked at the average over the 
years, with about 50 million, but they forget that in ’95 and ’98 
there was over $90 million spent by the provincial government. 
 
The coalition government takes care in regards to the 
economics, the health and safety of the community, and 
recognize when money is needed the money is there. So we put 
in over $90 million twice in the past 10 years. Now when I’m 
listening to the Sask Party members they talk about 

accountability, and a lot of them are former Tories and do not 
know very much about accountability. 
 
And they simply don’t get it. They don’t know exactly, exactly 
how and what type of commitment we have made on a yearly 
basis. And they should just look at the record, look at the 
record, look at the estimates, look at what was actually . . . the 
record speaks for itself. 
 
This, this coalition government provides tremendous support in 
forest firefighting. And also contrary to the Saskatchewan Party 
members, we do have the best forest firefighting team in the 
world, both at the ground level and also at the air support level, 
and also in regards to the communication systems level. 
 
You know, whether somebody is a worker in forest firefighting 
from the operations, from the radio operators to the central, you 
know, communication systems to the work on public education 
done by people like John Cook, it is quite a tremendous system. 
And they operationalize their system and they combine the 
attack teams at the various different levels and do an 
exceptional, an exceptional job. 
 
And I must say that as I looked at the record, you know, from 
the international level, from the level of the business 
community, that a lot of the people in northern Saskatchewan 
are also very, very supportive. 
 
And I must read this. And it says, from the Keewatin Yatthé 
Health District on October 1998, this is what the health district 
in the North said, and this is to the Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management, fire management and protection . . . 
forest protection. It says: 
 

In appreciation. Thanks for taking care of us. 
 
And to me again, it shows the appreciation of all northerners, 
and all the people of this province in regards to the excellence 
that we do in our forest management and protection crews. 
 
I would say as well that as I listened to the Saskatchewan Party 
members, and I’ve been looking at their debates, it’s interesting 
that we made the $9 million improvement this year on the 
budget to deal with the question of management in 
environmental situation, they voted against it. 
 
I remember, and they were very, very specific last year too, 
when they talked about doing away with highways workers, and 
then they complained about the highways. Then they also in 
that . . . when they fought that budget, it would have done away 
with forest fire workers as well. And they had very derisive 
comments about bureaucrats and things like that, during that 
period of the debate, and it was very, very negative. They didn’t 
learn to appreciate, you know, the aspect of the contribution of 
our civil servants throughout the province, you know, whether 
they are in regards to the forest firefighters, or to the social 
work people that help out in the communities, the health people 
who help the elderly when they have asthma, etc., and move 
them out of the community. 
 
So that indeed in many cases we have all kinds of civil servants 
helping out in the forest fire situation. You have of course, the 
Minister of Northern Affairs and his people helping out in the 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

 

. . . through the Northern Affairs situation as well. And it’s been 
very, very, very . . . it’s been quite an era of excellence over the 
past few years, and over the years to see our people work 
together with the forest firefighting crews on an 
interdepartmental level. 
 
I might add that as I was talking about the economy, and I heard 
the member from Saskatchewan Rivers talking about us taking 
jobs away from the private sector, the forest firefighting system 
is a combination of public sector and private sector. And I don’t 
think he understands that many of the . . . there is private sector 
planes and helicopters that are contracted from time to time. 
When we move in there that’s very important. 
 
But they forget that the people in forest firefighting have to eat, 
they have to get goods and services. Where do they buy it from 
but from the stores in this province. That indeed, when I was 
the Minister of Northern Affairs, and now pursued by the 
Minister of Northern Affairs, we had a northern procurement 
plan meaning that indeed the tremendous amount of neglect that 
the previous Tory government had done with the forest 
businesses in northern Saskatchewan was such that it was quite 
a disgrace. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And this time we made sure that the people from northern 
Saskatchewan at the business level were indeed a strong part, 
not only of policy but in regards to practice on getting the goods 
and services to the forest firefighting people. 
 
So that’s also a tremendous aspect you know vis-à-vis to the 
North. And it’s contrary to the information that the 
Saskatchewan Party says that it doesn’t help out the private 
sector. Of course it helps out the private businesses. And with 
our new policy with this government, which was very different 
from the Tory policy, we made sure that northern businesses 
were involved, not only in the procurement but being part of a 
forest firefighting team. 
 
I must say that when we looked at the development and 
evolution over time, after we’d had the ’95 fire and the ’98 fire, 
and we spent over $90 million, we had another review in the 
forest firefighting system. 
 
And we were doing it in coordination with the educational 
institutions as well and making sure that Woodland Campus 
was involved. And we were starting to look at an integrated 
approach between forest fire management and also the forest 
fire economy . . . I mean the forestry economy. 
 
And in that sense, we had a program that dealt with integrated 
resource management. So we had an integrated resource 
management program which has as a component of it of course 
the forest firefighting. But lately we have looked at extending 
the program on a two-year program and come out with actually 
a forest fire suppression program. 
 
And that’s very, very important. It shows you that we, as well 
as our institutions in this province, are keeping up with the time 
in making sure that not only the international community 
recognizes our quality forest firefighters and hire them in the 
different provinces and the different states in America. But that 

our institutions as well develop the expertise within Woodlands 
as well as Northlands in evolving a system that’ll be recognized 
not only for forest firefighting capacity, but forest firefighting 
training. 
 
And I think that’s very, very important. One of the things . . . 
one of the other commentary that was made by the members 
from across was — of course they had their usual Alberta-envy 
comment on the amount of money the Alberta was spending, 
you know, this year. Over $1 million a day, they said. 
 
Well what the member doesn’t understand is this: when indeed 
your forest firefighting team is not a quick attack team and your 
fires spread quickly and you do not control them over a certain 
length of time, you’re going to have huge fires. And when we 
were doing the . . . that development, we were able to put out a 
lot of the fires. 
 
And I looked at a performance evaluation that was done at 
2001. There was 717 fires, which was significantly greater than 
the 10-year average of 556 fires. That was this . . . I’m talking 
about the evaluation of 2001. It says expenditures stayed 
roughly in line with the five-year average. The forecast 
expenditures of 50.34 million was just slightly higher than the 
average of 51.23 million. 
 
And here’s the important point. The escaped fires rate was 
significantly reduced over 1995-2000 average despite 
significantly higher levels of starts. An escape rate of just 1.1 
per cent represents extremely high performance. The strong 
performance in reduced escape fires translated into exceptional 
performance with respect to area burned by wildfire — 32,000 
hectares burned was just under 20 per cent of the 10-year 
average. It was 20 per cent of the 10-year average. 
 
In other words, the organizational work, you know, from that 
has been done from our air attack teams, our ground attack 
crews, our communication crews. The dynamic that has been 
created there has helped to stop those fires quickly — more 
quickly than in Alberta. 
 
And I looked at the fires because Alberta has relatively the 
same type of situation as we do have, and theirs was . . . when 
we were at 90 million, theirs was at over 200 million. They 
were spending over 200 million. And a lot of the Alberta crews 
came over to see what we were doing. They knew that we were 
cutting the time factor down; that our crews were attacking 
quicker, and that the type of coordination that we were doing, 
from the communications down to air attack, was simply one of 
the best. 
 
So many of the people have recognized that indeed . . . excuse 
me, that yes, Alberta spends more on fires but they’re trying to 
find out why is it that we are able to spend less than they do but 
are able to put out the fires quicker. 
 
And that is why indeed there was co-operation . . . and that’s 
why you got the letter from Weyerhaeuser co-operating, seeing 
the letter written to the Minister of Finance, the Minister of 
Economic Development and co-operation and also the Minister 
of Environment because of the great coordination not only out 
there on the field but also in government to be able to deal with 
the situation. And it’s been quite a record, you know, for us in 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

this province. 
 
And as I look at the situation we would like to of course form a 
northern members and visitors . . . I would like to explain some 
of what I said in English in Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
As I was relating some of the comments as well in Cree, I was 
mentioning the tremendous pride that northern people have had 
in being part of a forest firefighting suppression team. 
 
And when I was growing up, I mentioned earlier on, I was 16 
years old when I was forest firefighting. My mother had died 
that year and I needed something to do for the summer. So I had 
one of the people that I knew in the conservation officer side 
and I went forest firefighting. 
 
Of course I probably said I was 18 or something like that, but it 
really didn’t matter. I think many of them were very 
compassionate to me, you know, given the situation I was at 
that time of having to do something. 
 
So there I was forest firefighting, but it was interesting because 
we were paid $4 a day. I didn’t say $4 an hour; it was $4 a day. 
And I had tremendous experience. It was exciting for a young 
fellow going into the forest firefighting situation. 
 
You know, I heard about this big fire out there and I was 
anxious and gung-ho to get out there. And so I got to this forest 
fire area and there was this guy that was name, the late Joe 
Macaulay, and he used to be the tower man. And he had shown 
us where the fire was and he had worked with a team and we 
. . . and so we got over there and it was very interesting because 
it was the very first time I had gotten into a helicopter. So here I 
was, you know, overseeing the fire and riding in a helicopter for 
the very first time. 
 
There were some fairly unique little experiences. I remember 
they were dropping off our goods and supplies and we had a . . . 
Sometimes trees are burnt off at the top and they were dropping 
off one of those great big boxes of bread. And when they 
dropped it from the air, it happened to hit one of the trees. So 
we had one of those boxes of bread hung up on a tree, so we 
sort of had to chop it down to get at our bread. 
 
But there were some times we had to stay in the muskeg areas, 
so the mosquitoes are like airplanes in Cumberland House. I 
mean they were huge mosquitoes. So you learn how to stay and 
learn how to live out there. And I remember they had not 
brought in our supply of insect repellent, so we had a lot of fun. 
 
Of course we used to be in front of a tent and we used to do a 
little fire and we used to put some type of material there, certain 
types of smoke to get the mosquitoes away. So we were in quite 
the situation. I was in quite a situation when I was young, you 
know, dealing with a forest firefighting aspect. 
 
We learned a lot of things about when the fire rolls, the dangers 
of the fire. You know, we learned about when fire is dropped 
you know from the air, that you have to lie flat because a lot of 
things, you know, will fly in front of you and you could get 
injured. And so we learned how to do the forest firefighting you 

know from direct experience. 
 
And later on as . . . and it evolved. And I talked to Murdoch 
Carriere of Cumberland House. We learned from those years 
and we’ve trained people now. And it’s been quite the record. 
 
So I would like to say that, in going back to the motion, I was 
very, very thrilled to be part of this debate and to say again a 
special thank you to the forest firefighters of this province. You 
know, to the people who do the work right from the 
communication systems and the people who do the telephone 
calls and from the radio operators to the people who do the 
situations on all the different aspects, a special thanks from all 
of us, from the Government of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible) 
. . . And I would like to say I would like to move to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:45) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member . . . There’s already 
been a motion that has been defeated. That motion has already 
been defeated so there has to be an intervening motion. So I 
can’t accept that motion. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to enter this debate here 
on the motion that’s put before us and the amendment made 
forth by our side. 
 
It’s kind of interesting to enter this debate, Mr. Speaker, 
because where I am, we don’t have a lot of forest. But we have 
fought fires and I know how dangerous they are and how hard 
they are to fight. 
 
And I just wanted to get up and talk about how we, on this side 
of the House, recognize the importance of firefighters and want 
to agree with the motion and the amendment on this side, that 
not as been . . . that we should recognize the firefighters on 
there. 
 
I can remember talking about how scary fires are, Mr. Speaker. 
There was one in Bladworth this spring and how fast . . . 
coming home on a Friday and seeing the smoke and then 
realizing that it was the town of Bladworth. And there, all the 
fire departments around that area are all volunteer. There is . . . 
The nearest paid fire department would probably be, I would 
say, 60, 60 miles away. It would be in Saskatoon or Regina. So 
basically, everything that is done out in our area is on volunteer 
firefighting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in Davidson fire department there is probably I think 20, 
25 firefighters. In Bladworth, we don’t have a fire department 
any more, but the whole town I guess you would call volunteer 
firefighters. And as the word spread throughout the community 
that there was a fire, that it started from a burning barrel and it 
started spreading through the town, I mean the people started 
coming from all over. 
 
And just seeing the smoke and knowing that it was in . . . 
approximate in the town, close to the town, that if . . . the town 
could be in danger, people always . . . if they see it being so dry 
this spring, that they just automatically, if they seen smoke and 



June 11, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

 

if they knew if it was close to a farmyard or a town, would 
always go to investigate, which at this particular time, Mr. 
Speaker, was a very good thing. 
 
It took . . . that fire department there came about . . . the 
volunteer from Davidson came about 1:30. And I remember 
people coming with shovels and whatever they had — old coats 
— to beat the fire out, and it was scary. I remember it jumping 
the road and having some volunteers there. And it took quite a 
while to fight, to put it out. And also it . . . the fire department 
stayed through the night because of the hot spots that flare up 
because it was very, very windy. 
 
And I could . . . I couldn’t even imagine the conditions that the 
firefighters in the forest . . . in the . . . that are facing in them 
fires. And the winds that we’ve had this spring would be very, 
very scary indeed. And it takes probably a special breed of 
person to fight that kind of fire, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why on 
both sides of the House we recognize that and believe that they 
need all the help they can from this government to fight these 
fires, especially in the dry conditions that we have had. 
 
I mean, thank God that we do have some rain coming. Now I’ve 
been hearing that even up north now that we’ve had some rain, 
and in fact yesterday was the first rain we’ve had. But even up 
to a couple of days ago too, we’ve had this rain out our way. 
 
It’s hard to believe that in the middle of June that a fire could 
still get away and it could. Like I mean, there were still the RMs 
(rural municipality) around us that put fire bans on, not to do 
any burning anywhere in the RMs. Just basically, just being that 
dry. It hasn’t been that dry out our way since the ’30s which is 
scary at the end of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now the . . . talking about the forest fire budget, I know 
that we’ve had a few members bring up some questions about 
it. Has it gone over budget? Has it gone under budget? I mean 
naturally with the amount of firefighting to go through . . . And 
I mean we agree with the government on some respects, that the 
most important thing is to fight the fire and get it out. But the 
next thing is to also be accountable to the people in there to 
make sure that they have the money available to fight it. Also 
that they have the equipment to fight it. 
 
I know the number of equipment it would take, and water 
bombers and helicopters. I remember watching the fire on TV, 
about the one in Nipawin, and seeing . . . I didn’t realize that 
they used helicopters to fight hot spots, taking water to fight 
that, which was very interesting. 
 
And I think it . . . just recently at . . . because the lakes were so 
cold this spring, at Blackstrap, my constituency, the water 
bombers were doing test runs there, doing some practice runs in 
the spring which was very, very unusual. 
 
I think I had a call about that to my . . . one of my offices about 
. . . that they were doing that there. And they were . . . the 
person was just wondering what was happening, why they were 
doing it. Because I guess usually they do the practice up in the 
fall there but . . . or not in the fall, in the early spring, but 
because of the . . . being so cold the ice was froze over. So I 
believe that they were using Blackstrap which was interesting 
for some practice runs, some training, at that end of it. 

And I know the one person that phoned wasn’t sure what was 
going on at first. And then I think I phoned and found out that 
that’s . . . they were doing some testing at one of the lakes there. 
 
But so the training that goes into it for the professional 
firefighters plus all the volunteers up there that are probably on 
alert at this time of the year would probably be quite intensive, 
Mr. Speaker, at that end of it. 
 
And I imagine the drain on the budget too will be quite costly, I 
think, as the bills come in over the next month or two. And with 
that, I was just questioning where is it going to come from. I 
know that with the one thing, the government had to back up on 
the one health thing, taking approximately $7 million from the 
Highways department. And I know that this government is 
running very tight on the budget restraints, so there’s going to 
be questions. 
 
Where is that money going to be coming from? Is it going to be 
coming more from Highways? Will Health suffer more 
unfortunately? I mean, we can’t stand any more budget out of 
there. Or will the province have to go into more debt, you 
know? 
 
And one of the things I have heard, talking to some of the 
members up north, is the equipment that’s up there — 
30-year-old water bombers we’re hearing — you know, World 
War II vintage. And, you know, that must be a little scary 
taking planes of that age up to fight these fires. And we’re 
going to need money to replace these planes. 
 
And there’s . . . another question to the minister is, where is the 
money going to come from? Are they looking at slowly getting 
more planes? 
 
Or another option is the private industry. I know I have a friend 
that, I think he’s from back home there, that fought, that worked 
for a private company that fought fires in Manitoba till the NDP 
government took over there. Now they’ve switched to trying to 
buy their own planes. And he said it hasn’t worked out as well 
as they thought it would be. The private companies that were 
hired, he used to go there and work six months of the year 
fighting fires and the company he worked for did a very good 
job, and they controlled the fires there. So that’s another option 
that the government should be looking at, is letting the private 
industry in there as much. 
 
And I’ll admit I don’t know that much about it. But I also know 
just talking to him, that in Manitoba it worked very well there, 
the private industry. 
 
And another suggestion is, how does inter-provinces work? Do 
they help each other? I would imagine that they trade 
equipment, equipment and firefighters back and forth, but a 
year like this when it has been dry constantly across the 
Prairies, each province is fighting fires. 
 
And I was wondering if they’d of . . . There was talk one time 
of bringing the army in which is a very good idea. I mean that’s 
what they’re there for — emergencies. I can remember, was it 
Toronto brought them in for snow clearing. And I mean that’s 
important but I don’t think it’s important as fighting fires, Mr. 
Speaker. 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 2002 

 

And I mean any time we’re in an emergency situation, I 
wouldn’t know why the government wouldn’t . . . the federal 
government wouldn’t volunteer them, or even our provincial 
government be talking to them to bring them in, their equipment 
that’s there. I know at the army base at Dundurn there, is very 
big and it has a lot of equipment there, a lot of planes, a lot of 
. . . in fact a lot of people that would love to go out and fight 
fires, you know to help. Because that’s when they go into the 
army, I mean that’s what they’re there for — to help in 
emergency situations, do a lot of peacekeeping things. 
 
And I think a good thing for this province to be looking at is to 
maybe do some training with the army and with pilots back and 
forth. Because I mean there . . . (inaudible) . . . very many air 
force pilots, Moose Jaw pilots. We have the air force base in 
Moose Jaw, helicopter pilots in Moose Jaw that would probably 
be looking . . . they would be looking for practice runs to get 
more air time. Because I think that’s something that the 
province should be exploring very, very good there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They had the military out helping with 
the flooding in Winnipeg. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — As the member pointed out, the military was 
out in Manitoba helping the flooding. So they should be out . . . 
they should be helping in firefighting. And if this situation has 
reached a very dangerous level — an emergency situation has 
arisen I think throughout the North with I think a record number 
of fires this year — that they should be looking at bringing 
them in. 
 
Now one other thing that we’re talking about is emergency 
debate on emergency assistance for the fire at Nipawin, also for 
the fires at RM. A lot of RMs have been fighting fires for the 
number of . . . this spring, have had some very dangerous fires. 
 
There was one just on the other side of my constituency where a 
farm was bought . . . where a farm was lost basically. And that 
fire was very dangerous coming alongside the lake, very 
dangerous of . . . dangered a lot of cabins there. And the RMs 
just don’t have the fire . . . (inaudible) . . . capability or the 
money or the finances to fight these fires. So they have been 
looking towards the government for a number of years. 
 
Plus the fire . . . the local volunteer fire departments. I know the 
one in Kenaston and Davidson, in my constituency, that are 
always constantly raising money trying to buy new equipment. 
The trucks in Kenaston are as old as the water bombers, are as 
old as the 30-year-old water bombers that our pilots are flying 
up north. And that’s what they’re expected to fight fires with, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s . . . and I know that they receive very little funding. 
The only funding they get is through per capita, through the 
towns and the RMs. And unfortunately, under this present 
government, with the people unfortunately leaving, your per 
capita has been dropping so they’ve been getting less money 
from the towns. And the province has been downloading on 
these towns and these RMs, that they unfortunately can’t supply 
funding for . . . to keep these firefighters going. 
 
And they don’t . . . And a lot of them don’t have equipment. I 

know that they throw like say, a lot of fundraising just to have 
the proper equipment or trying to raise the proper equipment to 
save their lives to fight these fires. 
 
Some of the fundraising that the member was asking was 
dances, selling tickets. I was at a demonstration in my 
constituency, that was about three weeks ago. There was the fire 
department and the EMO (Emergency Measures Organization) 
threw on one. They kind of had them in different districts. How 
they . . . how the car . . . They’d set up a car accident, just a 
scenario, and how they basically cut the roof off, the fire 
department comes and puts it out. 
 
And they just . . . basically they raised . . . It took them I think 
four years to raise money to get a Jaws of Life there, and which 
probably has last year saved one or two lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But those are the conditions that our local and my volunteer 
firefighters are facing all the time. They’re out there laying their 
life on the line with antiquated equipment that unfortunately 
this government can’t seem . . . won’t seem to want to help 
them too. 
 
And then also . . . There’s also dealing with the cost of cleanup, 
Mr. Speaker, when a fire is over. Who assumes that, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
I know up north, my member was talking about — what’s the 
word called there — they use fire, fire burnt wood when it’s 
done. And I know that there’s been, over the years many local 
little companies or just individuals that have made money from 
it. But now I understand that the government isn’t issuing as 
many permits for that. And I thought that’s what this 
government was for, was trying to help small business, small 
individuals, especially up north where they supply a lot of jobs, 
Mr. Speaker, at that end. 
 
I understand that that’s . . . that has helped the individuals over 
the number of years make a living there. And now I understand 
that the government has been making more . . . is making it 
harder on them to attain these permits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It now being slightly past the hour of 5 
o’clock, in order that members might have a little break before 
resuming debate, this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


