















































Hansard: June 17, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2081 
 June 17, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to present petitions from citizens of our 
province throughout the Humboldt area who would like to see 
the territory operations office for Saskatchewan Housing 
Authority remain in the good city of Humboldt. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
rise on behalf of citizens concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon are all from the city of 
Saskatoon and I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today with citizens concerned with the overfishing at Lake of 
the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Spy Hill, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the dangerous and 
deplorable condition of Highway No. 58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Chaplin and Calgary, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the crop 
insurance premiums. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned with the fact that current tobacco legislation 
regulates the retailing of tobacco but not the possession. And 
the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

That legislation would make it illegal for anyone under the 
age of 18 to be in possession of any tobacco products; and 
furthermore, anyone found guilty of such an offence would 
be subject to a fine of not more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of 
Swift Current and the town of Stewart Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
to improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Eyebrow and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about being covered by WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board). The prayer reads: 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to acknowledge the concerns of 
the taxpaying citizen by causing the Government of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that absolute fairness and equitable 
treatment be given to those injured and disabled people and 
their families and be diligent in this most urgent matter. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Blumenort, Swift Current, 
Waldeck, Neville, and Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I stand with a petition of citizens concerned about Highway No. 
15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And again it demonstrates how well travelled the highway is, 
Mr. Speaker, because the signatures are from Watrous, Fosston, 
Abbey, Yorkton, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, St. Albert, Alberta, 
Rocky Mountain House, Winnipeg, Manitoba, and Whitehorse. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that’s concerned with the Besnard 
Lake fishing. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from P.A. 
(Prince Albert), Saskatoon, Candle Lake, and Albertville. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning the Saskatchewan Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund; and 
 
Addendums to previous tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 11, 18, 132, and 165. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 68 ask the government the following question: 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: how 
much is budgeted in the current fiscal year for the We’re 
Building Better Highways advertising campaign, including 
the budget for individual advertising mediums and 
including a breakdown of all the costs associated with the 
campaign? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 68 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: regarding the civil suits arising 
out of the Martensville prosecutions, when will the 
government release the details of the settlement of the civil 
actions arising out of the fiasco of the Martensville 
prosecutions; (2) when the government does release the 
details of the settlement of the Martensville actions, will it 
also release protocols to ensure that the taxpayers are not 
stuck with million dollar bills again to compensate for 
botched investigations and prosecutions; and (3) has 
anyone involved in the key decisions surrounding the 
Martensville prosecutions been disciplined or demoted? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 68 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Executive Council: what positions are 
currently vacant in Department of Executive Council? 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 68 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Executive Council: why is the Premier’s 
itinerary coordinator paid less than the Premier’s assistant 
itinerary coordinator? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the Assembly, seated in the opposition gallery, in the east 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, 48 grade 5 students from the very best 
school in Swift Current, from Oman School. And I could say 
that, Mr. Speaker, because both my kids also go to Oman 
School. 
 
They are accompanied by vice-principal David Franz and two 
teachers, Debbie Mann and Patty Gatsky as well as 11 
chaperones who have joined them for the trip here. I think they 
were at the Science Centre this morning and they are here to 
watch question period and then have a tour of the building. 
 
I had a chance to meet with them earlier and hopefully was able 
to sufficiently brief them on what they might be able . . . what 
they might be seeing here in the next little while, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I just would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
the grade 5 students and the chaperones and teachers from 
Oman School in Swift Current. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

 

legislature, 25 students in the west gallery who are 
accompanied by their teacher, Marian Ready, as well as a 
number of parents: Ms. Nenson, Mrs. Seed, Ms. Eros, Ms. 
Shorten, and Ms. Scott-McPherson. 
 
And I would like to have one of the students please stand up 
along with his mother, and that is Reece Topping and Ms. 
Scott-McPherson. Now these people are really important in the 
history of this particular building because Reece is the great, 
great, great-nephew of Walter Scott, the first premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when Mr. Scott was the premier, he played an instrumental 
role in building this building and making sure that we had a 
building that would last us for centuries. And we finished the 
first century and we’d like to say thank you to the Scott family 
as evidenced here by Reece Topping. So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Cameco Victoria Park Festival, Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this past weekend thousands of people visited my 
constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale to attend the second 
annual Cameco Victoria Park festival. 
 
The festival this year included the second annual Dragon Boat 
Races; the televised Western Canadian Strongman Competition; 
the 10-kilometre run, walk, and roll for Big Brothers and the 
United Way. It featured live stages of dancing, theatre, and 
music; food and drink in abundance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the full co-operation of the weather this 
weekend, more than 15,000 people attended the Victoria Park 
Festival. Mr. Speaker, the festival showcased the community of 
Riversdale itself. It showcased our beautiful Victoria Park, the 
Riversdale pool. And it showcased the strength of my 
constituency, which is our volunteers and our cultural diversity. 
 
And so our thanks to the many sponsors; to the many, many 
volunteers who made the festival happen: to Art and Theresa 
Mark, who only two years ago pioneered the idea of the dragon 
boat races; and to Dennis Neudorf, this year’s festival Chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and 15,000 others are already looking forward to 
next year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Esterhazy Teacher Receives Prime Minister’s 
Award for Teaching Excellence 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
night the Esterhazy High School music program held its annual 
year-end concert. For the school’s music teacher, Kevin 
Hrycay, this was not a usual year-end concert because during 
the evening he was presented with the Prime Minister’s Award 
for Teaching Excellence. 
 
When Kevin first arrived to teach the music program in 

Esterhazy there were 160 students involved. Now there are 275. 
This number is amazing, Mr. Speaker, because the entire school 
population is 420. Overall 60 per cent of the school is involved 
in the music program and at the junior high level 90 per cent of 
the student population participates. 
 
In 2001, Mr. Hrycay and the senior high school band travelled 
to Ottawa to participate in the national competition, MusicFest, 
where they won gold. This past year the high school junior band 
travelled to Calgary to participate in the same program, and 
they brought home the silver medal. 
 
As a teacher, Mr. Hrycay always stresses excellence and always 
challenges his students. The accomplishments of this 
28-year-old teacher who is only in his seventh year of teaching 
are commendable, Mr. Speaker, and says so much about the 
energy and enthusiasm that is in the Esterhazy High School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating Kevin Hrycay for winning the Prime Minister’s 
Award for Teaching Excellence, and also for the dedication he 
has to teaching young people music. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Sedley New Horizons Seniors Centre Opens 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday I drove 
down the well-maintained Highway No. 33 to the town of 
Sedley where I was happy to stand in for the Minister of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) at the 
official opening of the Sedley New Horizons Seniors Centre. 
The members of the Sedley New Horizons Club were in turn 
very happy to see me because I brought with me a cheque from 
SaskPower to assist in the financing of the new building. 
 
SaskPower directs over $1 million annually to support 
programs and events across the province which focus on youth, 
culture, and social development. This is just one of the many 
examples where SaskPower gives back to the communities it 
serves. 
 
What was most impressive though, Mr. Speaker, and at that 
same time was the least surprising, was the fact that this small 
community used volunteers both to raise most of the money and 
to provide 90 per cent of the labour for the new building. 
 
The New Horizons Club has been meeting for 24 years and now 
has a brand new meeting place to continue their affairs for the 
next 24 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was very glad to take part, and I wish the volunteers and 
seniors of Sedley the very best in the years to come. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, June is 
ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) Awareness Month in 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

Canada, and June 16 to the 22 is ALS Awareness Week across 
the country. I ask all members of the Assembly to recognize 
this important event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ALS is a rapidly progressive, fatal neuromuscular 
disease. Those who have been afflicted with ALS lose muscle 
function until they are no longer able to walk, write, smile, talk, 
eat, and often breathe on their own. Yet throughout all of this, 
and in what we can only imagine must be incredibly frustrating, 
the minds and the senses of ALS sufferers remain unaffected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ALS can strike anyone at any time regardless of 
age, sex, or ethnic origin. And in at least 90 per cent of cases it 
afflicts people with no family history of the disease. 
 
The national emblem of ALS is the cornflower, a hardy 
wildflower with a fragile appearance. This flower, Mr. Speaker, 
is representative of those who are living with ALS. These 
people show a great deal of strength while forced to cope with 
this devastating disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to all ALS patients, their families, and their 
caregivers in Saskatchewan during this ALS Awareness Week, 
while we cannot know the many difficulties that you must face 
on a daily basis, we still recognize the strength of mind and 
character that is needed to deal with these challenges. 
 
We will be thinking of you, especially this week. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Children’s Festival 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regina’s Children’s 
Festival started yesterday, June 16, and it’s going to run for 
three days, Mr. Speaker. This is the 15th anniversary for the 
festival. Prominent local artists are taking the stage in Chicken 
Cabaret — it’s an artistic expression of chickenesque. The 
cabaret, I’m told, made its debut at the Cathedral Arts Festival 
two years ago, Mr. Speaker, and is a real hit with the audience. 
 
As in previous festivals, this year will showcase inspiring 
performances from around the world. Festival president Barb de 
la Sablonniere says that the festival is to be a positive 
experience and something that engages the audience. She wants 
to have the children interactive with the performances and — 
something like this place — and thinks that they learn nothing if 
they’re just sitting there and watching, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. de la Sablonniere says that the festival’s acts focuses on the 
audience’s experiences. As in past years, there is face painting, 
noodle art, and the return of the popular sound tent where 
children can make their own music. 
 
Mr. Speaker, performances . . . performers are a diverse mix. 
We have a guitarist from Brazil, a dance troupe from Russia, 
and an Inuit storyteller from Nunavut all appearing. 
Experiencing a wide variety of cultures helps children 
understand their own culture and appreciate culture around 
them. 
 
Children of all ages are welcome. It’s at Douglas Park here in 
Regina. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grand Opening of Perdue Car/Machinery Dealership 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, June 14 I 
had the opportunity to join around 100 other patrons taking part 
in a ribbon cutting ceremony at the grand opening of Cam-Don 
Motors in Perdue. Cam-Don Motors has been a fixture in the 
community of Perdue since 1964, providing area residents with 
a friendly facility in which you receive quality service for 
everything from your farm machinery to the service you use 
daily. 
 
They also supply the parts for all types of machinery and 
vehicles. As well, Cam-Don Motors also sells farm machinery 
as the local Ford dealership with a nice selection of new and 
used vehicles. 
 
I have had the opportunity to deal with Cam-Don Motors over 
the years and have found them . . . found that they are eager to 
give prompt and excellent service. Cam-Don’s is a large 
employer in the area and has a staff of friendly, knowledgeable, 
well-trained men and women that are always enthusiastic to 
give you the best possible service. 
 
The Weir family is optimistic and sees a potential for the 
business to grow and continue to be a centre point for service 
and sales in west central Saskatchewan. With that optimism, 
they built a new and expanded dealership with service bays 
capable of accommodating combines and other farm machinery 
and vehicles. 
 
I would like to congratulate Cameron and Scott Weir and their 
families on the opening of the new facility and the continued 
dedication to and the confidence in the community of Perdue in 
west central Saskatchewan in which they have been serving 
with distinction for the past 38 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Fire Hall in White City 
 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in the House today to share more good news in Saskatchewan. 
Two communities just east of Regina — White City and 
Emerald Park — are growing quickly. One sure sign of this 
growth is the opening of the new fire hall in White City. I was 
able to attend the official opening earlier this month. White City 
town council decided to proceed with the new fire hall two 
years ago and the contract was awarded to Dura Structures of 
Regina. 
 
According to volunteer firefighter Dave Morrow, the new fire 
hall was needed in order to accommodate the growing 
communities of White City and Emerald Park. He said, and I 
quote: 
 

About five years ago we got to the point where there were 
three vehicles but the hall had just two bays and only about 
1,200 square feet of space. 

 
Although the new hall was completed late in 2001, the grand 
opening was delayed until this year to coincide with the 20th 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

 

anniversary of the White City Volunteer Fire Department. The 
grand opening brought together volunteer firefighters past and 
present at a 20-year reunion where various awards were 
presented at an evening banquet. 
 
The new hall was built with many hours of volunteer labour and 
will ensure that White City’s Volunteer Fire Department can 
deliver the best services to those in the communities in times of 
need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members of this House to 
extend their congratulations to Mayor Rob Mitchelson and the 
council, to Fire Chief Richard Thiele, the White City Volunteer 
Fire Department, the First Responders, and those volunteers 
who gave of their time and effort to help make the opening of 
the new fire hall a reality. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Assistance for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It now appears 
that the Premier’s hastily arranged trip to Ottawa had no impact 
whatsoever on the federal government. 
 
Lyle Vanclief is now saying that there will be no trade injury 
payment. And any farm package that the federal government 
does deliver, according to Mr. Vanclief, will have to be cost 
shared 40 per cent by the province. 
 
Why isn’t Ottawa listening to the Premier? Mr. Speaker, what 
price will Saskatchewan have to pay for the weak leadership we 
are getting from this government and from our Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if in fact Ottawa is not 
listening, Ottawa is not listening to this Premier, to the Premier 
of British Columbia, to the Premier of Alberta, the Premier of 
the Yukon, the Premier of Nunavut, and the Premier of the 
Northwest Territories. 
 
Ottawa’s not listening to the Leader of the Opposition from this 
province, the Leader of the Opposition from Manitoba, the 
Leader of the Opposition from Alberta. 
 
If Ottawa is not listening, it is not listening to SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). It is not 
listening to the large agricultural producer groups from across 
Western Canada. It is not listening, therefore, to the producers 
of Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Had it not been for the voice of this legislature — and if I may 
say, for my voice in Ottawa — they wouldn’t have even heard 
the case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know it 
used to be said of leaders that the buck stops here. But with our 
Premier, the buck is passed on to whoever is convenient and 
handy. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition has been 
behind the Premier in this effort, and all farm groups have been 
behind the Premier. The problem is that every time we hand the 
ball to the Premier, the Premier fumbles the ball. 
 
The entire point of this exercise was to get a trade injury 
payment funded by the federal government. And what’s Lyle 
Vanclief saying? He’s saying, no trade injury payment. And any 
package that we do get is going to have to be shared by the 
provinces — an unfair burden to Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers and Saskatchewan 
taxpayers are paying the price for weak leadership from this 
Premier and his government. Why has the Premier blown it so 
badly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Some day the Leader of the Opposition 
should just put down those printed, written-up questions, and 
speak a little from the heart — ask on behalf of the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, blown it? Here today is the headline in the 
national paper, The Globe and Mail: Deputy Prime Minister 
Manley, referred to here, fires salvo over US farm Bill. We 
have the . . . now the Deputy Prime Minister of Canada 
understanding the hurt caused by this US (United States) farm 
Bill on Canadian people. And I expect — I expect — when the 
Deputy Prime Minister raises this as an issue, that Ottawa in 
fact will act in an appropriate fashion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition talks about 
handling the ball on this file . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I recognize the 
Premier but I ask members just to tone it down a little bit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition talks about handling the ball on this file. I want to 
remind the people of Saskatchewan and members of this 
legislature that that member sat in the House of Commons 
where the ball was in his hands. And what did he do? He 
preached a doctrine of non-subsidy — that’s the doctrine he 
preached in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Handling of Ministerial Investigation 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising the Premier can’t 
handle a major issue like the Ag file. He can’t even handle a 
dispute between a minister and one of her own staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everywhere I went this weekend, people were 
asking: what kind of a Premier would let this situation get so far 
out of control? The Premier managed to take a minor incident 
over birthday cards and he turned it into a full-blown crisis for 
his government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would almost be funny, but it’s not funny 
because the people of Saskatchewan are paying the price for 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

this kind of bumbling leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the people of Saskatchewan have any 
confidence in the leadership of this Premier when he showed 
such poor judgment in handling this fiasco with the former 
Environment minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll tell you about the fiasco in 
Saskatchewan politics. The fiasco is sitting right across the 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Here, Mr. Speaker, here, Mr. Speaker, is 
an opposition that will not recognize 11,000 new jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, here is an opposition that 
will not recognize a credit rating upgrade to this province from 
Moody’s of New York, only one of three in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this is an opposition that 
hasn’t come with a new idea to this House in the course of the 
session. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order, 
please, members. Order, please, members. Once again I 
recognize the Premier — 20 seconds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me continue. Here is an 
opposition that doesn’t recognize record-level housing starts in 
this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — . . . doesn’t recognize new investment in 
this province. Does not recognize reduction in income tax in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fiasco in this House is seated directly across 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, I picked up the National Post on Saturday, thinking 
that I might see a big story about the dire need for a federal 
trade injury payment. Instead, I saw this, Mr. Speaker. I saw 
this. A full page on the Premier’s botched handling of the 
former Environment minister. That’s the kind of national 
attention this Premier is getting these days. 
 
And what’s even more bizarre, Mr. Speaker, the Premier didn’t 
fire the minister for striking her staff member; he fired her for 
talking about striking her staff member. 

Mr. Speaker, people all over this province of Saskatchewan are 
questioning this Premier’s judgment. If the Premier can’t even 
manage an internal issue like this one, how on earth can he 
manage the real issues like the farm crisis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when I’m reviewing the 
national press these days, you know what I’m reading about, 
I’m reading about the challenges to the leader across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not reading about 
challenges to leadership on the government side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken to literally hundreds and thousands 
of people in the last several weeks. Mr. Speaker, I take my 
strength, not from the criticisms of this group, I take my 
strength from the people of Saskatchewan who are saying to 
this government, you’re on the right track, you’re building this 
province, you’re creating a new Saskatchewan for a new 
century. And we’re not going to be stopped by these folks at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I assure the 
now Premier of this province that the leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party will beat him hands down in the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier has spent thousands and 
thousands of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the fact remains that this Premier has 
spent thousands and thousands of taxpayers’ dollars to 
investigate one of his own ministers. And after all that he still 
blows it. 
 
First he puts her back in cabinet, and then he fires her out of 
cabinet. And he tells everyone there to keep their mouth shut, 
and then he fires the minister for not keeping her mouth shut. 
And after all that, we still don’t know whether the former 
minister was guilty of harassment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier spent thousands of taxpayers’ dollars 
on this investigation and he’s spending another $50,000 to find 
out why the SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
minister doesn’t know his own policy. We have a Premier who 
would rather order another investigation, Mr. Speaker, than 
lead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much more are the people of Saskatchewan 
going to pay for the incompetence and the feeble leadership of 
that Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I understand why the 
members of the opposition do not want to ask about health care 
for instance. Not when we see, not when we see for instance our 
major districts growing in strength in national surveys. They 
don’t want to ask about our universities; not when we see our 
universities growing in strength. They sure don’t want to ask 
about highways; not one question, Mr. Speaker, not one 
question in this session about highways in question period . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well we understand that. 
 
But then perhaps, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand — I 
understand why it is they don’t want to ask about all the good 
things that are happening in our province. But perhaps, perhaps 
I could suggest, that perhaps they’d like to ask about some of 
the difficulties that face the Aboriginal people of our province. 
Perhaps they’d like to ask a question or two about some of the 
difficulties we have in the core neighbourhoods of our inner 
cities. Or perhaps they’d like to ask about some of the 
environmental challenges that face our province. 
 
No, we get a lot of grandstanding, Mr. Speaker, but very little 
substance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement on Gaming with First Nations 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of 
Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Last week the NDP (New Democratic Party) signed the new 
gaming agreement with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations). The official 25-year agreement commits the 
NDP government to a process that would give the FSIN full 
jurisdiction to all forms of gaming on First Nations land. Does 
this mean the province would no longer be controlling the 
expansion of gaming on-reserve? And there is also a question 
about what this means in terms of revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain specifically what 
granting full jurisdiction of gaming on reserve land to First 
Nations means in terms of the provincial government’s control 
of gaming expansion and in terms of provincial revenue 
sharing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to once 
again acknowledge the questions with respect to a very good 
agreement that’s been entered into between this coalition 
government and the First Nations of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, an agreement that will allow, 
in co-operation, to advance our communities’ economic 
benefits; over 1,250 people working in these casinos now and 
they will continue to be doing that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only that but why does the opposition 
fail to recognize all the good things that are happening, such as 

high standards and quality standards for people that need help 
in some of our communities. Like in Prince Albert where the 
group counselling centre gets 300 . . . $302,000 donation, where 
the grand council chief is trying to help their communities help 
people and develop some more opportunities for First Nations 
people. Why are you, when your . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d just like to remind the 
minister to complete his answer through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 25, the day 
the framework agreement was signed, CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) radio reported, according to Chief 
Perry Bellegarde, full jurisdiction meant that First Nations 
would receive all the revenue from on-reserve gaming ventures. 
He said, and I quote: 
 

At that point it’s our full jurisdiction and we set up our . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, members. Order. Order. Must be able 
to hear the question. Order, members. Order. I recognize the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy and only — only — the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Full jurisdiction 
meant, according to Chief Perry Bellegarde, and I quote: 
 

At that point it’s our full jurisdiction and we set up our 
systems the way we want to do it. Because what other 
business — it’s a business — we’re sharing the profits, 
where else does that happen? 

 
Mr. Speaker, does the minister agree with Chief Bellegarde that 
full jurisdiction on-reserve would mean the end of revenue 
sharing between the FSIN and the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the short 
answer is no, it will not end that kind of an agreement. We have 
a great deal of mutual respect and confidence in our First 
Nations partners — not unlike the members opposite who still 
have some concerns about the agreement that we’ve entered 
into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the . . . we will be working with First Nations to 
make a representation to the federal government with respect to 
jurisdiction on reserves. We’ve agreed to that. That was part of 
the ’95 agreement and it continues to be part of that agreement. 
Now I really, really can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, why the 
Leader of the Opposition would say that the Gaming Authority 
. . . Hermanson, I quote: 
 

. . . praised the FSIN for running a successful gaming 
business and complimented it for addressing . . . 
(government’s) challenges . . . 

 
Now I don’t know why the members opposite will not support 
their leader in telling everybody what a great agreement this is 
and will continue to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, again the minister does not 
clearly and . . . clearly define what the new gaming agreement 
means when it refers to full jurisdiction. Yet the government is 
committing $250,000 annually to the FSIN for the next five 
years to enable them to move toward full jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can this government justify spending 250,000 
of taxpayers’ dollars to help the FSIN secure full jurisdiction 
over gaming on-reserve when the minister will not define 
clearly what full jurisdiction means? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Full jurisdiction 
is what the First Nations people will be requesting from Ottawa. 
Remember that the federal government controls jurisdiction on 
gaming under the Criminal Code. 
 
Now we will be working, and we made an agreement in good 
faith in 1995 and reaffirmed it, that we will assist them in 
making their proposals to the federal government. That’s where 
the final decisions will be made ultimately. 
 
Now in any good business agreements and partnerships, Mr. 
Speaker, obviously the members opposite don’t understand why 
would we want to have competing interests when we’re into a 
partnership to benefit all the people of Saskatchewan — not just 
one particular sector of our community but the entire 
community at large, First Nations and non-First Nations 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to give the 
people a straight answer, so I will direct my question to the 
Premier. The NDP government has not consulted with the 
public about this 25-year agreement. And they refuse to define 
what allowing the FIS . . . FSIN full jurisdiction means. Yet the 
NDP government is committing $1.2 million over the next five 
years on a process to pursue this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is on public record in the past as 
opposing gaming expansion in Saskatchewan. So will he 
explain what exactly full jurisdiction means? Will this allow 
First Nations to expand on-reserve gaming without the 
provincial government’s approval? And will it mean all 
proceeds from on-reserve gaming will go to First Nations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has answered 
this question now one, two, three times. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
have a question. I have a question. Who is it, Mr. Speaker, that 
speaks for the Saskatchewan Party opposition on gaming 
policy? Who is it? Is it the leader, is it the Leader of the 
Opposition, who stands in public at the FSIN Assembly and is 
quoted as saying in the Saskatoon . . . The StarPhoenix: 
 

Hermanson praised the FSIN for running a successful 
gaming business and complimented it for addressing (the) 
“governance challenges” at SIGA. 

 
Does the Leader of the Opposition speak for the gaming policy 
of the Saskatchewan Party, or is it the member from Weyburn, 
or is it the member from Humboldt, or is it the member from 

Rosthern? Who speaks for the policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sound Stage in Regina 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
just moments ago the Premier went on a small rant about why 
don’t the people over here ask some questions. That’s why we 
don’t ask questions, we don’t get answers from that 
government. We don’t get an answer at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister Responsible for 
SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). 
According to CBC the NDP’s $11.5 million sound stage in 
Regina is actually going to cost taxpayers even more. They’re 
reporting, CBC is reporting, at least $500,000 over budget and 
the bill could go even higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the legislature what the 
original budget for the NDP’s Regina sound stage was, and 
what does the NDP now estimate the government will have to 
spend to complete the building so tenants will actually sign 
lease agreements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have to admit it was hard to hear the last half of the question but 
what I did hear, I will certainly answer, and that is around the 
budget around the sound stage. 
 
The increase in terms of the cost. Actually I will tell the 
member that the project was under budget before enhancements 
were made to bring the windows up to heritage standard, before 
enhancements were made to the landscaping because it’s built 
in the middle of Wascana Park, and before a wall had to be 
buttressed that they didn’t believe had to be. This is what 
brought the cost up. Had it not been for that, the project 
management would have had it underneath. 
 
Now what I think the members opposite should understand, and 
they should be standing for it and they should be telling people, 
is that this is a good economic infrastructure investment for the 
city and for the province and they should support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we will wait to see 
how good it is economically for the city. 
 
My question again for the minister. The minister tells the 
legislature and the media that the sound stage is 80 per cent 
leased and as it turns out, that is not true. According to the 
minister, according to the minister, many potential tenants for 
the sound stage production space have only signed letters of 
intent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what percentage of the production space at the 
Regina sound stage does the NDP actually have signed leases 
for? And what percentage of the sound stage production space 
does the NDP have signed letters of intent for? 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, letters of intent are 
legally binding documents and I would ask the member to 
apologize for accusing me of lying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. It’s not the Speaker’s job to 
ascertain as to the facts, but it is the Speaker’s duty to call to 
order any time members use language that’s unparliamentary. 
And I would ask the member . . . Order, please. Order. And I 
would ask the member for Regina South not to use the word lie, 
whether it is in reference to himself or anybody else. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again I go 
back to the Premier’s dissertation earlier on about why we don’t 
ask questions. There’s the prime example. 
 
I ask the question again, Mr. Speaker, what percentage of the 
production space at the Regina sound stage does the NDP 
actually have signed leases for; and what percentage of 
production space does the NDP have signed letters of intent 
for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 
once again has proven that it can rain doom and gloom on the 
most positive activities happening in this province. They’ve 
proven it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again the minister has 
answered, the minister has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry members, I just have to ask the 
Premier to start once again. And I would ask members on both 
sides of the House not to interfere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I attended to the 
Babelsberg studios in Germany with Team Canada. In Germany 
the largest European film studio has high regard for Minds Eye 
Pictures, for the Regina sound stage, and for what’s going on in 
the province of Saskatchewan. I wish that kind of enthusiasm 
would exist in the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now we have learned one thing today 
though, Mr. Speaker, we have learned one thing today: the 
member from Wood River, the Wood River member has now 
admitted it, they don’t ask questions in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 78 — The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Benefits Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 78, The 
Members of the Legislative Assembly Benefits Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I stand on behalf of the 
government today and convert questions 339 through 347 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 339 to 347 have been converted to 
motions for debate returnable. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to begin by saying how pleased I am to rise and 
move second reading of An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation Act. 
 
This amendment will increase the borrowing limits for the 
research parks business unit from 150 million to 170 million. 
 
This government is on record of course as supporting research 
parks and the science and technology sector as vehicles for 
economic development. 
 
Although SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) 
was wound down as part of the 2002-2003 budget, the business 
of the research parks must continue and grow. The corporation 
needs additional capital so that the research parks can continue 
with routine business operations. As well, there is potential to 
purchase two existing buildings from the University of Regina 
to bring much needed critical mass to the Regina Research 
Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I need to emphasize that this enhancement in the 
borrowing limits is very crucial to the continued operation of 
the research parks and indeed to the continued growth of 
research and technology in general in the province. 
 
Before I explain in a little more detail why this increase of 20 
million is necessary, I should remind this House that it is a 
borrowing limit we are increasing. This is not a handout or a 
grant but monies that will be repaid with interest through the 
rental revenues from research park tenants. 
 
The other important fact that needs to be stressed, Mr. Speaker, 
is that not having this increase would put at risk a lot of our 
present investment this government has in our two world-class 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

research parks. 
 
The research parks offer specialized infrastructure that are 
geared to the needs of tenants engaged in a wide range of 
research activities from ag-biotech to information technology to 
petroleum, energy, and related projects. If we are not able to 
provide and maintain these facilities in a manner that will be 
suited to the specialized uses by tenants, we may over time find 
that the tenants will look elsewhere for space, or prospective 
tenants may choose other locations outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to remind those in the House, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government not only believes in the research and technology 
sector but that we see this sector as having an important role in 
economic development of our province. 
 
I know that we are accustomed to seeing immediate or at least 
short-term results for our investment resources. The research 
and technology sector, however, is different. The money we 
spend on research today will be repaid several years from now 
in many ways — not the least of which is an improved 
economic climate and a better quality of life for the people of 
the province. 
 
It’s also important to clarify that Innovation Place and the 
Regina Research Park are part of the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation. And that corporation, commonly 
known as SOCO, is in the process of being wound down. The 
assets of SOCO, as the Minister of Finance announced on 
March 27, are being transferred to Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
This government is committed to the continuing existence of 
the research parks and has asked the management of CIC and 
SOCO to review the role of research parks to determine how 
they can be most effectively and efficiently operated over time. 
That review is underway and is anticipated that the final 
decision with respect to governance structure will be made later 
this fall. 
 
I want to assure you in this House, Mr. Speaker, that research 
parks are continuing with business as usual during this review. 
It is continuing to meet the needs of tenants, to actively seek out 
new tenants, to make changes and improvements as needed to 
ensure the parks continue to represent the high standards for 
which they are so well known. 
 
In the meantime, the two parks are in urgent need of tenant 
improvements, building improvements, and ongoing building 
and maintenance projects. As the parks are looking at the 
potential for growth and expansion, officials are ongoing . . . in 
ongoing discussions with the University of Regina to purchase 
two buildings that are known by the university . . . now owned 
by the university. 
 
The buildings, known as no. 1 Research Drive and no. 2 
Research Drive, are already located in the park. These buildings 
could be an important addition to the assets of Regina Research 
Park, making them better equipped to attract new tenants and to 
provide property management services to those buildings and 
relieve the university of this responsibility. The increase in the 
borrowing limits, as stated in the amendment, will allow the 
organization to continue to pursue these negotiations with the 

university. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that we in Saskatchewan 
have the finest research parks anywhere in the world. And that’s 
not just my view, Mr. Speaker, that’s the opinion shared by 
many people who visit Innovation Place — both in Regina and 
Saskatoon — people from around the world. 
 
We have been able to successfully operate research parks when 
others have failed in many places. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 
management of the research parks get inquiries almost daily 
from other countries and the provinces are asking for advice in 
how to set up and operate a research park. And they have 
already provided such advice to Malaysia, Panama, Toronto. 
 
Innovation Place and Regina Research Park are very strong 
symbols and evidence of growth and economic progress in both 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
By increasing the borrowing limits for the research parks, we 
are enhancing our ability to keep our province’s best and 
brightest minds here in Saskatchewan. No matter what political 
persuasion we represent, one thing we are all committed to is to 
provide an environment that will keep our young people here 
and to encourage those who left to return. 
 
I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the additional capital will be 
used to improve and expand our research parks, which in turn 
means new jobs, enhanced economic growth, and more 
opportunity for innovation. It’s obvious that virtually all of our 
initiatives requires a share of the pie in order to survive. 
 
The additional funding to research parks, however, is not in 
competition with health care, with agriculture, or highways, or 
education. As I said, this is an amendment to increase the 
borrowing limit and the bill will be repaid from lease revenues 
from the parks. 
 
I’ve been very fortunate to visit our research parks and to 
become acquainted with some of the exciting things that are 
happening in these facilities. And I want to encourage all 
members of this House to do the same. 
 
The parks are a visible symbol of progress both in Saskatoon 
and Regina and are highly regarded in those communities. But 
they’re more than landmarks and architectural masterpieces. 
They’re environmentally efficient, very functional, and highly 
successful in attracting tenants. Right now both parks are about 
95 per cent full with exciting potential for growth. 
 
What many people do not know is that the research parks 
provide many economic benefits to the two cities and the 
provincial economy. Last year the parks contributed about $390 
million to our provincial economy. 
 
Are we proud of our research parks? Yes, we are. Are we 
committed to their continued existence and growth? Yes, we 
are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very optimistic about the future of this 
province and about the spirit and energy of the people who will 
take us into the 21st century as we prepare to bring new ideas 
and new methods of improving ag-biotech, and 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

 

pharmaceuticals, and information technology, and petroleum 
research, and so on. We need to support the infrastructure that 
will make these things happen. 
 
I’m honoured, Mr. Speaker, to stand here today and invite 
members of the House to support this amendment to increase 
the borrowing limits for our research parks and to use this as a 
statement of our collective commitment to the future of our 
province. And therefore, I’m proud to present this Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act for second 
reading. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 74, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation Act is really quite a small Bill as far as text is 
concerned. But when you look at what it does, it raises the 
borrowing limit for the research parks — whether it’s 
Innovation Place or Research Drive in Regina here — from 
150,000 to 170,000, Mr. Speaker, and that I think on first blush 
looks like a . . . not a bad idea. 
 
It was interesting, though. In the budget they’ve talked about 
winding down SOCO and turning it over into CIC, which 
honestly gives us a little bit of a scare knowing what the track 
record of CIC has been, Mr. Speaker. But certainly, when the 
minister was talking about these two facilities, whether they be 
in Saskatoon or Regina — and the intent of them is keep our 
best and brightest at home — Mr. Speaker, we could certainly 
say that maybe we should be doing a much better job than what 
we are. 
 
The statistics show and the many, many stories that I’ve heard, 
albeit anecdotal, just tell us that so many of our brightest and 
our best are leaving the province for greener pastures. Quite 
often they go through these universities. They go through the 
universities and they tend to take the education and they leave. 
 
And the member from Moose Jaw is saying that all I have to do 
is look at him as one of the best and the brightest, and I don’t 
know if you’re meaning the light off your forehead, Mr. 
Speaker, because that certainly is bright. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I realize that members . . . Order 
. . . that members may be taking things in jest, but I would 
advise members to stay away from personal references to other 
members. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . sides and that was mentioned in the 
minister’s speech that the intent, be it whichever political party, 
is to grow the province and is to keep the people that we 
educate back here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And if this 
Bill leads towards that by increasing the lending limits . . . the 
borrowing limits, I mean, of the universities, the research parks, 
to increase that will accomplish that goal then, Mr. Speaker, I 
think in first blush that we’d be in favour of that. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we would like to talk to the different 
facilities that are going to be impacted by this and get their 
opinion on it before we would just pass it on, on just the word 
of the government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this time I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 74. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 54 — The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
and enter the second reading debate on Bill 54, The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act. 
 
And as the minister noted when he made his second reading 
speech and as did our member for Redberry Lake noted in his 
comments, that it’s a fairly wide-sweeping Bill. It touches on a 
lot of very, very important issues in terms of municipal 
government and urban municipal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It doesn’t clarify a lot about the intent of the government or the 
direction the government intends to go, but certainly it touches 
on them and brings them into the field in terms of being open 
for debate in this Assembly as regards Bill 54. So it is a 
pleasure to enter this debate. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Speaker, I worked for some five years 
for an urban municipality. And although I worked in economic 
development, you got a sense from, you know, the director of 
engineering and the director of finance and certainly our city 
commissioner that there was this real desire on the part of the 
city of Swift Current administration and on various councils for 
some fundamental changes to urban legislation in the province. 
 
Now this Act contemplates some of those changes that those 
urban municipalities have wanted, at least my colleagues that 
used to work at the city of Swift Current certainly wanted. 
Some of the more substantive changes though, that they have 
long sought out, frankly though, Mr. Speaker, could be found, I 
think, in The Cities Act which was also introduced into the 
legislature. Those changes there are perhaps even more 
important to municipalities than these are. 
 
But as you will know, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 54 does address the 
very, very serious topic of assessment. And I don’t think you 
can go to any city or for that matter any rural municipality in 
the province of Saskatchewan and not run into somebody who’s 
very, very concerned about assessment. 
 
And this Bill talks a little bit about or at least seems to indicate 
that the government is heading in the direction of the income 
approach. But that new system for assessment in the province 
might not be in place until the end of this decade. And so 
people who are really interested in change will be concerned 
about the pace of change. 
 
Of course it’s a very, very, very difficult issue, the issue of 
assessment. I think everyone will agree that there are parts of 
our current assessment system that are just patently unfair in 
terms of being the method of raising local levies, local taxes, 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

especially as regards education. Of course it doesn’t matter how 
much of the education system you’re using, as a property 
owner, or how much you’re not using. The assessments are 
based on how much land you happen to own and the value of 
that land. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very, very serious issue. 
 
There are also some provisions, smaller provisions some would 
argue, about allowing the dangerous dog bylaw to expand to 
cover other dangerous animals in the same manner, and also 
giving local governments some more autonomy with respect to 
charges for persistent false alarms. 
 
You know, there’s a couple of very seemingly housekeeping 
points of this Bill. But one would wonder why, if they are 
moving in the direction of the kind of cities Act that the cities of 
this province want, which is to have a . . . is to have the new 
legislation from the province not tell them what they are not 
allowed to do but rather prescribe . . . They would like the 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, to prescribe for them what they’re not 
allowed to do; not list all the things that they can do. 
 
And one would wonder why they would bring in these two 
pieces of legislation at the same time that seem to, these two 
points about the dog bylaw — the dangerous dog bylaw being 
expanded to other animals — and the local governments given 
some autonomy with respect to false alarms, might be covered 
off in the appropriate changes to the cities Act, should they be 
serious about making those, Mr. Speaker. Also in that category 
is the comments in this Bill that contemplate the subject of junk 
cars in the cities. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, clearly the most important part of the Bill is 
the issue of assessment. 
 
The Bill also contemplates the water and sewer issues in cities 
in the province. And, you know, nobody’s going to 
underestimate, Mr. Speaker, the importance of that issue in 
every city in this province, in every municipality — rural or 
urban — in this province in light of recent events, in light of the 
ongoing difficulties many municipalities are having with water, 
with sourcing quality water for their residents. 
 
And I think specifically of cases in Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. 
You know not long ago in this legislature we had a debate about 
Last Mountain Lake, and we continue to have it, and about 
actions taken by the city of Regina where . . . Now government 
members are quick to point out, fair enough, that it’s treated 
effluent — treated effluent that is discharged through the 
system and could possibly end up in Last Mountain Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I’m assuming it goes through a water 
treatment, the city of Regina’s water treatment process, and the 
city and the Environment department allows these discharges to 
occur. But you know, Mr. Speaker, in the city of Swift Current 
historically, which uses a lagoon system to treat its effluent, in 
the city of Swift Current the city has from time to time needed 
to apply to the province for a permit to discharge. High rains or 
a very wet year perhaps, Mr. Speaker, are usually the years — 
and this has had to occur — and it’s a fairly rare occurrence. It 
had been a very rare occurrence. 
 
The other system that the city uses is they also irrigate. They do 
some effluent irrigation, permitted in process by Sask 

Environment. So you can see though in a wet year that doesn’t 
help because those who are taking the irrigation simply don’t 
need as much. It’s raining more and so you have this double 
whammy. And the problem our engineering department faces in 
Swift Current with the lagoons that are close to overflowing, 
they’re overcharged, and what has to happen then is the city 
needs to apply for the permit to discharge treated effluent — 
mind you, similar to the argument they make for other cities — 
treated effluent into the Swift Current creek. 
 
Now you can imagine that the word treated effluent is cold 
comfort for those downstream residents of the lake; and I have 
some that are very close friends. And I understand completely 
that they are very upset if ever that has to happen, because it’s 
their creek as well, and what impact does it have on well water? 
And these are the questions that are asked every single time an 
application’s been made. 
 
And so the Environment department came down fairly 
unequivocally on the city of Swift Current when I was still 
employed there in the mid . . . might have been about the late 
1990s, and clearly said to them, no more permits. No more 
permits. You’re going to have to do something about this. 
We’re not allowing discharges any more. 
 
Fair enough. The city looked at its options and it elected a 
snow-fluent plant which they’re having some problems with, 
and literally that’s a system that would turn . . . make snow 
from the effluent and pump it out in the winter. And they’re 
having problems with it. And the issue hasn’t gone away to the 
point where they probably still need a water treatment plant. 
 
The issue, Mr. Speaker, isn’t whether the cities should be 
regulated with respect to quality of water. The issue is fairness. 
Let’s make sure that whatever we do in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
whatever we do in Bill 54 on the subject of water and sewage, 
that every municipality that it affects is treated equally, that 
every municipality gets a fair shake. Especially those 
municipalities that really do their level best — their very level 
best — to avoid any environmental catastrophe, either 
purposeful or otherwise. 
 
And so that’s a concern certainly that I have as the member who 
represents the city of Swift Current when I see any municipal 
legislation contemplating the subject of water and sewage. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s many other 
members that would also like to enter this debate. And as a 
result, I would move at this time that we adjourn the debate. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 55 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 55 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 55, the rural municipal amendment Act, certainly is a very 
interesting Act, Mr. Speaker. 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

 

The Minister for Municipal Affairs has introduced a number of 
pieces of legislation. One we’ve just heard on is the urban, this 
one being the rural, and the one following will be the northern 
municipal Act, amendments being made to them. 
 
And some of the amendments are quite substantial, Mr. 
Speaker. As I go through this rural municipal amendment Act, 
it talks about allowing more flexibility for the rural 
municipalities in terms of amalgamation. It allows perhaps 
easier amalgamation of one or more municipalities. Also even a 
portion of a municipality may be annexed by another. 
 
And it’s very interesting that this legislation is put forward. And 
I would, for the most part, have to agree with that portion of the 
legislation. It wasn’t too many months ago — I guess about a 
year or a year and a half ago — when the debate raged on about 
municipal amalgamation and the whole idea of this government 
to force amalgamation. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we saw all over the province, 
municipalities — whether they were urban, small urbans, towns 
and villages, or rural municipalities — get up in arms. And they 
really, really made their voices and their feelings known, that 
forced amalgamation was not the way to do this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And we were of the same agreement. We felt that being forced 
into amalgamation, forcing municipalities to join, was not the 
way to go. Allowing legislation that would make it a little bit 
easier for this happen, which this Act does, was the proper way 
of going about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What it also does, this Act, it talks about giving some of the 
municipalities a little bit more, greater authority, I guess. What 
it gives . . . one of the areas that I was noticing, it gives greater 
authority in taking action against so-called nuisance buildings. 
Also giving council greater scope in recovering costs associated 
with removal of nuisance buildings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And I think if you travel throughout rural Saskatchewan right 
now, as the population is dwindling in rural Saskatchewan, a lot 
of the buildings that may have been used many, many years ago 
have been left vacated, there is no tax being collected on them, 
and they’re sitting in small hamlets for example, or 
communities that used to have some population. 
 
I can just speak of the community that I was born and raised in 
and lived pretty much my whole life in, the town of Lewvan, 
which I think the population now is down to six; no it might be 
seven now including all the . . . there’s a couple of . . . one other 
family that moved in I guess. So it certainly isn’t a booming 
metropolis that I knew of when I was a kid. 
 
And there are a number of buildings in that community that I 
think you could consider would be the RM’s (rural 
municipality) responsibility now, is nuisance buildings. 
Buildings that have come into disrepair and really are quite an 
eyesore. 
 
And it is really quite depressing I think — not only think, I 
know — when I travel back down through the community that I 

was born and raised in and see some of the buildings that were 
lived in, some of the buildings that had businesses operating out 
of them, because of changes in the rail system and the 
depopulation of rural Saskatchewan, those buildings are left in 
disrepair. And I think the RMs need a little bit more authority in 
cleaning up some of those sites. 
 
It also gives authority, a little bit more authority, in dealing with 
junk vehicles which can be a problem in certain communities as 
well. 
 
It puts in place provisions that allow income approach for 
property assessment. When the speaker just before me, the 
member from Swift Current, talked on Bill 54, the urban 
municipal Act, he talked quite a bit about assessment. And I 
think in rural Saskatchewan and for RMs, one of the biggest 
issues that I hear of over and over and over again is the issue of 
property tax and the effect of property tax on the farming 
community. 
 
Now this government in its wisdom two years ago put in a place 
. . . put into place a bit of a program that would address property 
tax, the education portion of property tax. It didn’t come to this 
conclusion that it needed to address this problem certainly on its 
own or with any thought of its own. It came to the conclusion 
after attending tax revolt meeting after tax revolt meeting after 
tax revolt meeting held all over, especially southern 
Saskatchewan, and it was spreading into northern 
Saskatchewan, before this government started to realize that 
maybe property tax is a huge issue, maybe the education portion 
on property tax is a huge issue in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly I know in our area property tax can be quite a 
problem. So what I’ve been . . . a number of phone calls that I 
have been getting just recently all over the last month or two is 
the fact that first of all, we’ve got an enhanced crop insurance 
program — enhancement meaning taking out spot loss hail. 
How that could be enhanced crop insurance, I don’t know, but 
we’re hearing lots of phone calls on that, the enhancement, or 
the destruction of the crop insurance program with the removal 
of spot loss hail. 
 
But that’s only one blow that rural Saskatchewan has taken 
from this government this year. It’s taken the blow of losing 
spot loss hail. 
 
But it’s also taken the blow of this government taking away $25 
million that it put in place 2 years ago — 25 million 2 years 
ago, 25 million last year — that people could access to down 
. . . absorb some of the blow of the education portion of the 
property tax that we’re facing in agricultural land throughout 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what the Bill talks about is changing the way we look at 
assessment a little bit. And I guess one of the issues . . . I heard 
one person talk about assessment and how important getting 
assessment right is — especially in a province like 
Saskatchewan. It is crucial that we get the process of 
assessment correct in this province, because the provincial 
government that has downloaded so much onto property 
ownership that if the structure . . . if you call assessment the 
foundation of our system, and it is not a very strong foundation 
— in fact the foundation is crumbling a little bit or our 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

assessment system is a little bit suspect — and you keep putting 
more and more weight from the provincial government in the 
form of downloading on a foundation that is not structurally 
sound, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you run into the situations that 
we’re running into right now in rural Saskatchewan. We’re 
running into situations where people . . . with input costs and 
everything else. 
 
But one of the major expenses is property tax because of the 
government downloading so much on an assessment system 
that may not be structurally sound, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So if 
the Bill addresses the whole assessment system and makes the 
assessment system a little more structurally sound, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’d have to say that would be a very good thing. 
 
But until we talk to more municipalities on the impact of this 
Bill, because it is a wide-sweeping Bill — I’ve only talked 
about a couple of things, I’ve talked about assessment and I’ve 
talked about amalgamation. It also talks on water and sewage 
and that type of . . . those type of issues — all issues that are 
very important to rural Saskatchewan and the RMs of our 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So as we get more information back, as the 300 RMs around the 
province have a look at this Bill as it impacts them, and they 
give feedback back to us on how that is . . . the impact is going 
to absorbed by them, whether it’s good ideas or bad ideas, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d move that we would adjourn debate on this 
Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 56 — The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure this afternoon to make just a few comments on 
the Bill No. 56, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act. 
We certainly see that the government . . . This is quite a large 
Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to northern municipalities, 
the 34 northern municipalities who will be affected by this Bill. 
 
And certainly we see some good in here. We see some 
questionable, some questionable legislation being brought in. 
We have some curiosity around it. And certainly sometime in 
the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll get a chance to the speak 
with the minister in Committee of the Whole about these issues. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we take a look at this 
Bill, I think it’s important that in today’s debate that comments 
are made in regards to this government’s attitudes towards 
northern municipalities and the detrimental affect it’s had on the 
past . . . in the past decades in the growth of northern 
municipalities and their ability to govern and their ability to 
establish economic growth in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the slight changes that is 
coming . . . And course in this Bill there is some tinkering, 
some tinkering that’s going to take place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This government is looking at some flexibility in the number of 
councillors that are going to be allowed on municipal boards in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve certainly noticed in the two 
previous Bills, Bill No. 54 and Bill No. 55, in reference to 
changes to the urban municipal Act and the rural municipal Act, 
is that municipalities are going to be able to without, without 
approval from the minister get a chance to be able to set an 
appropriate amount of councillors to be able to sit on their 
municipal boards. 
 
In northern municipalities, this is extremely important. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we know that many of the municipalities in 
northern Saskatchewan have a very limited amount of residents 
in their communities and having the flexibility to reduce in 
those situations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amount of councillors 
that sit on those municipal boards, it’s very important that 
flexibility be allowed so that they’re not always in a state of 
flux, so that they know on a three-year basis how many people 
that they’re going to be able to find to replace those members of 
councils who want to move on for other purposes. And that’s 
appropriately so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So in many of the smaller municipal districts certainly there are 
very limited opportunities to find the appropriate amount of 
councillors that were necessary to operate, in the past, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, those councils. And having the flexibility to 
reduce down to even as few as two councillors, the mayor and 
two councillors in these northern municipal districts, it’s 
extremely important that that be allowed to happen. 
 
But on the other side of the coin — and there is another side to 
the coin, Mr. Deputy Speaker — some of the northern 
communities are extremely large indeed. As an example, just as 
one example, we certainly know that the town of La Loche in 
northern . . . the town of La Loche has a population of about 
3,500. Well even in southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for a town, that’s a large size. And so they need the 
flexibility to allow themselves to have larger amounts of 
representation on council. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of this, this tinkering in 
this Bill, this one small tinkering, that’s going to be able to 
happen so that the very small communities will be able to have 
fewer amounts of councillors, and in the much larger 
communities will have significantly higher amounts of 
councillors. And that is very appropriate in today’s day and age. 
 
Another change that is being looked at in this Bill, Bill No. 56, 
the northern municipal amendment Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
changes to the assessment. Now certainly this government, 
whether being approached from either urban governments or 
. . . urban governments, rural governments, northern 
governments, is the dissatisfaction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
the assessment system that is presently in place in this province. 
And certainly this government in the early 1990s, in their 
attempts to do what they thought at that time was upgrading the 
assessment system . . . And certainly it was archaic at the time. 
We were using assessment values that were significantly 
outdated, as many as 30 years of age old, and certainly that 
needed to change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

 

But this government in their lack of wisdom — and in many 
cases as we see in much legislation that is brought, especially 
that I’ve seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last three years — is 
in their desire for change and in their lack of consultation, in 
their lack of due diligence they’ve often rushed into situations, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, making changes to legislation that has a 
tendency to have a negative, significant negative impact upon 
municipalities. And one of them of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as all members of the House are well aware, was the changes in 
the assessment system in Saskatchewan that was brought in, in 
the early 1990s. And certainly those changes have had a 
negative impact on the . . . (inaudible) . . . assessment is taking 
place in this province. 
 
So we see in this . . . in these three pieces of legislation and 
specifically Bill No. 56, the northern municipal amendment Act 
2002, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this government is starting to 
think that the changes are going to be need . . . made to the 
assessment system that we presently have in this province. Now 
we know that at times they . . . this government can rush into 
things kind of helter-skelter and then other times they can drag 
their feet. We see in this piece of legislation again a dragging of 
the feet of the changes that are going to be necessary in regards 
to assessment. 
 
This piece . . . these three pieces of legislation certainly talk 
about in the future they’re going to allow for income base to be 
allowed around commercial properties for assessment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Now it’s going to allow municipalities to use 
that when, when, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s changes made to 
the . . . to SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) legislation, or the Saskatchewan assessment 
management authority, when their legislation or their 
regulations are changed. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they seem to be getting, this 
government, getting the cart ahead of the horse a little bit. 
They’re putting the change into . . . in the municipal legislation 
that this is coming. Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is 
going to be a change in government before that happens when 
. . . in regards to Saskatchewan assessment management 
authority. 
 
And so we’re wondering on this side of the House — and 
certainly sometime next month we’ll get the chance maybe to 
ask the minister about that — is why they’re changing this in 
the municipal legislation now when it might be more 
appropriate to have tied it in at the same time with changes to 
SAMA’s authority in this regard when you talk, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, about income based assessment also being applied. 
 
Because we see very clearly in the Act is that even though it’s 
going to be there for, going to be there for municipalities, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s also very clear in the Act that they’re not 
going to be able to allow to use it at this time until there are 
changes to the assessment manual. And certainly we don’t see 
anything in the near future coming along that lines, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker 
 
(15:00) 
 
There is an interesting little change that’s coming, and certainly 
it’s at the request, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the town of 

Creighton. The town of Creighton for many years has operated 
under the authority of urban municipal Act. 
 
But of course as we’re all aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
House, that the town of Creighton is certainly in the northern 
district, in the northern administrative district in this province. 
And the town felt quite strong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what 
they needed to do to enable to enhance their opportunities is 
that the town of Creighton should be included under the 
northern municipal Act. And that’s very appropriate. 
 
So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this government kind of 
wanders through the maze of trying to govern a province and, 
as we’ve seen, especially last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
they often drop the ball in this case, that this tiny request from a 
town, the town of Creighton, to be able to operate under 
different circumstances and follow the northern municipal Act, 
is highly appropriate. 
 
Because as we know very well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government has not been very responsible . . . responsive to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And certainly it wasn’t until the 1999 
election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when we were forced upon 
us this coalition government, that they decided they needed to 
start listening to the people of Saskatchewan. And this would be 
one small example of that. 
 
So the town of Creighton, we certainly want to congratulate 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on their perseverance in finally 
getting what they need in order to operate as a town in northern 
Saskatchewan, the opportunities that are going to abound to 
them because of their access to better opportunities in the 
northern municipal Act. The town of Creighton needs to be 
congratulated for their efforts finally after all these years at 
getting this NDP government to listen to them. 
 
One of the sad states of affairs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in northern 
communities, and certainly we know on this side of the House 
and maybe some of the members on the other side of the House 
also know this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the town of La Ronge 
operates under the urban municipal Act. And that’s 
appropriately so. It’s a very large town. 
 
La Ronge proper, the town of La Ronge, probably has a 
population of about 4,500. It plays a very central role to 
economic growth and development in northern Saskatchewan. 
But all the other communities, and now including the town of 
Creighton, operate under the northern municipal Act. One of the 
outstanding ambiguities of the northern municipal Act was that 
it allowed no authority — no authority, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
to communities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
At one time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, northern communities were 
allowed to enact dog bylaws. Well that was fine. But the fact of 
the matter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a dog bylaw had no bite, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
What northern municipalities had to act under at one time . . . 
how they had to operate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is if they wanted 
to enact a bylaw, they actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had to get 
permission from the minister — in today’s circumstance that 
would be the Minister of Government Relations — actually 
having to be getting permission from a government minister to 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

enact a bylaw. 
 
Well nowhere else was that happening in Saskatchewan. In 
southern Saskatchewan, in the areas south of the northern 
administrative district line, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those 
communities were allowed to enact bylaws as they deemed 
appropriate for their communities. And if those communities 
didn’t appreciate the bylaws all they had to do was simply wait 
for the next election, throw out that mayor and council, and 
bring in more appropriate bylaws. 
 
Well the communities in northern Saskatchewan weren’t 
allowed that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at one time. Well until this 
Bill passes — it may be some time next month or August, 
whenever that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re not allowed to do 
that in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s really unfortunate. It’s unfortunate to think that a 
government in today’s day and age, and specifically this NDP 
government, would actually believe, would actually believe, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people of northern Saskatchewan 
are not ready for self-determination. 
 
They have the ability, they have the ability, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to govern themselves and we should allow that; we 
need to allow that to happen. But many times, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with communities in northern Saskatchewan, with 
mayors and councils . . . and certainly, we have found out that 
these people are more than ready to be able to take on the roles 
and responsibilities of operating local governments in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And finally, finally, if this government can get down to 
business some day in the very near future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this part of the Act can be changed so that municipalities in 
northern Saskatchewan are going to be able to have more 
self-determination in the direction that they would like to see 
their towns grow, and be able to operate . . . for the 
opportunities that people in northern Saskatchewan are certainly 
are asking for. 
 
Another one of the areas that we’re finding somewhat . . . we’re 
finding it amusing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because certainly as 
I’ve mentioned already before, municipalities in northern 
Saskatchewan were certainly not even allowed to have a bylaw 
in regards to dangerous animals unless they had permission 
from the minister, the Minister of Government Relations. 
 
Well that’s changing, of course, under this Act. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what’s going to happen is that they’re going to be able 
to allow to do that. Towns throughout Saskatchewan are going 
to be able to allow . . . have the opportunity to enact bylaws in 
regards to dangerous animals whether they’re in southern 
Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Well what’s interesting, what’s really interesting in this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that now municipalities 
throughout Saskatchewan, whether it be urban municipalities, 
rural municipalities, northern municipalities, will be able to 
extend those bylaws beyond canines, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Because at one time, it was believed by this government that 
that was really all that it was necessary for. 
 

And certainly in northern Saskatchewan, of course, with their 
proximity to the northern forest is that they need the 
opportunity to be able to enact bylaws on a much broader range 
basis. And we see that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this Bill that 
they’re going to be able to put teeth into the legislation, so to 
speak, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And finally after many years of NDP government, they’re 
finally allowing the people of northern Saskatchewan the 
opportunity to self-govern. And unfortunately it’s terrible we 
had to wait for a coalition government for that to happen, that 
the pressures of Saskatchewan people finally got to them and 
they were able to enact some laws in this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that will benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we want to applaud the people from northern 
Saskatchewan for their due diligence in being able to impress 
upon this government the need — this government, this NDP 
government — the need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to allow them to 
have self-government in Saskatchewan. And it’s hard to believe 
in this day and age that in northern Saskatchewan that wasn’t 
happening yet. 
 
Now what needs to be looked at as we talk about the 
municipalities that is of great concern to us and certainly we’ve 
been trying to impress upon this government — we know that 
the Saskatchewan Association of Urban Municipalities, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities have been 
trying to impress upon this government — the huge tax burden 
that is being placed upon the property tax owners in this 
province. The downloading that has taken place since the early 
’90s on the property tax owners . . . the property tax base, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in this province has been abysmal. It’s 
provided a great burden upon the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
and that needs to be righted. 
 
We’re not seeing anything in this Bill that’s going to address 
this in the very near future. We know that there’s a couple of 
Bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that have been brought by the 
government that they believe, they believe, are actually going to 
help address the situation. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all 
know — and certainly on this side of the House, and I’m sure 
many members on that side of the House also realize, on the 
government side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that that 
is only a pittance, that much more is going to be needed to 
address the property tax burden in this province. 
 
And it is Bills such as this, the northern municipal amendment 
Act, 2002, this Bill No. 56, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would have 
given this government the opportunity to be able to start 
addressing those situations. 
 
When we have a government in the early ’90s that actually took 
— actually took — $200,000 out of educational funding in this 
province and applied that, applied that to the property tax base, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it speaks quite loudly and very, 
very clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government, 
certainly in the early ’90s, did not have their priorities right. 
 
Instead of buying up companies all over the world, they could 
have been investing those monies very clearly, Mr. Speaker, in 
education in this province — the education that is going to be 
so desperately needed when the member from Rosetown-Biggar 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

 

becomes premier and the Saskatchewan Party is going to be 
enabled to enact their Grow Saskatchewan plan, a plan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that is going to grow this province by 100,000 
people in 10 years. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know on this side of the House that 
there are still some members who want the opportunity in the 
future to be able to make a few comments about this Bill, and I 
think it’s appropriate that that be allowed to happen. I know that 
the few comments that I have made have not covered all areas 
of this Bill and that other members on this side of the House 
would like to make comments on that . . . this Bill sometime in 
the future. 
 
And so then, at this time, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 52 — The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today we want to just speak for a few minutes on The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act. Really all this 
Bill is dealing with is the amount of revenue sharing going to 
the municipalities this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government side made a big to-do about the 
extra $10 million that they were putting into municipalities this 
year. The one thing they forgot to mention budget day was that 
over the past 10 years there’s been about $300 million in cuts to 
revenue sharing to municipalities, whether you be city, town, 
village, or the RMs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you divide that out, that 300 million that this 
government has cut in the last year . . . last 10 years to 
municipalities is about an average of 30 million a year. So the 
$10 million increase this year seems very petty and very small, 
albeit that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM were very grateful to get any kind of 
an increase because that meant the cutting was over for this one 
year. 
 
City mayors alone, Mr. Speaker, have said they needed $20 
million this year just to try and turn the trend of having to raise 
local municipal taxes. 
 
SUMA has also talked about the revenue sharing and the 
increases they need, Mr. Speaker. They figured which . . . this 
year they’re getting close to 32 million, but it’s about half of the 
67 million that they were paid to urban municipalities about 10 
years ago. And the 32 million that they got this year is actually 
less than they received in 1978, Mr. Speaker. So if you add 
inflation into that, they’re far behind where they were at that 
point some 30, 25 years ago. 
 
SARM also is very disappointed. I think they were happy to see 
the downloading stop for a year and the few million dollars that 
they had increased. But I think the thing that hurt SARM the 

most this year, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the $25 million 
education tax rebate was cut. When you put that in proportion 
to the $4.5 million increase for SARM this year to the increased 
funding, and then take away $25 million cut to education tax 
rebate, the rural taxpayers out there are losing a vast number of 
dollars this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleague for Indian Head-Milestone touched on just how 
important that $25 million was to farmers out there on their 
education tax and how badly that’s going to be missed in this 
year’s round of trying to balance their books out there, 
especially when we still have a large area of this province that’s 
still in drought conditions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The South, south of No. 1, has received rain in many cases, 
ample rain, but the minute you get north of No. 1 Highway we 
still have many, many areas, Mr. Speaker, that are in a disaster 
situation. Their wells are going dry. Their dugouts are drying 
up. They have nowhere to water their cattle. They’re having to 
move their cattle to other areas. Their crops, for in all intents 
and purposes, haven’t even germinated in many cases. 
 
So for those to think because in the South we have rain here, I 
think, Mr. Speaker, we should remember that part of this 
province is still in a very critical situation and will be have to be 
addressed at some point in the future if the rain doesn’t move 
north and spread very, very quickly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m thinking of the area probably from Kindersley 
on the west, through to Saskatoon, through Watrous, Humboldt, 
all through those areas, and really straight across to the other 
side of the province. We have a large area out there that these 
people are still hurting very badly, and I know it must be hard 
for them to hear about all the rain in the South. And it sounds 
like at this point where maybe government they feel that, both 
federal and provincial maybe, for all intents and purposes have 
forgot that there still is a drought out there in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So what I’m trying to say, Mr. Speaker, is that the hurt is going 
on out there in rural Saskatchewan, even though in the south 
side here we can quite easily seem to forget it because in some 
cases they’ve had 4 or 5 inches of rain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting back to the Bill that I actually started with, 
the municipal revenue sharing Bill, just a quote from the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation on property tax bills over the 
past year and how they have jumped dramatically. And here’s 
some of the listings, and I quote from the Canadian taxpayers: 
municipal, school, and property taxes for all municipalities, 7 
per cent increase; total property taxes for rural municipalities, 
9.5 per cent increase; total property taxes for urban 
municipalities, 4.3 per cent increase; total property taxes on 
agriculture land, 10.3 per cent increase. 
 
And this goes back, Mr. Speaker, because partly of the $25 
million cut to the education tax rebate — 10.3 per cent increase 
on agriculture land when a big area of this province is one of 
the worst droughts that we’ve seen in many, many years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

School taxes on agriculture land, 15 per cent increase. Again, 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when we can least afford to be jacking 
up taxes for rural taxpayers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipal leaders all over this province have 
wanted the downloading to stop, the increased revenue sharing 
to start, and maybe we saw a little glimmer of hope. But as we 
have saw in the past, Mr. Speaker, and we know that we . . . 
government has had a couple of deficit budgets, the overall debt 
of the province is starting to increase, so I hold my breath 
whether next year we would see any new dollars for 
municipalities. But I would certainly hope so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think we’ve addressed a number of issues speaking to this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, and at this time we would let it move to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 45 — The Local 
Government Election Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well Bill 45, 
local government election Act, is really quite straightforward, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t think SARM, SUMA, anyone has really 
any big problems with it. There’s a few interesting points that 
we will have a number of questions on at Committee of the 
Whole. The one to do with telling or explaining how many 
dollars you spend in an election campaign, the 60-day deadline 
on putting this in place. 
 
There’s a number of questions there, Mr. Speaker. We would be 
wondering why this was brought in — whether municipalities 
have asked for this change, school boards have asked for this 
change. But overall, Mr. Speaker, we really don’t have, I don’t 
think, a big problem with this Bill and we’ll be able to have our 
questions answered also on this Bill in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 34 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 
stand today to discuss The Education Amendment Act, Bill No. 
34 that was brought forward by the minister. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, addresses just three issues that are 
concerning education in the minister’s mind. But I was 
disappointed when I read it because I’m sure the three issues 
that he’s dealing with in this Bill is not the ones that most of the 
taxpayers and students and teachers in this province are talking 

about. 
 
The issues that most concern the people that are involved in 
education today is money, first of all. And this Bill does nothing 
to address the fact that since 1992 the government has cut $380 
million from the Education budget. 
 
In fact if we would have frozen the Education budget in 1992 
the taxpayers would have been much further ahead. This year 
Education needed $25 million just to keep the status quo from 
last year, Mr. Speaker. And what did the budget give us? Just 
$14 million. 
 
That means that in many school divisions they are not going to 
be able to keep the programming that they had last year. Either 
that or they’ll have to cut teachers or they’re going to have to 
cut programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has given education lip service 
since 1992. And I look at this Bill today and think that this 
government is actually going to address the problems in 
education, I think the minister is really looking at the world 
through rose-coloured glasses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of this the minister said that he was going 
to put more funding into a number of programs — things like 
Community Schools. And, Mr. Speaker, every one of us knows 
through the Role of the School report and other incentives and 
initiatives around the province, the Community Schools is a real 
benefit to many schools. 
 
In fact the Role of the School says that every school should be 
considered a community school. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
additional money that’s going to the additional community 
schools this year is coming from the existing budget. Every year 
since 1992 the government has talked about the money that 
they’re going to be putting into education and all they do is take 
their money, the size of . . . the amount of money that they put 
into education and cut pieces of that pie into a different shape. 
They’ve never actually increased the amount of money to 
education. 
 
So when school boards and directors look at the budget every 
year they’re saying okay, how am I going to do more with less? 
There was conditional funding in this budget for community 
schools, more money for community schools, more money for 
technology, more money for distance learning, and a lot of 
initiatives that we consider very, very important. 
 
But none of them came with the dollars that we need to actually 
to make a difference in this province. We have to pay for the 
teachers. We have to pay for the programs and the busing and 
maintaining the schools and these not addressed at all in this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of my colleagues before talked about . . . 
before this Bill came forward talked about the $25 million 
reduction in education property tax. And this is something that 
really has affected education as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that $25 million made a huge difference to 
farmers. It’s something that we know when it was brought 
forward it should have been addressed through the RMs; it 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

 

didn’t have to be administered through this government, but at 
least it was money that came to farmers. And it was cut in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in many parts of the province there are farmers still 
experiencing a drought that’s going to have a devastating effect 
on their future —if they have a future in farming. And this is 
just another insult to the injury they’re suffering right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian taxpayers indicate that in the year 
2001, Saskatchewan families were hit with huge property tax 
increases. The total property tax — municipal and education — 
is up 7 per cent from last year. The total rural property tax is up 
9.5 per cent, the total property taxes on agricultural land up 10.3 
per cent, and the total school division property taxes on 
agricultural land was up 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issues that are affecting the education 
system that wasn’t addressed in this Bill is the fact that we have 
a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Members of the 
Assembly, it’s really the tradition of the House to allow some 
wide-ranging debate but don’t really allow for speaking about 
what is not in the Bill. Members are to address what is in the 
Bill. 
 
And I would ask the member to take a close look at the Bill and 
compare it with the comments of the last five minutes and 
there’s very little. So I would ask the member to revert to the 
Bill or pass the speeches on to the next member. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m delighted to 
talk about this actual Bill because the Bill was talking about 
community schools and the fact that the number of community 
schools in this province was increased in the last budget. It’s an 
initiative that the government has addressed and something that 
the people across the province were looking forward to and 
Role of the School addressed it quite openly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund was set up 
to help young people in grade 11 with future education but the 
students that are actually going to be affected by this 
scholarship or will have it available to them are actually 
students that are in community schools. 
 
We now have 17 community schools . . . pardon me, we have 
an increase in the number of community schools in this 
province but it is not the total number of schools across this 
province. 
 
So I’ve had calls from people who are saying, this scholarship 
fund is great; we appreciate it. But my school isn’t a community 
school and how are my students going to be able to benefit? 
 
Five hundred dollars may not be a lot of money but with the 
increase in tuition right now, Mr. Speaker, it would something 
that all students would look at. So again we have . . . the 
government is deciding who gets the money. And worse than 
that, the actual Department of Learning is going to administer 
the fund with the support of community partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering what the nature of this support is. 

How is the Department of Learning going to decide how this 
funding is going to be approved to different students? Who is 
going to be getting it? I’m always a little leery when I hear that 
the government is going to be administering any program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also addresses two other areas. One of 
them is the amalgamation of school divisions which now, 
through this Bill, there’s going to be two different rates allowed 
in a school division. Before this Bill is passed, really there’s 
going to have . . . There’s only one mill rate allowed right 
across the school division but this Bill addresses the fact that 
during amalgamation there often is a difference in mill rates and 
this is going to give the boards an opportunity to apply two 
different mill rates during one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also are appreciative of the fact that this Bill 
doesn’t force amalgamation and that there will be school 
divisions that will benefit from this new Act. 
 
The restructuring of francophone schools into one school 
division is something that I’m sure most . . . the schools with 
the common interests and concerns are going to be pleased 
with. I am wondering about the logistics of . . . when you think 
that these schools are spread right across the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that we can address these concerns 
in Committee of the Whole so I move this Bill be passed on. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 46 — The 
Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 
stand and address this music teachers association Bill. 
 
There’s two initiatives in this Bill. The consumer protection that 
would give citizens the confidence that the individuals in this 
profession have qualifications and standards that meet with 
everyone’s approval. And then also it addresses the internal 
affairs of the music teachers profession and gives the dedicated 
professional people the opportunity to manage the affairs of 
their profession and bring forward their initiatives and concerns. 
 
I’m very pleased this government recognized the importance of 
self initiatives in governing. I hope this government takes a 
page from this professional Act for other areas. 
 
The Act allows professions to make bylaws in the areas of 
administration. Members of the association have lobbied for 
and persuaded the government that the change will be beneficial 
and we do agree with this. 
 
Adding a public representative to the executive and to the 
disciplinary committee shows . . . underlines the fact the 
professions seek to be open and accountable. The university no 
longer is involved in the registration process for music teachers. 
They agree the association is more than capable of handling this 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

details. And the new Act outlines in more detail the process of 
disciplining. People will have confidence in the profession that 
has an open process. 
 
A number of years ago this government tried to change the 
number of credits students would receive when they were 
taking music in school. But there was a public outcry and 
citizens . . . because citizens know that the value and 
importance of music to children and to basically people of all 
ages. Music is a gift that we can take into our old age. 
 
And I can congratulate the music teachers like the one from the 
. . . the member from Saltcoats talk about today, Kevin Hrycay, 
a music teacher from Esterhazy who recently received the 
Prime Minister’s award for teaching excellence. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there will be detailed questions on this Bill, 
but I will be pleased to ask those questions in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you and through 
you to all members of the House, I’m pleased to introduce to 
you 18 students from Archerwill School. They’re grade 8 and 9 
students and they’re in the east gallery. 
 
With them today is teacher, Mr. Rick Hamel; and chaperones, 
Yves Martin, Barb Hage, Linda Braaten, and Cindy Wittynek. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students have travelled from Archerwill this 
morning, and I think the members of the House will remember 
that we’ve spoken about Archerwill and the fire in that 
community in the last little while. And these are a number of 
the students that were involved first-hand with that — what 
happens to a community when they have a disaster like that. 
 
So I’m pleased to see the students here, and I’ll be looking 
forward to meeting with you a little later. So welcome to the 
gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 40 — The 

Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand today to address the Act to amend The 
Highway Traffic Act and to make other related amendments to 
the Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many amendments, it seems, that 
are stated here. And one of the clauses in this piece of 
legislation allows police to only attend to accidents where there 
is injury, death, hit and run, or impaired driving. And this will 
allow accidents . . . law enforcement more time to pursue other 
crimes. 
 
Now we understand that police forces are in favour of this and 
my colleague, the member from Cannington, has spoken 
previously to that area of amendment. 
 
There are also proposed changes for the fines imposed for 
speeding infractions, and these proposals also come from law 
enforcement officials in terms of road safety and deterrents. 
And so that appears to be quite explicit and good amendments. 
 
There are also changes for the driver’s licensing and vehicle 
registration, which according to the minister will reduce red 
tape, and the Saskatchewan Party opposition would concur with 
that. 
 
The final piece though in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, deals with 
setting an offence for vehicles that repeatedly enter an area 
where it is well known to be a district that is populated by those 
exploited through the sex trade. And in the House, when the 
member from Cannington was debating this area of the Bill and 
the amendments that were necessary to deal with Bill No. 2, he 
clearly outlined to the minister responsible that there needed to 
be a more definitive area in a clause, or through a clause, that 
would explain to law enforcement as well as to the court that 
the amendments in this Highway Traffic Act pertain directly to 
Bill No. 2. 
 
Failing to do that we may end up with some Charter arguments 
on this Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote from 
Hansard, the member from Cannington’s advice to the minister 
of the Crown that is responsible for making sure amendments 
are succinct and clear and certainly definitive. 
 
The member from Cannington says: 
 

. . . the Charter’s Impact on the Criminal Justice System, (a 
part of that that he read) seems to be indicating, Mr. 
Speaker, that the blanket powers that police have under The 
Highway Traffic Act will not be sufficient to allow for the 
enforcement of Bill No. 2 . . . under The Highway Traffic 
Act. 

 
So what the government needs to seriously consider, Mr. 
Speaker, and do is include in The Highway Traffic Act that 
that (specific) Act applies to Bill No. 2, Mr. Speaker; (he 
says) Bill No. 2 which is the emergency protection of 
victims of child sexual abuse. If that particular Act is 
named under The Highway Traffic Act . . . then that 
protection, those powers of police, will extend to that Act. 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

 

But failing to name that Act . . . under The Highway Traffic 
Act, I think will have a serious (or rather I think will have a 
serious) implication in disallowing police to have those 
powers to stop and to investigate the possibilities of crimes 
being perpetrated under Bill No. 2 . . . 

 
So (the member from Cannington went on to) . . . strongly 
suggest that before this Bill moves ahead, that the 
government go back to the drawing board and reconsider 
the text that they are placing under the wordings of The 
Highway Traffic Act . . . (and to make sure, he advised the 
government to make sure) they include a reference to Bill 
No. 2, the emergency protection of victims of child sexual 
abuse, Mr. Speaker. 

 
That would go a long way if that amendment were reworded 
and if it was more definitive and succinct referring to Bill No. 
2. That would in fact help to move along Bill No. 2 so that it 
could be effective and protect children in this province. 
 
If the government fails to do that the powers of the police could 
be excluded from protection of those children. And that would 
not be a positive note for this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, clarification of these kind of things are very, 
very important. We know now that oftentimes the police as well 
as other players in the system — in the justice system — have a 
great deal of trouble with the complexity of having to refer from 
one Bill to the other in order to understand and apply the law. 
 
I think that the minister . . . or the member rather from 
Cannington gave a really sensible piece of advice there and it’s 
beyond me why the government of the day would not take that 
advice if in fact they really want to see Bill No. 2 be effective 
and make sure that it’s there to protect children and it can be 
enforced and acted upon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just one more note on this. I remind the 
government of the day that there was a Bill that was issued by 
the committee to prevent the sexual abuse and exploitation of 
children and that draft Bill was an Act to provide for the 
protection, support, and assistance of sexually exploited 
children. 
 
And this was an all-inclusive, comprehensive Bill. It had under 
it everything that needed to be done in order to protect children, 
including the confiscation of vehicles and the kind of things that 
would need to be clear to the law. And it would take for the 
courts just one reference to this Bill in order to know what 
could be done and what could be enacted in law and enforced 
through the law. 
 
This was not done. The government chose not to take this Bill 
for their own reasons. Now we have a little bit of controversy 
already happening. And I’m not sure whether an item that was 
on the news of late is going to pertain to this Bill and maybe a 
Charter challenge, but there was a story on the CBC this 
morning that may shed new light on this part of the Bill. And 
the story states that a recent spot check by RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) in the province went beyond the 
powers of law enforcement. The judge ruled that Operation 
Recovery went too far. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will be asking questions in committee of 
the minister to see how this particular ruling might impact this 
Bill, if it does at all. 
 
There are some questions that we have that certainly need to be 
asked in clarifying the legislation. And those questions can best 
be answered in committee, but we do have some amendments 
also relating to these clauses that we will be moving within 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this Bill on to 
committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Prebble): — I’d like to invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m pleased to have with me 
this afternoon, Glenda Yeates, who is the deputy minister; 
Lawrence Krahn, who is the assistant deputy minister. Behind 
Glenda Yeates, Dan Florizone, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Directly behind me, Al Johnston, acting director, Saskatoon and 
west districts and district management services; to my right, 
Rod Wiley, executive director, finance and management 
services; and right behind him, Mick Grainger, who is assistant 
deputy minister. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Prebble): — Thank you very much, 
Mr. Minister. We’ll go to Administration (HE01). 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome, Mr. Minister, and welcome to your officials this 
afternoon. I have a few questions to do with the new health 
districts that we’re setting up, Mr. Minister, and some of the 
concerns that are within the hospitals in my constituency and 
the area that I would be affected by. 
 
The first one is, Mr. Minister, one of your officials from Sask 
Health had come out to the community of Kamsack and the 
concern that the community of Kamsack and surrounding 
municipalities had was with the accreditation that they were 
granted in Kamsack and the services that they could deliver 
within that hospital. 
 
I had the opportunity to tour that hospital the same day that the 
official was out, along with that official, Mr. Minister, and they 
have a great little hospital. They seem to have excellent doctors, 
excellent nurses, but where their concern comes in is with the 
accreditation. I think their feeling is that they actually can 
provide or are providing more services at the present time than 
the accreditation allows. 
 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

And I think their concern is that will they at some point in time 
within the new health district be cut back and lose some of the 
services they’re providing. Mr. Minister, was that brought to 
your attention and could you comment on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. I think to 
clarify the terminology, you’re talking about the hospital 
categories, not accreditation. Accreditation is quite a different 
process. 
 
But effectively the question is, when we have designated 
different categories of hospitals in our new plans, how does that 
affect a community like Kamsack? 
 
I think the thing that I want to emphasize is that these are . . . 
We’re trying to set minimal standards so that the public will 
know that at least whatever that particular hospital has is as a 
community standard. So in the Kamsack area, and this is one 
that has some special attributes that are really positive, they’ve 
asked that question directly of me and of officials within the 
department. 
 
And we’ve acknowledged that yes, they do many things. It’s 
important that they have services that cover that whole part of 
northeastern Saskatchewan. And even though they are 
designated as a community hospital, there are quite a number of 
services where the intention is that they would stay and be part 
of the long-term care that’s provided in that particular area. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m glad to 
hear that and I’m sure the members of that community out there 
will. As you know, they have Duck Mountain Park, and they 
have a ski hill there, and they have a number of things going for 
them out there; but I think the hospital as it is now and the 
services they’re providing is very crucial to many of those 
happenings that are going on in that area. So I’m sure they’re 
quite happy to hear that they will still be able to provide those 
services under the new system. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you’re aware, we have the new hospital in 
Melville that I think will be in the new health district in our 
area. As I said, we have Kamsack, we have Esterhazy that is a 
smaller hospital but very crucial to IMC Esterhazy, the mine 
there. They need a hospital in that area to service the mine and 
the surrounding farming community. We have Foam Lake at 
the other end, in the member from Canora-Pelly’s constituency, 
and then we have Yorkton, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I guess where I’d like to go right now for a minute — in 
East Central Health District compared to North Valley and 
Assiniboine Valley — I believe one of the other two had no 
debt, the other one had a small debt and now they’re joining 
forces with East Central Health District; that if it’s my 
understanding or my numbers are right, that I have been told 
that we are sitting with possibly as much as a $20 million debt 
sitting there. And I believe this might be the first year that we’re 
even into where we’re starting to operate in the black, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Can you tell me what happens in the new health district with 
that $20 million debt, if that is the number and if it’s not if you 

could correct me, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The plan that we have around dealing 
with debt also relates to assets. So both assets and debts will be 
moved from the existing health districts into the new regional 
health authority. 
 
And so there are many assets. Obviously, we’ve seen the 
various facilities that you have talked about. The long-term debt 
is about $20 million as you’ve indicated. That figure is 
accurate. 
 
And what we’ve been concentrating on this year and next year 
is making sure that the operating costs are at a break-even basis. 
We’ll have to have a broader strategy for the long-term debt 
that’s going to deal with that kind of a problem over the whole 
province. And we’re not, in this particular year, able to 
basically assume all of that long-term debt. 
 
Sometimes the debt does actually relate directly to some assets 
as well. And so as we look at the different areas of the province 
there are different challenges, but clearly in East Central we’ve 
got the operating side, I think, fairly well set for a go-forward 
basis. The debt will be a challenge but it’s one that we’re going 
to work at for the whole province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, as you’re probably aware — and we’ve talked about 
this before — is I’ve had personal experience with the Yorkton 
Hospital. And as you know, there’s been a number of cuts in 
that hospital over the last number of years. We’ve cut beds. 
We’ve lost our pediatrician due to cutbacks in beds. I think 
we’re down to 12. At one point, we were at 32, years ago, and 
we went down, down, down. 
 
Again I mention that we lost our pediatrician — one of the 
finest probably in this province or in the country for that matter. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, that debt goes along into the three health 
districts through all into one. And when you think about that, 
it’s not really fair for the two health districts that are moving 
into there who, in one way, whether it was through lack of 
funding that East Central got into this situation, whatever the 
reason, these other two health districts move into there now, 
one that has a clean slate, I believe — and my numbers again 
could be a bit wrong — but has no debt sitting against them. 
And they’re thrown in here and they have to share this $20 
million debt. 
 
I understand then, or I would presume that the responsibility of 
servicing that debt, which could end up being probably in 
excess of $1 million a year, will be the responsibility of this 
new health district. Will it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The 20, approximately $20 million debt 
that I confirmed is there is accumulated deficit, and it’s about 
16 million for East Central and about 2.5 million for each of the 
others. So they each probably have some share in this long-term 
responsibility. And I think probably the Yorkton-centred areas 
has a little bit more than the others, but it has a few more people 
as well. 
 
So practically, I think the other thing to look at is that this is a 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

 

total province-wide system and a province-wide issue. And 
most all of the funding does come through the provincial budget 
that we’re debating right now. 
 
And so what we need to do is make sure we have policies that 
work for the whole province and all the different parts of the 
province. The goal is to make sure we don’t burden any 
particular area in a way that they can’t manage. Ideally, if we 
could, we’d like to start everybody with clean slates as quickly 
as possible. But we have to take into account both the assets and 
the liabilities and deal with it that way. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. But, as I’m 
sure you’re well aware, there have been cuts lately in the East 
Central Health District to the care homes, a number of other 
facilities all across that . . . the old health district. I know there 
was staff lost in the Saltcoats care home and I’m sure in a 
number of others out there, where they have all paid the price. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you missed one part of my question. When 
this new health district sets their budget for the upcoming year, 
will servicing that $20 million debt, whatever that amount will 
be — and if you know that amount, I’d be interested to know 
what that is — will that not be part of their budget for the 
upcoming year and will that servicing of the debt not take away 
from some of the services they normally could provide with the 
dollars that you allot them to run that new health district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question that you had around 
the debt servicing, that is an amount that is taken into account in 
preparing the amount of revenue that is forwarded to that new 
area. Right now it goes to the three health districts and then it 
will go to the overall regional health authority. So it is taken 
into account as we prepare the 2002-2003 budgets. 
 
I would like to, though, maybe change the perspective a little bit 
from sort of half full to . . . from half empty, because there have 
been some adjustments in services out in the area as you’ve 
indicated, but there have also been some positive changes 
around dialysis for example and some other kinds of services 
which are provided in that whole area which I think are very 
positive. 
 
And so what we’re trying to do is work on a province-wide 
basis but also work with the local communities to enhance 
services where we can. And it does mean some adjustment in 
the services, but it’s all . . . not always in a negative adjustment. 
There are some very positive things that happen as well. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
the example you gave about renal dialysis, I think we can thank 
IMC Kalium, Esterhazy for a large donation to the last renal 
dialysis unit. I think they put money into the East Central 
Health District. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I heard you in one of your answers before, are 
you contemplating down the road then paying off this, in this 
case, the $20 million debt, or 21 million now, accumulated 
between the three health districts? You said it would be great if 
they could start off at zero, and I agree with you. I think it 
actually would improve the services that they actually could 
provide for our local residents out there. 
 

So is that in the near future? Are you working on that situation 
and trying to pay off some of these debts that are out there right 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I just want to clarify one comment that 
you made around the dialysis unit. Clearly, with the dialysis 
unit we appreciate the community contributions that relate to 
capital, but the real cost in the dialysis is the operating and the 
long-term operating. And that’s where we have the challenge. 
And so practically, we thank IMC Kalium for their contribution 
but it is the local board organizing their budget to have 
sufficient monies available over the longer term. 
 
Now my previous comment about dealing with the accumulated 
deficits or debts right across the province is accurate in the 
sense that what we need to try to set out is a long-term plan that 
deals with these accumulated deficits right across the province. 
And in an ideal world you’d like to just be able to pay them all 
off, but practically we have to work within the kinds of 
resources that we have, making sure that we have the proper 
balance. 
 
And sometimes some of the debts that are there in some of the 
new regional health authorities will be directly related to assets 
which are generating revenue — for example, like parking 
structures or some other kinds of things like that. 
 
But the simple answer is yes, we would be . . . we are planning 
to develop a long-term plan once we have the new regional 
health authorities in place to try to deal with the accumulated 
deficits right across the province. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, you bring up a good point and we’ve argued this one 
many times before. 
 
We thank . . . I think we all are very grateful to IMC Kalium 
and community . . . interested people and businesses out there 
that donate to any health district out there. 
 
But you talked about the most expensive part of the renal 
dialysis and providing that service is the staffing and the 
operating of those units. But think for a minute, Mr. Minister, 
and I know when we argued originally to get our unit set up in 
Yorkton, which has only been there the last few years, as I’m 
sure you’re aware, that constituents of mine and other 
constituents — Canora, Pelly, and other areas out there — 
drove to Regina or Saskatoon some three times a week at a 
tremendous inconvenience. Their whole life revolved around 
going for treatment into Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
That cost money in the health district in Regina here or in the 
health district at Saskatoon. Now that cost is transferred from 
Regina, say for the example for those people that come here. 
Would that money follow these people when they go out there 
to help operate that municipal health district because that’s kind 
of an interesting scenario, it wasn’t provided free in here; it cost 
for nurses and dialysis technicians and so on in here. Now 
we’re transferring that out to operate another machine out there. 
Is that money transferable back to the new health district out 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the simple answer to your question 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

would be yes, if we were in a situation where there was no 
growth in the number of people who require dialysis. 
 
Unfortunately in Saskatchewan, and I think probably across the 
country, this is an area where there’s a huge growth in the 
numbers of people that actually need the service. And so we 
provide the service in Yorkton and I agree that it . . . the really 
valuable thing is that people can get the treatment close to 
where they live and they save all of the difficulties and expense. 
 
So obviously though we need to be working and we are 
working on some of the diabetes issues and others that really 
are a major problem in this area. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, and 
welcome to the minister’s officials. Some questions about the 
hospital project in Swift Current, if I may. We briefly got into it 
a little bit last time officials were here and we were considering 
Sask Health estimates. 
 
And I guess what I was looking for then and I am still looking 
for is some confirmation on the part of Sask Health about the 
current state of our facility in Swift Current. Specifically the 
question would be — through you, Mr. Chairman, to the 
minister — is it Sask Health’s assessment, having dealt with 
various proposals, one to renovate and a new one to construct a 
new facility, is it Sask Health’s belief that the facility in Swift 
Current is in need of some significant capital improvement or 
complete replacement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I recall the conversation that was had 
around this topic not that long ago. And as you know, the 
process is for the people in the local area to make an assessment 
of the kinds of things that they need and put forward a proposal. 
And the people have done a good job of putting together a 
proposal that is different obviously than what they were 
thinking before. And now that particular proposal is being 
discussed and reviewed and I think prodded and probed to make 
sure that it fits with the various kinds of needs that are there. 
 
Sask Health doesn’t go out and assess the facilities and sort of 
make some statement as to their use, but they do rely very 
clearly on the local assessment that’s made and then go from 
that and move, and move forward. And practically this project 
is one where the local people have identified a need . . . 
identified some positive solutions. And now working together 
with people in the department, the whole thing is moving 
forward. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, the 
other questions that I have revolve around the recent proposal 
by the group in Swift Current which does represent some 
neighbouring municipalities, the city, I think the health care 
foundation, as well as the district itself, that their proposal or 
their request earlier this year that the government consider a 
new funding formula for regional facilities using the same logic 
that allows . . . or that the government uses to fund 100 per cent 
in terms of capital projects in the tertiary centres, is the fact that 
a new regional facility also has a provincial role to play in the 
. . . in the government’s new model. 
 
And so their question was: would you consider in changing the 
formula . . . I think they specifically proposed 90/10 — 90 per 

cent provincial funding and 10 per cent local funding. And I 
know, Mr. Minister, that Sask Health has . . . that the 
government has rejected changing their proposal . . . or 
changing the funding formula, I should say. 
 
And so in the correspondence that went back and forth, I know 
there were several requests on the part of the — and these ones 
I believe came from the city — on the part of that local group to 
meet with yourself. I think there may have been up to three, and 
each time the response came back that there was really no need 
to meet. 
 
And I wonder if you’d comment on that because I find that a 
little bit alarming. Even if the government knew from the first 
time the local group made the request to change the funding 
formula, even if you knew as the minister that there was no way 
you’d bring forward a change to that funding formula, it seems, 
on the face of it, that you may . . . would like to at least meet 
with them either here in Regina or in Swift Current to further 
discuss it; to discuss the project. It is one of the new . . . it will 
be one of the new regional hospitals for the provincial system. 
And I wonder if you’d comment as to why you wouldn’t . . . 
you refused to meet with the various proponents in Swift 
Current? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I would like to say categorically that I’ve 
never refused to meet with this group. This is a position that, 
unfortunately, some of the people in Swift Current have taken. 
They’ve written and asked for a meeting and I’m quite willing 
to meet with the people. 
 
But, unfortunately, rather than have further discussion, they end 
up going and making these comments which you now have 
made in the legislature. So I’m happy to meet with the people. 
 
Now the issue around 90 per cent/10 per cent funding, or 65/35 
per cent, or 100 per cent funding is an issue where we’re happy 
to consider other options. But the likelihood of any change in 
that particular area during this budget year is very slim. 
 
And so . . . But I have never been in a position where I said I 
wouldn’t meet with the people at all. I’ve actually been quite 
surprised when the mayor has said that in various ways. And I 
have not commented on it because basically I will eventually 
meet with the council. 
 
I have talked to some of the individual doctors when I’ve seen 
them at meetings. I’ve talked to board Chair and other members 
of the board from out in that area, and I’ve said to them we’ll, 
you know, we’ll meet. I’ve obviously met with the member 
from that particular area and said, look, we’ve got to keep this 
thing moving along. 
 
And so . . . But it’s not that helpful to have the comments in the 
media that the minister refuses to meet when that’s not accurate. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Well that’s 
very encouraging, that’s very encouraging because I’ve seen the 
correspondence that came back and I got that impression as 
well. And you have been very available to meet with myself 
here at the legislature, and that’s something that I appreciate. 
 
In fact we’ve had a brief discussion last week in light of some 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

 

of the events, and I appreciated the fact that you initiated them 
to indicate that the project should be moving forward and that 
also was relayed and well-received. 
 
But I see . . . I saw the letters and I got that impression. I think 
there were words to the effect — I mean, I wish . . . I don’t have 
a copy with me right here — but I think there were words to the 
effect about being . . . that the request for the meeting might be 
. . . or a meeting itself would be premature. I think there were 
words to that effect. And so maybe they were interpreted by 
people who would read that as an unwillingness to meet at this 
point. 
 
And I think that the people in that community who are working 
towards this don’t feel it’s premature at this time. The horror 
stories at the current facility keep coming in. They come in to 
my office and they are . . . they’re very serious in terms of the 
building that we . . . the facility that we currently have and the 
environment that staff work in and, most importantly, the 
environment that patients face on a daily basis. 
 
And I just think they got that impression. I certainly take you at 
your word, Mr. Minister, that that’s not the case and will relay 
that back, that there is an interest to meet. And I’m pretty sure 
they’ll take you up on it because I think they pursued this in a 
very earnest way, has the local group, in terms of putting 
together the right proposal. 
 
Most recently you’ll know that the city council approved a local 
levy that would make up the local component under the formula 
that they don’t think is right, by the way — under the formula 
of 65/30. Now I hear you say that the government may be open 
to changing that formula in, maybe not this budget year but in 
future budget years. 
 
So now I think is the time to meet with them and to clear these 
matters up about, is the government prepared to move off of the 
funding formula for years outside of this budget year? I heard 
you at least intimate that. I think I heard that. And to clear up 
any misconception about whether it’s too premature to meet 
now or not. I think that’s good. 
 
And I guess I would preface this question with those remarks, 
and the question is: certainly the minister is aware of then the 
decision by the local government there to pursue a local levy 
and to try to raise some money so that local levy would be less 
onerous on property taxpayers in Swift Current than it is right 
now, or even a better case scenario, to have the funding formula 
changed. 
 
So the question then to the minister is: is the government 
prepared . . . What is the minister’s view in the next budget 
year, as this budget year he’s been pretty clear about, for the 
next budget year, will the minister be recommending — 
assuming the actual facility, the design, the plan is something 
that Sask Health agrees with — what is the minister’s position 
in terms of supporting then the 65 per cent funding coming 
from the provincial government in the next fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I’m not sure that I dare use the word 
premature but I might, because basically what happens is that I 
have requests from every city and every community in the 
province to go out and meet and try to answer the same 

question that you’ve asked. 
 
And we have a process of working to try to assess the projects, 
making sure that they’re flowing. And I think, you know, Swift 
Current is involved in that particular part, which is . . . which I 
think is good news because there are some challenges. 
 
Now as far as next year’s budget goes, we will be obviously 
asking all of the health districts and then the new regional 
health authorities to continue to examine their capital plans and 
their operating plans because it’s . . . once again it’s . . . you can 
build something but you also have to have the funds in the long 
term to make sure it operates in light of what new kinds of 
services that are required or adjustments or whatever that may 
be there. 
 
And so we will be looking forward to getting those over the 
next number of months and then we’ll have to look at the 
priorities right across the province. And I know, you know, the 
member from Moosomin, he’s I’m sure going to get up and ask 
me about this particular issue. And the member from 
Canora-Pelly has a question. I don’t think the members from 
Melfort and Weyburn have questions this year because those 
projects are moving along relatively and . . . although maybe 
we’ll get some questions from the member from Weyburn. 
 
But I guess what I’m saying is that there’s not an unlimited 
amount of money available. And so part of our difficulty within 
the Department of Health is to figure out which ones can go 
forward because once a commitment is made, it’s usually like 
about three-year’s worth of budgeted money. And I think in the 
Swift Current case that’s a, you know, a large project, probably 
larger than any of the other ones that we’ve done recently. And 
so that one, it’s going to be a challenge. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I would 
like to return very briefly back to the funding formula issue 
because . . . and again, I . . . if this is incorrect, I’d just ask the 
minister to clarify it. But I heard him say that the government 
may be open to reconsidering the funding formula for regional 
hospitals. 
 
And I just want to clarify that because, for whatever reason, that 
local group in Swift Current is operating under the 
understanding based on correspondence that that’s not on the 
table. And if it is still on the table, obviously that’s a big . . . 
that’s a very important issue that needs to be resolved, whether 
or not there’s money in the next fiscal year. As you’ve pointed 
out, it’s a long-term project but we need to begin anyway at 
least framing the deal between the local group and the 
Government of Saskatchewan and all of the stakeholders. 
 
And essential to framing that then, is what the funding formula 
will be or what it could be, what the government may consider. 
And I would just ask you to please clarify if — not this budget 
year but in the future — is the government open to changing the 
funding formula for capital construction of regional health care 
facilities, acute care facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The funding formulas that we’re using 
right now are not under active reconsideration. But we’re . . . 
we always are listening carefully to what people say and what 
communities say and looking at what kinds of things that we 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

need to do over the longer term. Clearly in the action plan for 
health, the roles of regional hospitals are important. And that 
ends up being part of our overall discussion. 
 
But clearly the challenge — and especially from, you know, the 
communities on the west side — is around sales tax and income 
tax and the comparison to Alberta. And so every time we hold 
the line there or try to reduce that, it does mean that there’s . . . 
there are fewer revenues available across the whole 
government. And I think I maybe don’t need to remind you that 
Saskatchewan Health actually takes all of the personal sales tax, 
all of the personal income tax, all of the corporate tax, plus 
revenue resources, and still that doesn’t cover the $2.3 billion in 
Health. 
 
And so we . . . we’re under continual scrutiny by the Minister of 
Finance and the Treasury Board around the resources that are 
available. And what we need to do is work together with 
communities to get the right plans together to make sure we get 
the kinds of facilities that we need. And we’ve been working 
hard at that. And sometimes it doesn’t go quite as fast as we 
would like, but we are able to proceed with a number of 
projects. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. And in 
the meantime Swift Current has a very, very aging hospital. 
And in the meantime Swift Current is to be a . . . the centre for 
that particular region, for that particular authority that you’ve 
structured, that the government has structured under its Action 
Plan for Health Care. And everybody understands I think in this 
province the constraints that governments are under to provide 
the facilities and services that they need to provide. And 
certainly we on the west side of the province are very aware of 
the competitive nature of our neighbours across that particular 
border. 
 
But none of that changes the need for the facility and the need 
that we . . . And not just for the bricks and mortar, of course, 
but for its ability to attract the very, very best medical people, 
front line people to our community and also for it to be properly 
equipped. And I think the health care foundation locally has 
certainly indicated it’s willing to do whatever it can to make 
sure that a new facility would be properly equipped. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But I just . . . I think you can appreciate the frustration that I 
have. And I don’t want to speak for the local group but, you 
know, they’re trying desperately to find a way to go forward 
with this. Originally they would like to have changed the 
funding formula rules, and they felt . . . And I looked at the 
correspondence and I felt that that wasn’t on and so they make 
some very bold decisions at the civic level, I think, to try to 
make this thing happen under rules that they may not agree with 
but rules that they think they have to live with. 
 
And now we hear this; now we hear this answer here. And I’m 
not trying to be unfair but we hear an answer that yes, there 
maybe kind of, sort of, might be some room on the funding 
formula thing. Well the same constraints that this government is 
under are the same constraints that local governments are under. 
And certainly when they make this decision to look at the 
property tax base to fund a levy, a significant levy, they are 

under pressure from their ratepayers as well. 
 
And the pressure would be, you know, are you sure, is the 
government certainly not going to change the funding formula 
for certain. We need to know that before we pass judgment on 
this decision. 
 
And so you could see the frustration that they would have and 
that I would have, notwithstanding the realities that you quite 
rightly point out in terms of funding, but what I’m hearing now 
is that the funding formula isn’t written in stone and that they 
should perhaps pursue it. And you know I . . . That’ll be up to 
them. But I’ll understand it if they are frustrated by this. 
 
And I think if I can, Mr. Minister, is, and you’ve already given 
it so I don’t want to . . . I’m not trying to beat a dead horse here, 
but I think my last question would just be a final commitment 
that the time is right now, for these and other reasons, to meet 
with a group there and — either there or here, like I don’t think 
it would matter — and to get that commitment and . . . so that 
some of these issues can be resolved and the thing can go 
forward and progress. 
 
And I think that both Sask Health and yourself, and the local 
group and myself all have that as a common goal — that it 
proceed and that it move forward so that the facility can be 
provided in as timely a manner as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m happy to meet with the people from 
. . . It’s primarily the mayor and the council and the chamber of 
commerce, and I have talked with the board Chair of the health 
district and also of the new regional health authority and other 
board members. And so I know the kind of hard work that 
people are doing. I think the Dr. Noble Irwin Foundation as 
well, those people I’ve talked to, some of the ones that were 
involved with that as well. And so practically I’m happy to talk 
about these kinds of things. 
 
Unfortunately I’m not in a position to hold lots of hope that the 
formula is going to change. But what I do say is that we have to 
do all this together. We have to work together if we’re going to 
get some of these new projects in place — the capital side — 
but just as importantly the operating and long-term operating 
costs. And that’s part of a total province-wide strategy in which 
the Swift Current and area facilities will be a crucial and 
important part. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There is a great deal 
of concern being expressed in the Watrous constituency about 
the new proposed Regional Health Authority No. 6. 
 
The Watrous constituency had at one time pieces of three 
different health districts. Now the entire constituency will be all 
contained within the Regional Health Authority No. 6. And 
there is a feeling from the letters that I’m receiving and the 
phone calls that I’ve been receiving that it’s going to be a 
disaster for the rural facilities within the regional health 
authority. 
 
So one of the first concerns that I will ask the minister about is 
the size of the district. It has a population of just under 279,000 
residents, which is over a quarter of the population of the 
province. 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

 

So the question that’s coming forward to my office is, why did 
the minister choose for this one particular regional health 
authority to be so large? And if indeed that is acceptable and 
will function extremely well, why do we not then have only 
four regional health authorities rather than 12 because this 
particular regional health authority is indeed a rather large one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As the member knows we’ve had much 
discussion about the size of health authorities and about the 
whole organization of health care in Saskatchewan. I think 
ultimately we should remember that we have 1 million people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Capital Health Authority, which is Edmonton, has 1 million 
people in one health authority. And I think some of the ones in 
BC (British Columbia) are even bigger than that. 
 
But we are . . . This is Saskatchewan. We have challenges 
around distances, around sizes of communities, around how 
various groups work together. 
 
And one of the things that I think happens around the Saskatoon 
area is clearly that many people have services in the city, but 
they also have services in their communities in which they live 
or if they’re farming or have other businesses around some of 
the smaller places, they have services there as well. 
 
What this new regional health authority no. 6 has — obviously 
a lot of the benefits of some of the most sophisticated 
equipment and the most well-trained specialists, all those — but 
it also has, like you identified, a number of the smaller facilities 
that have served people for a long time and served people well. 
 
My understanding is that they are working as a new regional 
health authority board to try to maintain the proper balance 
between those kinds of communities, and that they are very 
cognizant of making sure that the people right across the whole 
regional health authority feel a part of it. 
 
And any time there’s change there are adjustments that need to 
be made and some of the . . . there are concerns that are 
registered. But my sense, listening to the people from all of the 
regional health authorities across the province, is that many new 
positive relationships are being built. 
 
There are some challenges and we’ll continue to work on those 
challenges. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member from Melville on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank my 
colleagues for the opportunity to take this opportunity and 
introduce to you, my colleagues, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery 
the Consul General of China from Calgary, Mr. and Mrs. Song. 
They’re up in the gallery. And the Vice-Consul here, Mr. Tian. 
 

And I had the privilege of hosting these people at a luncheon 
this afternoon, who are here for a first visit to Saskatchewan 
with a promise to visit many, many more times, I’m told, and to 
strengthen our relationships between the People’s Republic of 
China and Saskatchewan in our trading partnerships and our 
relationships. 
 
So I would ask everyone here to please welcome these fine 
people to our great province and invite them to come back again 
with our hearty welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And on behalf of the 
official opposition, we too would like to welcome the Consul 
General and the Vice-Consul from China. 
 
With that, to follow-up on the minister’s answer. He said that 
consideration was taken by his department as to the service 
routes and business routes of the residents of Saskatchewan 
when deciding the boundaries for the new regional health 
authorities, although I’m still, you know, getting questions and 
concerns to my office about how much thought was actually put 
into that. 
 
And an example that I will give to him is that the town of 
Strasbourg — which is less than an hour’s drive from Regina 
but well over two hours from Saskatoon — is in the Regional 
Health Authority No. 6. So it only stands to reason that the 
people from Regina are going to go . . . or people from 
Strasbourg are going to go to Regina for their tertiary care. 
 
And I know that members on this side of the House are hearing 
a concern, and I’m sure the government members are also 
hearing a concern, where service industries have been 
expressing a desire for coterminous boundaries more and more. 
And by the service industries, I mean education, health, social 
services, and justice. And we’re being told that it would be far 
more efficient and more economic to deliver services if there 
was some correlation in the boundaries. 
 
And I would like to ask the minister if this was something that 
his department considered. It was the perfect opportunity to 
completely redo these boundaries, perhaps have three school 
boards or school districts within one health district for example. 
 
Did they consider using this opportunity, where they’re 
redesigning boundaries, of actually lining up some of the 
boundaries instead of using the existing ones that they’ve had 
trouble with, that they’ve heard complaints about, and seeing if 
they could make things more efficient? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The legislation which is now in front of 
the House provides a very clear method of adjusting these 
boundaries to deal with the questions around a community like 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

Strasbourg or some of the other places that are of concern. 
 
One of the things that was part of the discussion, both in the 
public discussion — I think in Mr. Fyke’s consultation as well 
as the kinds of things that were heard by government members, 
and obviously the members opposite — did relate to how we 
can provide services across the province. And ultimately what 
we did in this particular plan was used the existing boundaries 
of health districts. But we put a very clear mechanism in which 
allows for an adjustment of those boundaries based on some of 
the community concerns. 
 
And so we anticipate that once the new regional health 
authorities are in place, that there are a number of places in the 
province where some adjustments will be made to boundaries to 
deal with that. 
 
Now I don’t . . . I’m not sure if I heard the member saying that 
she’s rueing the decision that she and her members made 
around the whole issue of rural municipalities and the numbers 
of rural municipalities and services that are dealt that way, or if 
she’s reconsidering that particular area. But if she is, I know 
that our Minister of Agriculture and Food would be quite happy 
to hear that there’s been a change in mind. 
 
The Chair: — Hon. members, the Chair has a special guest he 
would like to introduce. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, hon. members. My . . . I have a 
special visitor in the Speaker’s gallery, and that’s my son Eric. 
And he decided yesterday that as a Father’s Day gift he would 
come down to Regina today with me and tomorrow his other 
brother is coming down on a school trip. So he decided to come 
down a day earlier. 
 
So I’d ask all hon. members to welcome my son, Eric, to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The other concern 
that I’m hearing from my constituents is the lack of rural 
representation that will be on the new regional health authority 
no. 6. 
 
The CEO (chief executive officer) that’s been chosen is the 
existing Saskatoon CEO. And of the 12 appointed board 
members, nine of them are from the existing Saskatoon Health 
District and the remaining three are one each from the three 
rural health districts that have been put together. 
 

So I would like to ask the minister how he considers this to be a 
balance within the regional health authority? And how are the 
rural residents going to feel any confidence that they will be 
able to retain adequate health services and the health facilities 
that they have within rural Saskatchewan? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’d be happy to answer that question. I’m 
not sure if the member has the populations of the existing health 
districts, but if she wishes I can set them out. Central Plains 
Health District has 20,626 people; Gabriel Springs has 11,923; 
Living Sky has 13,506; Saskatoon has 240,416 — for a total of 
286,471. 
 
I’m not sure of the exact percentages, but I would think that 
Saskatoon does have more than three-quarters of the population 
of the new regional health authority, comes from the old 
Saskatoon Health District. The way that the members were 
divided was to have about . . . well, three-quarters from the old 
Saskatoon boundaries and then one from each of the other three. 
 
As far as numbers of people who have a rural base, there are a 
number of the people who are part of the old Saskatoon Health 
District who are rural-based people, farm . . . either in farm or 
in smaller towns. So we’ve tried to gain that balance. And I 
know that it’s always a challenge when you replace 48 people 
with 12 people, which is effectively what’s happened in this 
particular area. And I know that the new regional health 
authority in this area incorporating all of these — the existing 
health districts — has, as part of their agenda in their planning 
committee, how to make very strong connections with all parts 
of the new regional health authority. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would like to perhaps comment, before I 
move on to a different topic, on the minister’s perception of 
balance. And we need look no further than the present 
agriculture policy that we’re having such difficulty with in 
negotiating with our federal government. 
 
We have representation by population in our country. And 
we’re seeing how well that works out here in Saskatchewan 
when we have no representation — or we do not have, I should 
say, the population in order to have programs and funding in 
place to assist us at a time of great need — and the funding is 
all going to the Eastern provinces, particularly Ontario and 
Quebec. 
 
So when he says that this is balanced, I’m going . . . I would 
again like to stress that this is not making the rural residents feel 
secure at all. Yes indeed, Saskatoon has a bigger population, so 
therefore the rural representation is quite a bit less than that of 
Saskatoon, and when it comes time to make decisions at the 
table, they have a real fear of how those decisions will be made 
and where the funding will go. And I think that that fear is real, 
and it needs to be addressed by the minister. They need to have 
some sort of confidence that they can retain some services. 
 
So with that, I would like to move on to a document that was 
done within the Living Sky Health District. It was a review of 
the Living Sky Health District, and done by Bert Boyd, Janet 
Williams, and Stewart McMillan. And I would like to ask the 
minister who commissioned Bert Boyd to do a study of the 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

 

Living Sky Health District, and who paid for this report, and 
how much. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member for Elphinstone on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And thank 
you very much for the good grace of the member from Watrous, 
for ceding the floor for this introduction. 
 
I would like to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through you to 
the members of this legislature, and the assembled officials of 
course, one David Standingready, who’s sitting at the ready, up 
in the western gallery. 
 
Davey is a student, an avid student of politics, and comes from 
a long and very active line of political people who’ve been 
working diligently for the benefit of this province. So, Davey, if 
you could please stand, and we’ll . . . if we could all give Davey 
a warm welcome to this place — Dave. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to the question is that this was 
arranged by Living Sky Health District and Saskatchewan 
Health together. And Saskatchewan Health paid Mr. Boyd for 
the work that he did. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for the answer. He 
hasn’t said how much the report cost. It actually is an 
interesting report. I think it would have been of great help to the 
Living Sky Health District had they been able to remain as a 
district. However, a lot of it, perhaps, was wasted money 
considering that they’re going to be part of a larger health 
authority. 
 
The interesting thing that was written in his report, and I would 
like to read that, if I may: 
 

That within this context of a mix of local versus district 
management, it is difficult to completely quantify the 
corporate management requirements. However, the review 
team believes there are opportunities to reduce the 
corporate structure and related support with resultant 
ongoing operating savings. As the community managers 
continue to assume more leadership roles at the local level, 
the function requirements within the corporate structure 
should be streamlined and positions consolidated. 

And if I’m understanding Mr. Boyd’s message in that . . . is that 
they have in Living Sky Health District put community 
managers in place in each of the communities within the 
district. And these community managers have done a great job 
of being the liaisons between management and the 
communities, of coordinating the community services. And 
therefore Mr. Boyd is suggesting that they don’t need as many 
management positions as they presently have. 
 
I think that’s a fine example of how representation in the local 
level is extremely efficient and effective. And this is definitely 
the direction that this study has suggested. 
 
So again I go back to the number of issues that I brought up that 
is a concern — the size of the district; how will local 
representation fit into a district of that size and how will local 
representation be heard, how will that voice be heard, when it is 
heavily represented on the board by Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think it’s quite clear that the information 
that was gathered together by the Living Sky Health District 
with Mr. Boyd’s assistance will be advantageous to the new 
regional health authority and will provide some assistance for 
them in that particular project. 
 
But I think your question is once again about how does a board 
of 12 represent a whole big area and deal with the kinds of 
issues that are there. I think very clearly the 12 board members, 
who are a part of a new regional health authority planning 
committee now, and eventually will become the board, are set 
to represent the whole area. 
 
There also is a mechanism which involves community advisory 
committees, which will be organized around issues or other 
kinds of things that happen within a regional health authority. 
We are seeing some very innovative ideas being brought 
forward about how these will be used to involve people right 
across some of the larger regional health authorities. And I 
think that what we are going to see is some new exciting ways 
of providing health care across the province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would just like to comment to the minister 
that no, I wasn’t suggesting 12 members on the board cannot 
handle the regional health authority. What I was suggesting, 
again, is going back to the lack of representation or voice at the 
table of having only three rural as opposed to nine urban. 
 
And perhaps this will help him understand the point that I’m 
getting to. It’s a letter by Clayton Hobman, who is the reeve of 
the RM of Wreford. And this is just one of many letters and 
phone calls that I’ve received. And it’s a letter that was written 
to the Premier of the province, and it states: 
 

Your Saskatchewan Action Plan for Health Care calls for 
the regional health authority boards to have an urban/rural 
balance, and yet in regional authority no. 6, there are nine 
Saskatoon appointments and only one appointment each 
from the other three health districts. This hardly seems to 
represent an urban/rural balance. 
 
Premier Calvert, as you know, Mr. Romanow is going 
across the country in an effort to consult with people at the 
grassroots level about health care reform. It appears to us 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

that while Mr. Romanow, from a federal perspective, is 
looking at rural Saskatchewan residents for their input, our 
own provincial government does not want to hear from 
rural Saskatchewan. 

 
This concern is out there and I do believe it’s real. And again I 
will, I will, you know, bring up the agriculture issue and how 
representation by population sometimes is to the detriment of 
the least populated areas. So I would ask the minister again if he 
feels this is in balance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — If you will refer to the population figures 
that I gave you earlier, 84 per cent of the population in this 
particular new regional health authority is in the old Saskatoon 
Health District. But I need to emphasize that the old Saskatoon 
Health District wasn’t just urban areas, it included some rural 
areas as well. 
 
And I think if you look at the nine people who come from the 
areas that were in the Saskatoon Health District, there are at 
least two who would qualify under your definition as rural, 
which then makes the balance five against seven. You have Les 
Alm, who’s the mayor of Allan, and you have Carol Teichrob, 
who is a farmer, lives outside of town, and basically both of 
those people would qualify under your definition. 
 
But I think the important thing is that communities work 
together with the new boards and that we end up having the 
kind of contribution that’s necessary from all of the people of 
the province. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question 
through you to the minister deals with transporting blood. When 
the blood is taken from a client at a home, what’s the criteria of 
and the procedure of it being transported to a lab in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is that the rules around 
transportation of blood are under federal law; so that there are 
regulations that are very specific around the transportation of 
blood. And I think it does have some fairly high standards 
around basically the protection of the public. 
 
And I think some of the officials here may be able to answer 
some questions that you have around this, but that the actual 
rules are not ones that we set in the province, they are ones that 
are set on a national basis. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could a nurse 
transport blood, a registered nurse or an LPN (licensed practical 
nurse)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well as I say, some of the very specific 
kinds of questions that you have obviously relate to federal 
regulations and we don’t have all of those right here. And if 
there is a specific instance or a specific case that you’re asking 
questions about, we’ll maybe seek some advice from the people 
who do this regulation in this area in Ottawa. But I think you 
may get the answers as quickly, you know, working with some 
of the, with some of the federal officials. 
 
But practically we, you know, within the province we try to 
make sure that the transportation of blood obviously meets all 
the federal rules but doesn’t get into any kind of an impractical 

nature because in Saskatchewan we obviously have long 
distances and sometimes we maybe only have one or two labs 
in the province that can do analysis of blood products, if that’s 
what the issue is. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Maybe I’ll just narrow it down a 
little bit. What I have is a constituent and what they are is blood 
samples. They have to be taken weekly for . . . It’s for her son. 
And the Lumsden doctor and lab can usually do that; every 
week they do the testing there. But he’s going on holidays for 
two weeks and she’s been told that . . . And she can’t leave the 
child alone. 
 
A nurse comes out from Regina, will draw the blood, but that 
nurse can’t take the blood back, that sample back to Regina to 
be tested. The nurse told her that she had to find arrangements 
to get it there and she just said she can’t; she can’t afford to 
leave the child alone for any length of time. And so she had 
phoned my office with the rules and I’d phoned your office, but 
we still, kind of, didn’t get, kind of, a satisfactory answer. 
 
So that’s . . . I guess I should have been more specific. These 
are blood samples. This isn’t like whole blood. This is a sample 
that’s taken once a week. This boy has to be tested weekly for, 
you know, for the rest of his life. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — My understanding that some of these 
kinds of challenges that arise and this specific one, they haven’t 
figured out a solution exactly yet. But the Regina Health 
District, who obviously is in charge of this particular area, is 
working with the appropriate people who control the 
transportation of blood to come up with a solution. 
 
And so I guess all I can say is that some of the officials know 
about the particular case. It’s not the simplest problem to solve 
because of some of the federal rules, but there is hope that it’ll 
be sorted out before the vacation starts. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to 
your officials, welcome. 
 
A few questions today about the new health district structure. 
Of course, Mr. Minister, as you would know, that most MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) are receiving many 
questions about the new health districts, about their structure, 
who they’re accountable to, where the body of the health 
districts are going to be located, and so on. 
 
And so my first question today is, who is actually making the 
decision about the location of the administrative office within 
the districts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That decision is being made by the 
Regional Health Authority Planning Committee, which is the 12 
new members of the . . . which will eventually become the 
regional health authority board. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Pardon me, I should have said regional. I’m 
used to saying district. So we have to get used to this new 
terminology. 
 
So you’re telling me then that although the regional boards have 
not officially been appointed, they are already making these 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

 

decisions and acting as an appointed board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The name of the group is the Regional 
Health Authority Planning Committee. So they’re making the 
plans. And when the new health authority comes into place, it’s 
anticipated that that same planning committee will then be the 
new board of the regional health authority and at that time the 
decision would be made. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, it being 
near 5 o’clock I move the committee recess until 7 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


