















































Hansard: June 10, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1903 
 June 10, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to present a petition on behalf of the 
good citizens from the city of Humboldt. And these people 
would like to ensure that their Humboldt territory operations 
office for Saskatchewan Housing Authority stay there in 
Humboldt. And so they send forward this prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operating office in Humboldt. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
the city of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today on behalf of citizens concerned about the overfishing at 
Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bird’s Point, Round Lake, Whitewood, and Stockholm. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the crop insurance premiums. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Ogema 
and Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from the citizens of Elbow to improve Highway 42. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the condition of Highway No. 
15. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway No. 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Watrous, Imperial, and Simpson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’ll 
be no surprise I have another petition today with citizens 
concerned about Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And again, the signatures demonstrate how well travelled the 
highway is because they’re from Simpson, Watrous, Vanscoy, 
Imperial, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan and British Columbia that are 
concerned about the fishing at Besnard Lake. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives 
to bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation 
and to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used 
in a responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, from Candle Lake, and from Kelowna and Vernon, 
BC ( British Columbia). Thank you very much. 
 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7, 18, 23, 24, 132, and 157. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 63 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: how much did it cost to 
move each home that was relocated in the year 2000 under 
the housing authority program? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I have the same question for the year 2001. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I shall give . . . or I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 63 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Industry and Resources: what are the 
details of any cost-benefit analysis or any other type of 
economic study conducted in regard to the pending 
government deal with Broe Companies of Denver, 
Colorado in relation to the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan; when was each report commissioned; and 
what are the entire contents of any such report; what are the 
details of any other such report conducted by or for the 
government regarding the ethanol industry; when was each 
conducted and what are the contents of each? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, I shall also give notice on day no. 63 
that I will ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: what are the details of any 
cost-benefit analysis or any other type of economic study 
conducted in regard to the pending CIC deal with Broe 
Companies of Denver, Colorado in relation to the ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan; when was each report 
commissioned; what are the entire contents of any such 
report? 

 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 63 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of the Public Service Commission: what are 
the salary level classifications for government employees, 
both in scope and out of scope; and for each level, what is 
the salary range and how many people are employed at that 
level? 

 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 63 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of SPMC: how many aircraft are owned by 
the province of Saskatchewan? For each aircraft, what is its 
year of manufacture; what is the make and model; what 
was the year it was acquired by the province of 
Saskatchewan; what’s its mark; where is it based; and for 

what purpose is each aircraft primarily used? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 63 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: how many workers receiving 
WCB benefits in the year 2001 were at the top end of the 
$48,000 wage replacement capitation? 
 
And also the same question for 2000 and 1999. 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, a group of 38 grade 8, 9, and 10 students from 
Arborfield. They are in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that you will remember some of 
these as being once again the group of students that responded 
so enthusiastically to your outreach visit in Arborfield. 
 
They are joined today by two teachers: Rhonda Edwards, 
Warren Jacobson. And they also have with them five parent 
chaperones. I trust that they will enjoy question period and that 
they will note how well behaved their MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) is, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to 
meeting them after that. 
 
Thank you. Would everyone please welcome the group from 
Arborfield. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Legislative Assembly, 22 students from grades 7 and 8 at Holy 
Rosary School. They’re seated in the west gallery. They’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Ryan Forrest and Mona 
Diewold. 
 
It’s my pleasure to introduce them today because sometimes as 
you get substitute teachers, so too you often get a . . . you can 
on occasion get a substitute MLA. So it’s my pleasure to 
introduce you to the assembled, and it’ll be my pleasure to meet 
with you later on to ask any . . . answer any questions you might 
have. 
 
It’s also my pleasure to inform you that the Minister of 
Learning is a proud alumnus of Holy Rosary School, so maybe 
you can catch him later on. But I look forward to meeting you, 
and thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce some very special guests 
in the west gallery. They’re responsible for someone near and 
dear to my heart and the best thing that’s ever happened to me, 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

 

and that’s my wife’s parents. 
 
Neil and Marilyn Unruh are in the west gallery there, and 
they’re just in town visiting Neil’s . . . Yes, Neil’s sister’s 
daughter’s husband has just been sworn in as a newly minted 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer. There should 
have been an easier way than doing that. 
 
But would all hon. members please welcome Neil and Marilyn 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly, in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
vice-chief of the FSIN, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, Mr. Greg Ahenakew. 
 
And Greg is from the Ahtahkakoop First Nation, which is 
Sandy Lake. And it should be noted that my mother’s maiden 
name was Ahenakew and that was where she was from 
originally as well. Her grandfather of course migrated to 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I would ask once again, Mr. Speaker, to have all members of 
the Assembly send a very kind welcome to Vice-chief Greg 
Ahenakew. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Public Service Week 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You can’t run an 
organization without good help. That’s true for the CPR 
(Canadian Pacific Railway), for the local co-op, and it’s true for 
governments. Fortunately for us, we have the finest civil service 
in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is not just my opinion, Mr. Speaker, but also that of noted 
British public servant and author, C.P. Snow. Mr. Snow says 
that this is a fact and, quote, “recognized by civil servants 
elsewhere in the world.” 
 
Because we in Saskatchewan are fortunate to have a highly 
skilled professional government workforce, I am happy to 
announce to the Assembly that this week has been designated 
National Public Service Week — a week to recognize the many 
ways that public servants at all levels of government contribute 
to the quality of life for all Canadians. 
 
Public servants are vital for the effective delivery of programs 
and services to the people of Saskatchewan and Canadians, Mr. 
Speaker. Consider, Mr. Speaker, that right now firefighters are 
battling flames in Saskatchewan’s forests, agrologists are 
working with our farmers during this difficult period, highways 
workers are fixing the roads, and child protection workers are 
doing just that. 
 

And across the province in all departments, Mr. Speaker, public 
servants are working for us with professionalism and 
dedication. They do their work quietly and well and they 
deserve our thanks. And I know all members will join me in 
expressing our gratitude to our excellent public servants. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise in the 
Assembly today to join with the members opposite in 
recognizing June 9 through to the 15 as Public Service Week 
across Canada. This week is an excellent opportunity to say 
thank you to the many civil servants whose dedication and 
commitment help to make our lives easier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan our civil service are among 
the most hard-working in the country and we are pleased to 
honour their many contributions during this week that has been 
specifically set aside to honour them. 
 
On behalf of members of this side of the side House, a warm 
thank you to the many members of the public service who work 
daily to improve the quality of the life for all of us. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ride Along with Saskatoon City Police 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday 
evening and Saturday morning I had the opportunity to 
participate in a ride along with Cst. Schriemer of the Saskatoon 
city police. While it was not described as a busy night, we 
packed in a lot between 7 p.m. and 4:30 a.m. I saw first-hand 
how the 911 systems works. I observed how police officers on 
patrol cope with the myriad of calls that may vary from 
potentially violent incidents to noise complaints to concerns 
with alcohol and drug impaired people. 
 
During the night’s events, I saw arrests being made, a stolen car 
recovered, and young women of the sex trade given counsel. 
Like most police forces, the Saskatoon city police do not have 
the number of men and women they need to meet the needs and 
expectations of the public. In spite of the fact that the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) have failed to hire 200 more police 
officers in Saskatoon, the police force I witnessed in action do 
their best to maintain public safety and protection with scarce 
resources. 
 
I would like to thank Cst. Schriemer and the Saskatoon city 
police force for the excellent job they do. And I would 
encourage other MLAs to also go on a ride along so they too 
can have a better understanding of police work, both in 
Saskatoon and across the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Results of Standardized Testing 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order please, members. Thank 
you. 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, “Something is going on in 
Saskatchewan that the rest of us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order please, members. Would the member 
. . . Order. Would the member start over again, please. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker: “Something is going on in 
Saskatchewan that the rest of us should pay attention to.” These 
words appear in an article entitled “An Overlooked Success in 
an Under-Appreciated Province” in the May edition of Phi 
Delta Kappan, one of the top three educational publications in 
North America. 
 
What author Heather-jane Robertson is referring to is 
Saskatchewan’s results from the last fall’s Organization for 
Economic and Co-operative Development’s release of its PISA 
(Programme for International Student Assessment) report on 
standardized testing of math, science, and reading in secondary 
schools. 
 
In her article, Robertson states, and I quote: 
 

The province of Saskatchewan is achieving better equity 
outcomes than any other province — and better than any of 
the other 31 countries in the OECD study. 

 
Better than Japan, Sweden, the United States, and Germany. 
And better from Ontario, British Columbia, and Alberta. 
 
What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that in Saskatchewan, a 
pupil’s success does not depend on whether he or she comes 
from a wealthy family or a disadvantaged family. In 
Saskatchewan, all students have an equal opportunity for 
success. And Saskatchewan will continue to improve upon our 
record with the implementation of such initiatives as SchoolPLUS 
and Kids First. 
 
Something is going on in Saskatchewan. We have good 
teaching, good teachers, good universities, good government, 
and a continued investment in Saskatchewan children in 
education and in our province. It’s more good news for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Annual Youth Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this last Saturday, June 8, I attended the first annual Northeast 
Saskatchewan Youth Business Excellence awards held in 
Tisdale at the Tisdale Civic Centre. 
 
The first category was individual business plan award. And this 
category, Mr. Speaker, was to have clearly described and 
developed a business idea and to have demonstrated ingenuity 
and effort. The first place winner was Natasha Cochran for 
Nat’s Noteable’s, Music with a “Note”Able Difference, Gronlid 
High School. The second place winner was Easton Kapeller, 
Pasquia Hills Farm Sales and Service from Porcupine High 
School. 
 
The second category, Mr. Speaker, was the Group Business 
Plan award and the first place winner there was Chassidy Kohl, 

Troy Gabel, Dustin Wasyliw, Chris Johnson, for their business, 
SYP Rock Climbing, and they are all from Porcupine High 
School. The second place winner was Chad Bohachewski, 
Colin Wasylyk, and their business was C2 Mini-Golf 
Adventure. They are also from Porcupine High School, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Special Achievement awards were based on submissions 
for any kind of special achievement where they have 
demonstrated exceptional effort and outstanding achievements 
in one or more areas. The first Special Achievement award went 
to Amber Martin of L.P. Miller High School in Nipawin; the 
second Special Achievement award to the grade 11 class at J.W. 
Head Memorial Education Centre, Red Earth; and the third 
Special Achievement award, Amanda Klimm and Wade Lebel, 
Tisdale Middle and Secondary School; and the fourth award to 
Joshua Richer, L.P. Miller High School in Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask everyone to join with me in 
congratulating these winners and on congratulating the 
Newsask Community Futures Development Corporation for 
doing a wonderful job of organizing the first annual YBEX 
Awards. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Construction Career Project 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ranch Ehrlo 
Society is headquartered near Pilot Butte in my constituency 
and runs a number of remarkably successful programs for youth 
at risk, both near Pilot Butte and in other venues throughout the 
area and Regina. 
 
Today I want to tell the Assembly about one especially 
successful program which recently has been twice recognized 
— once nationally and once provincially. The Ranch Ehrlo 
Society’s construction career project in conjunction with the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association was honoured last 
week by the Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board at 
its annual Training For Excellence awards, which I was happy 
to attend. The project received the Recognition for Prior 
Learning award, one of six given out at the ceremony. 
 
Previously the SCA’s (Saskatchewan Construction Association) 
construction career project, in which Ranch Ehrlo participated, 
was recognized at the Conference Board of Canada’s National 
Partners in Education awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project was coordinated by Monica Rivers at 
Ranch Ehrlo. It takes young adults in the community and trains 
for work in construction. So far two groups have gone through 
and a sign of the program’s success is that currently 10 out of 
11 students are currently working in construction jobs — 
working in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Some have already 
been promoted. A third group is just beginning the six-month 
course and I’m sure we’ll expect similar results. 
 
This is a positive program and a successful one, ably led by 
Monica Rivers. I am proud to have Ranch Ehrlo Society in my 
constituency and I congratulate Monica, the SCA, and all of the 
young adults who have successfully completed the program. 
 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Hospital for Swift Current 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this year 
representatives from area health districts in the Southwest, the 
city of Swift Current, the RM (rural municipality) of Swift 
Current, and the Dr. Noble Irwin Healthcare Foundation, along 
with regional partners, came together to map out a plan to 
achieve a new hospital for the Southwest, located in Swift 
Current. 
 
They asked the government to consider changing its funding 
formula for such projects to increase the provincial share from 
its current 65 per cent of the construction costs to something 
closer to the 100 per cent funding provided for projects in the 
two largest cities. Unfortunately the answer from the 
government was no. 
 
Undaunted, Mr. Speaker, the city council of Swift Current 
voted unanimously last Monday to approve a local levy to 
complete the local 35 per cent obligation to fund the new 
hospital. Mr. Speaker, a new regional facility in Swift Current is 
clearly needed if Swift Current is truly to be a regional centre in 
the current government’s regional model. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the local health district has come up with a 
workable plan for a new facility, the city council has provided a 
means for local funding, regional governments and partners are 
coming on side. There is no question that when it comes to a 
new hospital for Swift Current and area, the health district, the 
city, and the region are prepared to make their commitment. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker, is: is this provincial government 
ready to make their commitment? On behalf of the constituents 
of Swift Current, I urge them to do so. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Speculation is building that the federal 
government is poised to announce a new farm aid package by 
the end of this week, based on a complete overhaul of federal 
agriculture policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also much speculation in the media about 
the financial size of the package for Saskatchewan producers, 
and whether or not it will adequately provide trade injury 
compensation and drought relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Premier been informed by the federal 
government when the announcement of a new farm aid package 
is expected? And will it include trade injury and drought relief 
as well as a new agriculture policy framework? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have not been informed 
by the federal government, either the Prime Minister’s office or 
the Minister of Agriculture’s office, or for that matter the 
Minister of Trade’s office, of any impending announcement or 
details of that announcement. 
 
With the Leader of the Opposition and other members in the 
House, we hear this speculation. Let me say this, Mr. Speaker. 
Some months ago the federal government was saying very 
clearly there would be no more money for Canadian producers. 
 
I believe because of the work that’s emanated from this 
legislature and the work that’s being done with the premiers 
across the country and farm leaders, we have moved the federal 
government. We have moved them in their thinking to an 
understanding that support needs to be provided for Canadian 
producers. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, there may be yet battles to be 
waged. We do not know detail, but we hold to that position 
which says there must be trade injury support for Canadian 
producers. And that support must come 100 per cent from the 
national government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, we were 
hoping the Premier would have some knowledge as to when 
this announcement might be made. We are also counting on the 
Premier and those in the provincial government to be arguing 
hard with the federal government that trade injury support will 
be part of a package announced. And also there will be 
compensation in light of the drought that Saskatchewan is 
experiencing. 
 
Concerning new farm assistance and a safety net package for 
grain and oilseed producers, we want the new program to be 
better than the AIDA (Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance) 
and the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) programs, their 
predecessors. 
 
So I would ask the Premier, Mr. Speaker, has he been informed 
by the federal government as to how much financial help will 
be provided in any new farm aid package? And can the Premier, 
in particular, assure Saskatchewan farm families that the 
program will be delivered in such a way that the assistance will 
be of more benefit to Saskatchewan producers than the help 
they received — or lack of help is perhaps a better way of 
framing it — under AIDA and CFIP; programs that were 
designed in which the provincial government did not have 
enough input and didn’t benefit Saskatchewan producers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again I inform the House 
that I do not . . . am not privy to any details that the federal 
government may be planning to announce. 
 
And on the second point, we share the view of the Leader of the 
Opposition that the programs that are being developed need to 
be of greater benefit to Canadian, and particularly in our case, 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

to Saskatchewan producers. 
 
Now we have been . . . The Leader of the Opposition, if he 
would just remain quiet for a moment, I can answer the 
question. The fact of the matter is this Minister of Agriculture 
has been working with ministers of Agriculture, farm leaders 
from across Canada, particularly with the farm leadership from 
Saskatchewan in working towards better and new programs for 
Canadian producers. 
 
The fact of the matter is this, Mr. Speaker. We are at a very, I 
think, important — important — moment in this discussion 
with the federal government. And what is absolutely crucial is 
that the farm leadership of this province, the farm leadership of 
Canada, governments, and oppositions stand together. 
 
I was able, Mr. Speaker, last week to sit down with the premiers 
of Western Canada and the Territories and forge a unanimous 
consensus position that in the need of trade injury for Canadian 
producers that need needs to be met by Ottawa 100 per cent. 
We need to continue that consistent voice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Resources for Law Enforcement 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Justice or his designate. 
According to media reports Saskatchewan is sending as many 
as 400 police officers to assist with security for the G-8 Summit 
in Kananaskis at the end of this month. 
 
Mr. Speaker the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association has written the Minister of Justice expressing 
concern about the pressure that losing 400 police officers from 
Saskatchewan will put on police services in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps is the government taking to ensure 
Saskatchewan communities are not left short of police 
protection as a result of the loss of 400 police officers to 
Alberta for the G-8 Summit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
minister, I’ll take notice of that question and provide the 
information for the member opposite. But what I would say is 
that our . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. If the member’s taking notice, we’ll 
wait for the response. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, communities across this province know full well that 
funding for RCMP and policing services has been low from this 
government for many years, and the cuts to municipalities have 
shown through in that lack of funding. So concern is out there 
in all communities in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan communities are already short of 
police as a result of the NDP’s failure to honour its election 
promise to hire 200 new police officers. Now communities are 
being asked to cope with fewer police officers for two weeks at 

the end of June. 
 
How much will it cost to send Saskatchewan police officers to 
Kananaskis for security at the G-8 Summit; and who’s going to 
pay for it, Mr. Speaker? Will the minister assure SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and the cities 
and towns of Saskatchewan that the cost of sending police 
officers to Alberta for two weeks this summer will not be 
dumped once again in the laps of Saskatchewan municipalities 
already struggling with high policing costs, and a shortage of 
police officers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there are many comments 
that the member has made about the funding for police officers 
that are totally inaccurate. Because what we have done in this 
province is increase the amount that we’re spending on 
policing. And in fact, in this past . . . 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Just want to be able to hear . . . 
I want to be able to hear the answers. I ask members not to 
interrupt the response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in the past budget year there 
was $83 million spent on policing out of the provincial budget, 
and we’ve increased it from last year. 
 
I guess what I would say to the member opposite around the 
issue of participating in some national policing issues. We 
know that, when in Quebec City, there were some real 
challenges when the local municipalities were asked to 
participate in that policing effort; and as a result, the 
municipalities across the country have been very wary about 
this. 
 
Our people are aware of that particular issue, and they will be 
working closely with the federal government to make sure that 
these are federal government expenses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister might be well aware that over the last 
number of years downloading of RCMP and policing costs has 
been dramatic to a number of communities. For example, RMs 
out there, Mr. Speaker, are now being asked to pay $15, over 
$15, per capita for policing when they paid nothing before. 
 
Communities under 500 are being asked to pay the same thing 
— in some cases more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Where is the 200 new police officers that in the last election this 
government promised to hire for the communities of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government has been working very carefully on that 
commitment of more police officers, and I’m pleased to report 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

 

that this year they were finally able to make sure that there were 
police officers in every RCMP position throughout the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The information that I’ve been provided 
from the commanding officer for the RCMP in Saskatchewan 
shows that what with cancelling all leave and working together 
with the federal government, we will be able to provide the full 
policing in Saskatchewan as well as assist the federal 
government in their international responsibilities as it relates to 
the G-8 conference. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we continue to work very closely with 
communities, with the policing communities, to make sure that 
there are safe communities right across our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Film Industry 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Culture, Youth and 
Recreation. 
 
On Friday, Edge Entertainment and an American television 
company announced a multi-million dollar deal to produce as 
many as 22 episodes of a new TV drama in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member will 
continue. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that is good news for the industry and great news for Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — However, Mr. Speaker, one may recall 
the NDP spent $4.5 million last July to buy 30 per cent of a 
Regina movie company called Minds Eye Pictures. 
 
Will the minister tell the legislature how the government’s 
movie company is doing? Will the minister provide a list of the 
productions that Minds Eye Pictures has completed or is 
currently doing in Saskatchewan and the total value of those 
projects? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With respect to Minds Eye, I think I understood the question 
correctly. With respect to Minds Eye, he’s correct, there was a 
$4.5 million investment in that production, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan has shown itself to be doing very well in the 
motion picture industry, Mr. Speaker. They’ve become highly 
competitive, Mr. Speaker, and there are many, many 
productions now that are made here in Saskatchewan. And the 
member accurately reflects what is about to take place in 
Saskatoon and I think that’s something we should all be 

tremendously proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question was pretty simple and straightforward and I think 
the minister had some problems with it. 
 
Last July the NDP decided they wanted to become movie 
moguls so they put $4.5 million into a movie company — 
Minds Eye Pictures. And the taxpayers have a right to know 
how that investment is doing. 
 
So I’ll give the minister another chance to answer the question. 
How many productions has Minds Eye Pictures done in 
Saskatchewan since the NDP bought 30 per cent of the 
company, and how many productions has Mind Eyes Pictures 
done in Alberta over the same period of time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll gladly give the 
member some sense of how they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. In the 
1980s they used to do about $5 million worth of productions, 
and now, Mr. Speaker, in the year 2000 they’ve done $50 
million worth of productions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the sector . . . Mr. Speaker, 
the sector . . . the sector now employs here in Saskatchewan . . . 
the sector . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the sector now employs 
approximately 850 people. 
 
And I want to point out as well, which is very important, most 
of those people are young people, Mr. Speaker, which I think is 
much to the credit, Mr. Speaker, of Minds Eye productions 
themselves who have ensured that we try and hire as many 
young people as possible. Mr. Speaker, I think this is very 
exciting for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister is obviously avoiding the direct question 
but he does see that the film industry is doing great in this 
province, thanks to tax credits. Now if tax credits work so great 
in the film industry, just think what it would do for the rest of 
the province. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s dream of 
becoming movie moguls didn’t end with just the purchase of 
Minds Eye Pictures. The NDP government also decided to 
spend millions of taxpayers’ dollars to build a sound stage. Now 
we understand the sound stage construction is complete and the 
taxpayers deserve to know how things are going. 
 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many taxpayers’ dollars has the NDP 
government spent so far on the new sound stage? How many 
production projects has the NDP booked to use the sound stage 
as of today? And will the minister table the business plan for 
the government’s new sound stage so his taxpayers can see just 
how the NDP plans to generate a return on their multi-million 
dollar investment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if they’re doing 
auditions, I wouldn’t say the member shouldn’t go for 
auditions, but I think that it would be highly suspect if he 
actually went for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker, the real point is that that member 
says, on one hand . . . one day he stands up here in the 
Assembly and says you should have tax credits and the next day 
he says you shouldn’t have tax credits, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
never on the same page, on the same issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that we have an industry here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that a few years back, in the 1980s, 
was just a very small business in our province. 
 
Now it’s grown into something that I think is exciting for the 
people of Saskatchewan. I think it’s an industry that has a real 
future here in Saskatchewan and we should be proud of that 
rather than criticize it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I can’t make my questions much more simple for the 
minister to answer. And he’s answering them in the same 
fashion that he answered the questions about SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again my questions are very simple. To the 
minister: will the minister table a business plan for the NDP’s 
new multi-million dollar sound stage? Will the minister give 
taxpayers a list of the productions the government has lined up 
to use in the new sound stage? And will the minister give 
taxpayers a list of all the projects currently using their new 
sound stage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again I’d 
say, with respect to the sound stage, there are great 
opportunities here in the province, and we’re . . . (inaudible) . . . 
I know the Premier when he was out on the Canada trade 
mission, Mr. Speaker, signed a number . . . signed an MOU 
(memorandum of understanding), I believe, that will bring, we 
believe, a number of investments here into the province. 
 
It should be something, Mr. Speaker, that we should be excited 
about. It’s going to bring lots of jobs to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and has a tremendous future here in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

Investigation of Claims by Government Agencies 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister responsible for SGI. Last week we 
raised the question of SGI conducting video surveillance on 
Saskatchewan people who have no-fault insurance claims with 
SGI. And after days of denying the obvious, the minister finally 
admitted that SGI does conduct video surveillance on insurance 
claimants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the year 2000, SGI claims they conducted 72 
in-depth investigations. Will the minister tell us how much 
those investigations cost SGI, and out of those 72 cases, how 
many resulted in either charges or the cancellation of the claim? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, again it’s interesting that 
member at least alludes or suggests in the question that 
somehow maybe these investigations shouldn’t even be taking 
place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point is, Mr. Speaker — let me make this point, Mr. 
Speaker, and let’s be clear about this, Mr. Speaker — the 
coalition against broad . . . against . . . the Canadian coalition 
that talks about fraud as it respects to . . . as it pertains, I should 
say, Mr. Speaker, to insurance fraud says that on an annual 
basis there is a loss to people who buy insurance of about $1.3 
billion annually, Mr. Speaker. It rates second only, Mr. Speaker, 
to drug-related criminal activities, Mr. Speaker. It’s something 
that is a concern, I believe, for taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And 
certainly it’s a concern for people who buy insurance and they 
want to be absolutely sure, Mr. Speaker, that the people who are 
receiving benefits under insurance are absolutely not defrauding 
the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Out of those 72 
cases, how many resulted in either charges or the cancellation 
of the claim? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again let me say to 
that member that on an average number of claims when you’ve 
got 140 to 150,000 claims and 6,500 of those claims, Mr. 
Speaker, are injury related, and whether the number is, as I 
indicated several days ago, is 9 or 10, or whether it’s 70, Mr. 
Speaker, that represents a fairly small percentage of the total 
amount of claims. 
 
Again I say to that member . . . And I know from the scrums 
that took place in that rotunda out there on Friday afternoon, 
Mr. Speaker, he refused to answer the question about whether 
or not people should be contacted in advance of whether or not 
there was a belief that they were defrauding the public, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that he again should stand up in this Assembly 
or out in the rotunda and answer to the people of Saskatchewan 
whether or not people should be investigated if they’re ripping 
off the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s refusing 
to answer and ducks the questions. Last week he didn’t do it in 
the House. He had his officials out in his vestibule. He went out 
in front of the media and he still didn’t know. 
 
So let’s make it a little simpler. Let’s bring it close to today. 
2001 the minister said there were nine investigations. What did 
those nine investigations cost and how many charges were laid 
or claims cancelled as a result of those investigations that took 
place in 2001? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that 
specific answer will be given in the review but, Mr. Speaker, 
those are some of the questions that I’ve asked to have 
answered in the review, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But surely . . . again I say to that member, Mr. Speaker, is he 
willing to stand up in this House or is he willing to stand up in 
the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, and suggest as he’s suggesting here 
that somehow these investigations shouldn’t take place 
irrespective, Mr. Speaker, of what those investigations cost. 
 
He’s saying that and I think he’s suggesting that if those 
investigations somehow surpass a certain threshold, that if they 
cost too much, Mr. Speaker, that the investigation should not 
take place. I think, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what he’s saying 
but I wish he would stand up here and be direct in the House, 
Mr. Speaker, and say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s 
penchant to go ahead and try to get answers and ask the 
questions, he will get that chance soon enough. We will oblige 
him; we will give him an opportunity very shortly to be on this 
side of the House. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that member 
won’t even make it into the House after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, SGI has said that 
PricewaterhouseCoopers will be charged with the task of 
finding out how come the minister was so completely lost on 
the issue of SGI surveillance on insurance claimants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will PricewaterhouseCoopers be looking into why 
SGI rep in Weyburn lied to Virginia Cook about being under 
video surveillance? Will PricewaterhouseCoopers ask the 
minister why on May 27 he said, in this Assembly, that SGI did 
do surveillance but on June 6 said SGI didn’t do surveillance 
and never would? Will PricewaterhouseCoopers find out why 
SGI vice-president in charge of special investigation unit was as 
misinformed about his department’s activities as the minister 
was? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what exactly are the parameters of the accounting 
firm’s investigation and when will that report be released? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Before I ask the minister to 
answer the question, in his statement, the member from 
Rosthern, I do believe, used the word lied as it applied to some 
particular person. I’ll have to check the record . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not in the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Not in the House. Well, I will check the 
record, but I wanted to bring it to his attention at this time in 
case the minister . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Well in my 
statement in the House the other day, Mr. Speaker, I said that I 
would ask the president of SGI — and I’m looking right at the 
statement — that I asked the president to review the 
circumstances of the case which were raised in the House 
yesterday in question period referring to the question period of 
last Thursday, Mr. Speaker. So absolutely they will review that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but let me say again to that member, if that 
member is somehow suggesting that there should not be 
investigations in cases, Mr. Speaker, where we believe and 
where SGI believes or any insurance company for that matter, 
Mr. Speaker, believes that the system has been ripped off or 
defrauded, Mr. Speaker, he should stand up in this House and 
be categoric about it or he should stand out in the rotunda and 
be categoric about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suspect that he holds that position, he will be in 
opposition for years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
next question is for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, if 
PricewaterhouseCoopers finds that SGI officials misled the 
minister over the two weeks the surveillance issue has been 
discussed, we assume disciplinary action will be taken. The 
minister intimated as much last week. 
 
So if PricewaterhouseCoopers finds out that the minister did say 
and did know on May 27 that SGI did surveillance on insurance 
claims, yet told the Assembly on June 6 that SGI did no such 
thing, will the Premier fire the minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this circumstance, the 
minister stood in this House on Friday of last week and made 
apology for comments that he had said. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, he has appointed Pricewaterhouse 
to find out precisely what has happened within SGI and to look 
at the whole situation of surveillance. But, Mr. Speaker, I stand 
here with this minister and I intend to stand with this minister a 
great long time on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I stand here today with this minister and 
I want to know, since the member of Rosthern won’t answer the 
question, I would like to hear from the Leader of the 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Opposition: is it the policy of the Saskatchewan Party that those 
who are suspected of committing fraud against the other 
motorists of Saskatchewan, is it the policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party that these people should, one, not be investigated; or two, 
not be . . . or be told in advance of being investigated? 
 
Would the Leader of the Opposition today stand in this House 
or stand in the rotunda and give us the policy of the 
Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions no. 282 through 286 inclusive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 282, 283, 284, 285, 
and 286 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 3 — The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today and refer to Bill No. 3, The Correctional 
Services Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been noted many times over that 
Saskatchewan has one of the highest crime rates in the country 
and this concerns all citizens of our province. And there has 
been a great deal of debate and discussion around this very 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have that dubious distinction; it’s one that 
we’re not very proud of, but . . . and this has been mentioned a 
number of times . . . (inaudible) . . . also of being the car theft 
capital of North America. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that just about every day, in talking with 
people in Regina and throughout the province, as we do move 
throughout the province taking care of our duties, that people 
are talking about that very concern that they have about the 
theft of their vehicles and/or damage of their vehicles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this crime rate that we’re experiencing, the high 

crime rate that Saskatchewan now has is not limited just to 
urban areas, but it’s also in rural communities. And we’ve seen 
an increase in this activity over the months, over the past few 
years that is very, very alarming. 
 
Regina and Saskatoon have two of the highest per capita crime 
rates in Canada. And the Bill that we have before us today is 
referring to correctional services and some of the things the 
government is going to do to try to ensure that there is 
flexibility as far as dealing with people that would be involved 
in these crimes in our province. And so it’s a good Bill; we are 
happy to see this kind of a Bill put forward. But it’s going to do 
very little to reduce the province’s high crime rates because, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s chronic underfunding and a lack of priority 
on the part of the NDP where it comes to staffing all police 
departments in the province. 
 
A recent report to Regina City Council has indicated that 
members of the Regina Police Service have the highest 
workload of any major western Canadian city. And so this is a 
major concern. This workload indicates that our crime rate is on 
the increase and that we’re not doing something correctly. 
 
There are other issues other than having the police staffed 
properly; certainly there are, Mr. Speaker. And the other issues 
are we need to address the many other issues that lead people to 
crime, like poverty and unemployment, homelessness, and 
particularly I think in this province, Mr. Speaker, it’s been 
noted that substance abuse is quite rampant and also leads to 
citizens involving themselves in crime. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, car thieves have said repeatedly that one of 
the things that they would like to see is better access to 
substance abuse programs. And there is a problem with access 
to these programs. This has been brought up in the legislature a 
number of times. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party opposition has presented on many 
occasions to the NDP government the need for a detox centre, 
for instance, in Saskatoon. We have also brought to the 
attention of the government a need for a youth treatment centre 
for alcohol and drug abuse. And these things are not being 
addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatoon we give credit — a great deal of credit to the city 
of Saskatoon — who is seemingly trying to do something about 
the detox centre but, Mr. Speaker, this government doesn’t 
seem to be working with them in that aspect, and so we are 
quite concerned about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very sad when the youth of the province 
are in need of detox centres, of substance abuse treatment 
centres, and we have seen nothing of the government acting on 
this need throughout the years that we’ve sat in this legislature 
as opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in a province that has a relatively high 
percentage of seniors, the crime rate is a concern for them. 
Women and children are also often the victims of crime and 
StatsCanada, a report of StatsCanada, indicated that 55 per cent 
of all the female homicide victims were killed by someone that 
they knew and that compares with only 6 per cent of male 
victims. But nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, there is a need to have 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

 

some changes made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been looking through this legislation and I 
noted that there is a reference that is made to correctional 
camps. And although the legislation is not absolutely clear, I’m 
wondering if it’s possibly an indication that the government is 
thinking of having something equivalent to boot camps. It’s 
talking about correctional camps here. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
wanted to just mention that it’s really very, very important that 
our young people have some disciplinary action in the form of 
good rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was really very impressed . . . This past week I 
was at Wakaw for a ceremonial annual review of their air 
cadets. Their Squadron 888 there was going through their 
annual review and clearly the discipline and the respect that 
these young people are learning through the cadets is very, very 
commendable. I have to give a great deal of credit to the many 
adults who took it upon themselves to ensure that this squadron 
is in place and that there is a sense of accomplishment and 
achievement by the cadets and also rewards. 
 
And so I think that we need to look to that kind of programming 
more often and if we want to call them correctional camps or 
boot camps or whatever we call them, I think we need to 
recognize that there is value in that kind of discipline and 
training. 
 
And there are many, many rewards also for the young people 
that are a part of cadets. And many of them have, I guess, have 
been directed in that way in order that they would have a 
purpose for their lives; a sense of belonging to a group of 
people who are doing some very, very honourable 
achievements. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really worthwhile . . . a very 
worthwhile activity that’s taking part across — or taking place, 
rather — across the entire province wherever we see cadet 
corps. And so I think that in looking at the value of those 
squadrons throughout our province we can take a lesson from 
some of the very basic principles that are in line for young 
people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there have been two of my colleagues in the 
past days of this session that have addressed this particular Bill. 
And so we would like to move it to Committee of the Whole 
where we can look at the Bill, ask questions of the minister a 
little more in depth. And so I do move this Bill on to Committee 
of the Whole at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The committee resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 9 — The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter into the debate on Bill No. 9, The Real Estate Amendment 

Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill seemed like it was primarily a 
housekeeping Bill with some basically inconsequential 
amendments. But one of the major issues that’s been identified 
in this Bill speaks to one of the problems we have that’s 
actually facing the province. 
 
In the housekeeping amendments, the NDP has theoretically 
taken care of updating legislation that deals with confidentiality 
and information sharing within the real estate industry. There’s 
also amendments that allow for interprovincial agreements 
between bodies of regulators, especially when you have brokers 
and salespeople moving from one jurisdiction to the other. 
 
Of course, we’re very familiar in this province with people 
moving from one jurisdiction to the other. It’s something that 
members opposite know a great deal about because we have one 
of the highest out-migrations from this province to other 
jurisdictions than any other province in the country. And one of 
the reasons, obviously, we have out-migration is people go to 
where the jobs are and when our job creation record is 
extremely poor from this government, we have . . . we have 
people that . . . that are moving out of the province. 
 
We have created one of the least friendly business environments 
in Saskatchewan, and again, this causes people to move out of 
the province and into other jurisdictions where jobs are being 
created at a horrendous amount and while we stay stagnate or 
go downhill in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, realtors represent a group of people who know 
how serious the issue is from out-migration. They are the ones 
who literally make their living in the buying and house-selling 
market, so they know first-hand, when you’ve got more people 
moving out of the province than moving into the province, that 
there’s a huge, huge problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall we don’t take issue with those 
amendments that talk about confidentiality and information 
sharing. And we also support the sections that strengthen 
agreements reached between regulating bodies and 
representatives. Changes that require errors and omissions 
coverage are in themselves not negative. In fact, the real estate 
group has indicated that they actually prefer this. It would only 
make sense that they should have this kind of protection. 
Changing the requirements regarding disclosure and reporting 
are also things we don’t take issue with. 
 
But the one thing, along with the real estate community, that we 
do not like is the section that deals with specifying one 
insurance carrier. And this is very typical, Mr. Speaker. It 
almost appears that the government tried to sneak this one 
through and nobody would pick it up. But in fact it was picked 
up very early on and that’s why it’s being entered into debate, 
about this one particular aspect of dealing with one insurance 
carrier. 
 
In fact during the second reading speech, the Justice minister 
said that they consulted with Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Commission, the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association, and 
the Superintendent of Real Estate. Yet we, Mr. Speaker, have 
received numerous letters all outlining concerns that realtors 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

and insurance brokers have about dealing with one specified 
insurance carrier. 
 
It seems the real estate community had not even seen this Bill. 
So if the minister or the NDP had consulted with the entire real 
estate community, they would have found that not everyone 
was in fact supportive of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House are 
wondering, though, what precipitated these amendments, 
especially the one dealing with specifying one insurance carrier. 
There are no reasons given for this. 
 
Specifying one insurance carrier means funnelling more 
business to the Crowns. Allowing a monopoly in this area 
would not make things easier or more economical. In fact, it 
would have the reverse effect. 
 
When you consider the hundreds of millions of dollars, 
taxpayers’ dollars, that have been lost to ill-planned business 
ventures, it really makes one wonder why would we . . . would 
be talking about again one insurance carrier and putting 
taxpayers’ dollars at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read into the record a letter from 
. . . parts of a letter from the insurance brokers of Saskatoon. 
And I think it accurately describes their feelings to this Bill. 
And in the letter, I’ll paraphrase: they have good support for the 
compulsory errors and omissions insurance, however, and I will 
quote: 
 

Our strong opposition is to mandatory errors and omissions 
insurance which dictates to the registrant with which 
insurer the registrant must be insured. Our association 
believes the quality and value of insurance is best served by 
an open marketplace. Registrants should have the choice of 
insurance providers. 
 

It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

The only single insurer model our association has seen 
provided 80 per cent less coverage at 30 per cent higher 
cost to the registrant. This certainly cannot be in the 
interests of the consumer or the real estate industry. 
 
The Saskatoon Real Estate Board strongly recommends 
that the suggested amendment to The Real Estate Act, 
section 83(1)(q.1)(ii) be repealed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, on that note, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 4 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few 
comments that I would like to make on this particular Act as it 
applies to SaskEnergy. I think at the end of my comments, 

we’re certainly prepared to move this into Committee of the 
Whole because there’s a number of questions that keep coming 
up and we’re having difficulty in trying to rationalize what they 
might . . . what the answers might be and why these 
amendments are putting forward in the first place. 
 
We’ve consulted extensively with members, industry members 
regarding this Act. And generally we find that the Act is 
supported and going in the right direction, but some of the 
comments that I have pertain to some of the questions that I 
referred to just a moment ago. 
 
One of the things that we have to be aware of, Mr. Speaker, in 
these particular Acts is what will be coming in the future and in 
the near future, and I’m talking specifically about deregulation 
within the industry. 
 
Deregulation is often considered a negative word when it’s 
applied to energy sources, through some of the experience . . . 
perceived bad experiences that happened with deregulation. 
 
This Act doesn’t pertain directly to deregulation, but one of the 
things that we have to be aware of is we’re setting the 
fundamentals in place for an Act in the future that will cause 
deregulation. 
 
When we first deregulated the energy in Manitoba . . . 
deregulated telephone rates for instance in Manitoba, when I 
lived there, we experienced both the ups and down sides, but at 
the end of the day, deregulation became quite an important 
factor in our particular use of the service. 
 
Right now I’m experiencing, in my home in Lloydminster, 
deregulated pricing on gas and energy as it comes and is 
supplied to my side of the city from ATCO Energy . . . ATCO 
Gas in Alberta. That of course has been deregulated. And while 
it made quite a spike and caused us some concern for a short 
period of time one winter, the price that I’ve been paying for 
gas in my home certainly has been considerably less than my 
neighbours that have to use SaskEnergy gas. 
 
So what I’m saying is that when we put the fundamentals into 
these Acts, they have to be . . . we have to be prepared that the 
consequence will eventually affect the deregulation of an 
industry that will happen probably sooner than later. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, there is some positive things in 
this . . . in the amendments that I think I should comment on, 
because if we can be of any assistance as legislators in trying to 
make this . . . make the industry more friendly to development, 
I think we should go in that direction. 
 
Therefore one of the clauses that I’m referring to is supporting 
the utilization of a company’s own pipeline when they are 
transporting the natural gas from their . . . from their own 
source to be utilized on their particular property. 
 
And also I noticed that this is expanded even further so that a 
company might be able to use their own gas and transport it 
through their own pipelining to other property that may not be 
adjacent, but is not sold anywhere else. 
 
I think that is a positive move for the industry because industry 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

 

doesn’t want to wait for regulation, doesn’t want to wait for 
decisions to be made when they can move ahead quickly and do 
what has to be done under their own budget and their own 
business plan as they see fit. If it doesn’t affect the monopoly 
position of SaskEnergy, I think that is a positive move, and I’m 
pleased to see that amendment in this Act. 
 
A couple of the questions that I referred to earlier, Mr. Minister, 
really are I suppose housekeeping in a way, but one has to ask 
oneself why were these amendments put into this Act. 
 
One of them is, a quorum has now been taken out of the 
legislation and is now to be defined, not by the board of 
SaskEnergy, by the Crown board. It is defined by an order in 
council. That is . . . makes me wonder what the purpose of that 
particular minutia or attention to detail that is required in order 
to set quorum of SaskEnergy board meeting with an order in 
council by cabinet. 
 
That seems to me that is an overkill and that is a question that 
defies explanation from my point of view. And that’s why we 
want to move ahead and we should be able to respond . . . get 
responses to these kind of questions when we get into 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
One of the other questions that seems unanswered, and seems to 
be very odd to me, is when we refer to, in the existing Act, as 
the executive committee, any time there was a reference to 
executive committee of the board, that now under these 
amendments has been reduced and in fact eliminated — 
removed entirely. Again the question is why, why is that so? 
What is the advantage of doing this? What will be entered in 
place of removing reference to executive committee? Those are 
the questions that we need to ask on behalf of the people of the 
province that in fact are the owners and shareholders of 
SaskEnergy. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Maybe the . . . one of the more contentious clauses in this 
particular Act relates to the acquisition and disposition of real 
estate or capital assets. It’s been referred to in the debate so far, 
and I just wanted to summarize it again by letting the people 
know that there is a limit up to which the board of SaskEnergy 
can make an acquisition or a disposition and that number has 
been established earlier at $200,000. Now as time goes on and 
the corporations enlarge and change, certainly those numbers 
have to be flexible. 
 
What the Act goes ahead with, or the amendments purport now, 
is that this . . . the 200,000 will not be the figure that will be the 
cap of acquisition and disposition, but in fact that limit will now 
be set by again the Governor in Council. That will be set by a 
cabinet decision. 
 
I think when we get into the large-scale acquisitions that need to 
be made, or dispositions, I think the government of the day 
should have some clear understanding of what these limits are 
and what is allowed. Because they in fact — the government of 
the day — is in fact the ones that are responsible for the 
ultimate success or failure of that acquisition or disposition. 
 
The question that will be asked in the Committee of the Whole 

is: why would a limit that is not listed in the legislation be 
allowed to be given to cabinet discretion to be set? The question 
is: on what basis would these numbers be set? Why is that a 
preference to something in the legislation? Why is that better in 
terms of transparency? Should the people of Saskatchewan not 
know what the limit is that their company, their energy 
company, is doing or will be allowed to do? At what level, over 
which the government of the day needs to be involved? That is 
a question that needs to be also brought up in Committee of the 
Whole and we’re certainly prepared to ask those questions and 
look for responses. 
 
One other provision that I think is a fairly positive amendment 
in the Act would be to make sure it’s very clear that a third 
person or a contractor that is hired to do a particular job is going 
to be responsible for the work that is done. And the example 
that might be used would be where digging is done around 
another pipeline or dynamiting or some other kinds of activity 
that needs to be done. The Act now, with these provisions, 
should make it very clear that the contractor, as a third person, 
is also responsible and the person performing that work also is 
equally responsible. 
 
Once it’s clear and established, people know what their 
parameters are and that risk can be adjusted for in the bidding 
process and it becomes much more transparent. And no 
questions at the end of the day — who is going to pay for the 
cost of the particular problem that might be created. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, talking about these regulations, I can see 
some positive regulations moving forward for clarification. I 
think that we need to make sure that the amendments are in fact 
in the right direction to lay the correct fundamentals for future 
development of SaskEnergy and the deregulation of our energy 
in this province. 
 
The questions that I’ve already talked about need to be 
addressed. The answers aren’t apparent, and I think the people 
of the province deserve to have answers to those questions; and 
we will endeavour to pose those questions and endeavour to get 
the appropriate responses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared now to let Bill No. 4 move 
forward into Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 20 — The 
Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand again in the House today and to address Bill 
No. 20, The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister outlined for the Assembly the intent 
of this particular Bill. And the Saskatchewan Party opposition 
certainly was very, very pleased to see that this kind of a Bill 
would be coming to the table because there is definitely a need 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

for a Bill like this with the changing face of commerce today in 
our world. 
 
We have many, many people that are purchasing items through 
the Internet and through e-mail and so on. And we need to have 
protection for these people to ensure that they’re not being 
taken in one way or the other. 
 
Internet commerce is a growing force, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
going to keep on growing despite the recent meltdown in 
Internet base business. But in the bigger scheme of things we 
have only just begun this type of business. And it’s certainly 
one that a lot of people in Saskatchewan are using. 
 
Just as consumers have certain protections when they make a 
purchase in downtown Saskatoon, Regina, Humboldt, or 
anywhere else, they need certain protections when they’re 
making Internet purchases also. And this Bill does put in place 
some of those protections. It’s certainly . . . rather, it requires 
certain things of the seller, as we understand it from the 
Minister of Justice. Certain things of the seller, such as 
providing a purchase agreement within 15 days and a window 
of opportunity for buyers to cancel any of their purchases. 
These are necessary features, Mr. Speaker. And in principle we 
do support this Bill. 
 
We are having some question though about whether or not the 
Minister of Justice has spoken with the federal minister about 
how this sort of protection may be applied throughout the entire 
North American continent. It is really very necessary that we 
take that kind of a step and ensure that we’ve got a harmonized 
system in place when it comes to the protection of our 
consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also has . . . speaks, rather, of some 
changes that are going to be made in relationship to stolen or 
lost credit cards, and some limits are put also on the liability of 
cardholders in those cases. And I believe this is really very 
good, very necessary. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that anyone that 
has travelled throughout North America, throughout the world, 
has experienced someone they know or possibly themselves 
losing their credit cards and what kind of an anxiety that may 
cause. And we certainly agree that, you know, putting some 
limit . . . some liabilities on the cardholders in those cases is a 
good thing. We agree with this. 
 
We’re looking forward to seeing this Bill play out. It sounds 
very necessary and very good on paper. We would encourage 
the minister to . . . in his discussions with the federal 
government Justice minister, to look at possibly taking some 
initiative in speaking with the governments of other 
jurisdictions in North America and in South America also, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Bill must — must — have enforcement mechanisms 
internationally. We realize that enforcing any rules 
internationally can be difficult, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
e-commerce but we will want to question the government very 
clearly on how he intends . . . or the minister intends to address 
that issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this sort of Bill in the day and age, as I’ve 
mentioned, that we’re in right now with so many people making 

purchases over the Internet, is important. And I’m sure that as 
time moves on we’re going to be finding that there is going to 
be other things that come to light that the consumer of this 
province, consumers of this province as well as throughout our 
country, are going to be bringing forward to different 
governments to look at and to address. 
 
It’s really getting more complex as I see it, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
seeing large, large items that are being sold through the Internet 
and we’re seeing this happening at long distances. And many 
times there are questions on the behalf of the buyer about, you 
know, what would happen for instance if I did not receive my 
purchase? Who would I go to? Do I know if there’s a legislation 
in place; a piece of legislation in place that would protect me 
and direct me? There are many, many questions. 
 
There is often, you know, a lot of literature and that kind of 
thing that is sold through the Internet for instance that may, may 
or may not, be conducive to the will of the people. 
 
We talked many times, Mr. Speaker, about pornography as well 
as just information that’s really very illicit passing on from one 
consumer to the other through the Internet. And we have 
certainly a long ways to go to ensure that what’s happening 
through the Internet is conducive to the values and the sort of 
moral, I guess, caring of the people within our country. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have very little more to say regarding the Act 
to amend The Consumer Protection Act, except that I am very 
pleased that the government has taken the step that it has to 
bring this Bill forward and it seems that it could have been 
looked at I guess some time ago. Because right now we have a 
number of our citizens that have expressed their concerns that 
they have needed something like this and we probably should 
have been ahead of the game before this time, but nonetheless 
it’s on the table now and it’s an important piece of legislation. 
Our members are looking forward to seeing what, what comes 
of this, to asking the minister more in-depth questions and we 
are, I guess, quite heartened that we have seen that the ministers 
of Justice from across the country have agreed upon this kind of 
a thing. 
 
The harmonization of laws throughout the country are key since 
the Internet is really not contained by provincial boundaries, 
and so it’s very, very important that we move ahead with this 
kind of legislation and try to ensure that our consumers are 
protected when they are making Internet purchases. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move this Bill 
forward onto Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 25 — The Cost 
of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand once again to address a Bill of this Legislative 
Assembly, Bill No. 25, The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act. 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

 

Mr. Speaker, our caucus committee has looked at this Bill very 
closely. We have recognized that it gives . . . puts forward, 
rather, a greater requirement on lenders of all sorts to give those 
people to whom they’re borrowing money more details about 
the actual cost of the borrowing of money. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, many times we hear on the radio or 
on TV that something is going to be offered to the general 
public for sale at zero down, zero per cent financing. We hear 
that a lot of times at car dealerships. But we recognize from 
speaking with a number of people in our province, who are 
purchasers of vehicles for instance, that the zero down, zero per 
cent in fact does come at quite a great cost. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So this Bill, as I understand it, will require dealerships, for 
instance, to disclose the cost — all the costs associated. 
Whether or not consumers are hearing these captions on TV, on 
the radio, making it sound as though there is going to be no cost 
at all in financing a car, as far as finance costs go, there is going 
to be a requirement on the part of dealers now to disclose what 
the entire cost is. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, affects all banks. It affects all credit 
unions and credit cards, as well as all retailers. And the Act also 
sets out the type of information that must be disclosed for 
different types of credit. For instance, it sets out how and when 
disclosure statements are made, the way finance charges are to 
be calculated, and the kinds of charges that can be imposed on 
borrowers. This is certainly a very, very important step that’s 
being taken. 
 
Some other features of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, are that it allows 
borrowers to purchase insurance, if it’s required, from any 
agent. Another feature is that the borrower may cancel optional 
services attached to the loan and the borrower may pay off 
non-mortgage credit at any time without penalty. Only 
reasonable penalties can be levied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, credit card application forms must clearly state the 
interest rate, whether it is a floating interest rate on non-interest 
financial charges — that’s on all non-interest financial charges. 
So this is also a very good step, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Many citizens that I’ve spoken of — or spoken to rather — in 
the province have expressed their dismay, I guess, and their 
surprise at finding out what kind of a rate, an interest rate is 
connected to owning a credit card, and possibly even different 
interest rates for different banking organizations that they . . . 
the credit card companies deal with. So there’s a variance in 
these rates and many people are very confused as to why this is 
happening. They’re also, as I mentioned, very surprised when 
they recognized the interest rate that they have to pay. So it’s an 
exceptionally good move when you have a credit card, when 
you make your credit card application, that you know at that 
time already what the interest rate will be. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, also affects lease payments with 
requirement for more explicit information. That is especially 
necessary also, Mr. Speaker. And this Bill will bring 
Saskatchewan into line with the 1994 Agreement on Internal 
Trade. 

It’s due time that this has happened. It’s important that 
Saskatchewan be right up there with everyone else when we’re 
talking about internal trade. And we have to recognize that we 
have a global community out there now, and certainly global 
transactions are taking place so we have to be . . . we have to be 
with it when it comes to these things and make sure that we’re 
not in a spot where we’re facing a great deal of exasperation by 
the people of our province because we’re not in line with what’s 
happening in the global world. 
 
So this legislation, Mr. Speaker, I understand is uniform 
legislation, and it has been passed already in several provinces. 
And that is excellent. We’re looking forward to hearing the rest 
of the provinces are going to be also passing legislation that’s 
going to be addressing this issue. 
 
There is one loose end that remains, Mr. Speaker, and our 
caucus is a bit concerned, that there’s nothing in this legislation 
that speaks of lending for the purposes of, you know, farms — 
farm lending and so on. And so we would like to question the 
minister a great deal more on that aspect of this Bill. 
 
If this Bill is going to go into effect on July 1, 2003, and 
supposedly it is in order to give affected parties time to deal 
with changes, then we want to make sure that everything is 
contained in this Bill that is necessary, and that it’s a complete 
and certainly a comprehensive Bill that addresses all of the 
needs that the people of Saskatchewan would require. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a very, very good step towards 
transparency — towards transparency. It’s an excellent Bill that 
I think certainly people of the province would have liked to see 
in times past with many, many, many other pieces of 
legislation. 
 
People need to know exactly what is happening when they are 
making transactions. It doesn’t matter what it is they’re 
purchasing or selling, they need to have transparency. They 
need to have and require to have very succinct directives on 
what is going to be in place for them so that they don’t need to 
be questioning a great deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that happens, it is a very good and fortunate 
thing for a society. Any country in the world would recognize, 
people of these countries would recognize that it’s important to 
have this transparency and very, very distinct details about what 
the law is that protects them and what the law requires of them 
when making transactions. 
 
It’s extremely important because people are really tired of 
having to go through the court system, hiring lawyers, and 
goodness knows what in order to get some of these things 
straightened out. That is very, very costly — unnecessarily 
costly. And I believe that when you have legislation that is quite 
specific, like this is apparently going to be, that it’s going to be 
helping consumers overall in the long run. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Party opposition believes in this kind of 
action. We believe that it’s really very important that people do 
know what is happening with any of their transactions before 
the transactions take place so that there is very little question 
about what’s going to happen along the road. 
 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a number of areas, for instance, with SGI, 
I have a friend of mine who was a little bit concerned that when 
insurance was purchased through SGI that there was very little 
information, for instance, given out about whether or not he was 
covered for this, this, or this. There was very little information 
given out at the time of purchase of that insurance. 
 
And some of it is in the smaller detail, but there is a great deal 
of very minute detail when you purchase that insurance. And 
it’s really very important, I think, for consumers of anything to 
be able to have boldly put in front of them what exactly they are 
covered for and what they are not. And I think that’s an area in 
our province that we could improve upon. 
 
I think it’s very important as I’ve mentioned before that there is 
very distinct, clear-cut indications of what kind of transactions 
are taking place. There needs to be transparency; there needs to 
be honesty and integrity in all of our dealings. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I . . . looking forward, as some of my 
Saskatchewan Party colleagues are, opposition colleagues are, 
to looking at this Bill in Committee of the Whole and 
questioning the minister in more detail on it at that time. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 32 — The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to be able 
to participate in the second reading debate on Bill No. 32, An 
Act to amend The Land Surveys Act. And, Mr. Speaker, as 
other speakers before me and more specifically the minister has 
noted, the . . . this Bill, Bill No. 32, is very much related to the 
LAND (Land Titles Automated Network Development) project 
more commonly known as the Information Services 
Corporation and the government’s attempt to automate our land 
titles here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, these next two Bills both relate to that 
particular effort on the part of this NDP government. And we 
certainly have a lot of questions and comments with respect to 
these Bills, especially as they relate to the automation of the 
land titles system in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by way of history, of course, it was some years 
ago that the NDP government announced that, while 
Saskatchewan was the last province to automate its land titles, 
that it intended to go down that path. And in typical fashion of 
this government, Mr. Speaker, it rejected any number of ways 
to accomplish that including, oh, perhaps contracting it out or 
having a look at existing technology that was on the market and 
bringing into the province of Saskatchewan. And they rejected 
that, Mr. Speaker, in favour of setting up yet another new 
Crown corporation called the Information Services Corporation 
to, among other things, automate the land titles system here in 
Saskatchewan. 

And we have . . . It’s a matter of the public record, Mr. Speaker. 
We have had a number of concerns about that process. Some of 
those concerns I think are born out in the fact that, well, many 
years into this process we’re now introduced . . . we’re now 
facing the debate of these two specific Bills and Bill 32. 
 
Because it strikes us, Mr. Speaker, as we read the Bill and we 
read the minister’s second reading speech, that the Bills are 
intended to clean up some difficulties or at least if not mistakes 
of commission, then mistakes of omission that have taken place 
with respect to this automated land titles file and the 
establishment of the Information Services Corporation. 
 
And certainly the efficacy that this . . . the ability of this system 
to function in an effective way for Saskatchewan people has 
been a concern of the opposition. Whether it be with respect to 
the land surveys themselves or whether it happens to be with 
how parcels are now dealt with in the new system, we have had 
concerns about the functionality of the system and the number 
of bugs that seem to be there, understanding that any new 
automated system that is a green field approach, in other words 
a from-scratch approach to develop a whole new software, is 
going to have some bugs. And I think that’s reasonable to 
expect of software. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing a — frankly in our opinion — 
a plague of bugs with respect to this system, almost of Biblical 
proportions. And some of them really go to the heart of the 
ability of people in the surveying business and people in the 
land transaction business and just homeowners to have a land 
titles system that functions on a timely basis as has been 
promised by the government in respect of these, not only of this 
. . . of ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), but also of this Bill. That’s what these Bills 
speak to. 
 
So that’s one set of concerns that we’ve had, Mr. Speaker. The 
other concern of course was simply the principle of setting up 
yet another Crown corporation to do this, to do this work, to 
automate the system. And the projected cost of the system, of 
the land title . . . the new automated land titles system, which 
was between 20 and $30 million was the projected costs years 
ago, and we’re well over 60 million and climbing, the 
taxpayers’ dollars spent on this. 
 
And I think you see these costs rising because the problems are 
being identified with the system, they’re having to fix the 
problems as we see here with Bill 32 and the next Bill that 
we’re about to consider, Mr. Speaker, Bill 33. So it’s no wonder 
why the costs have increased with ISC almost three-fold over 
what this government had forecast. 
 
And we’re not alone in our concern, Mr. Speaker, and certainly 
it’s not been a partisan concern because I think one of the first 
members of this legislature — and she’s now a former member 
— but one of the first members of this legislature to fully 
understand the problems with the government’s approach in this 
regard was Janice MacKinnon, the former member for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld, who clearly stated in a memo that we were 
able to . . . that we received a copy of last session, clearly stated 
in her memo her concerns about what ISC was doing about the 
fact that it would be elbowing out a burgeoning and growing IT 
(information technology) sector here in the province of 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And you know I think Ms. MacKinnon has certainly a fair 
amount of credibility, not just here in the legislature but around 
the province, because certainly it was under her tenure that 
some improvements were made in the province’s fiscal 
position. And I think that as . . . in her last portfolio of minister 
responsible for Crown Investments Corporation, she raised 
some very, very specific concerns about ISC. 
 
Now the minister, the current minister responsible for 
Information Services Corporation, and the then minister, the 
member for Saskatoon Fairview, just wrote those concerns off, 
Mr. Speaker; wrote the concerns off that the thing was . . . that 
ISC was out of control and that it was having a problem even 
delivering the basic function. 
 
And as we have seen ISC, I believe — and this with the 
approval of the NDP cabinet across the way — as we’ve seen 
them expand far past the mandate of simply automating our 
land titles system into all manner of other activities, that’s 
where we seem to have seen the problems with the land titles 
system. 
 
The original intent of the government was laudable — to 
automate our land titles in the province of Saskatchewan. We 
were the last province and are the last province to have 
automated our land titles. So it was certainly the right thing to 
do for us to go down that road. 
 
The problem again came with the process: the establishment of 
another Crown; the fact that expenditures got wildly out of 
control — and remember that we’re talking about taxpayers’ 
dollars when we talk about expenditures — and then the 
functionality of the system, whether it was working or whether 
perhaps they were so behind schedule and so in a hurry to get 
something out there to demonstrate that it hasn’t been a 
complete failure that they introduced it, I believe first in the 
Moose Jaw district, and there were a number of concerns. 
 
And the government has said and ISC officials have said well, 
you have to expect that, and I’ve addressed that very briefly this 
afternoon. You have to expect that. It’s a brand new . . . it’s 
brand new software that we’ve sort of bootstrapped or 
greenfielded, that we’ve built from the ground up, and you’re 
going to have these bugs. And I think we would even accept 
that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we’ve seen just more than a few bugs with the system. And 
we’ve seen some fundamental flaws with the system and I think 
even the government is recognizing that there are fundamental 
flaws with the system, and therefore we have before us Bill 32. 
 
You know, the minister in his second reading speech, he 
pointed out that the changes to The Land Surveys Act, part of 
which changes the Act by authorizing the controller of surveys 
to refund fees in whole or in part as to allow on-line searches of 
plans, to access plans that were formally maintained by the 
chief surveyor’s office. Those are some of the . . . some of the 
changes that we’re talking about here in this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 

And in the minister’s second reading speech, as well, he went 
on to indicate, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll . . . I’ll just paraphrase 
because certainly I don’t need to repeat what the minister said, 
but he . . . he basically admits, Mr. Speaker, that the proposed 
amendments also provide other minor enhancements to the Act. 
 
Now they highlight the need for these enhancements, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of the . . . I believe anyway what the 
minister is getting to is they’ve rolled this system out and 
there’s clearly some major problems with it and now we’re 
asked here, in the legislature, to clean it up. 
 
Well I believe we were sitting in this Legislative Assembly 
when the rollout in Moose Jaw occurred last summer and I’m 
not sure why we would be waiting until now to start proceeding 
with those changes, Mr. Speaker, so that we wouldn’t have put 
both the legal community and just . . . and those people who 
simply wanted to do their land transactions, what we . . . 
through what we put them through last summer. 
 
I think you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, that . . . maybe this was 
shortly after the session wrapped up, a lady in Moose Jaw 
highlighted the fact that she was waiting very patiently for some 
considerable period of time for her mortgage transaction to go 
through, to be approved by ISC. And ISC has always claimed 
that it be a 24- to 48-hour turnaround and it was weeks this lady 
was waiting and she couldn’t get title to her new home. And I 
think in her case she was forced to pay some sort of rent until 
the transaction could go through. 
 
Now that could be one of the bugs that the government 
characterizes as normal and sort of something you’d might 
expect from a brand new system. But you know, there are more 
stories like that than there should be for these just to be bugs 
and we’ve certainly been alerted to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, the Bill doesn’t speak to all of those problems 
which certainly bears out the concern that we continue to have. 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of members 
on this side of the House that want to speak to Bill 32 and I’m 
sure they’ll want to speak to Bill 33. So that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, at this time, I would move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill 32. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 33 — The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Much the same 
comments here for this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill 33, the 
amendment of The Land Titles Act. 
 
You know, and again if we go through the comments from the 
minister at the time of the second reading speech, he himself 
notes here — and I’m going to quote very quickly here, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s already in Hansard — but he notes that 
they’re going to provide for in this, in this amendment: 
 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

. . . clear definitions for each new parcel of land after a new 
plan has been approved. 

 
Again that’s a pretty fundamental change that you’d think the 
government would have made properly and effectively prior to 
the rollout of this system. One of the . . . He goes on to say, and 
one of the key amendments . . . He goes on to say: 
 

In addition, some housekeeping amendments have been 
identified internally that will make the legislation more 
precise, such as a provision clarifying that the land titles 
registry includes its data as well as its documents; (and) 
provisions to allow corrections to a title to be properly 
recorded against the title and maintained as a permanent 
record . . . 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, these are some seemingly pretty 
fundamental changes that we’re being asked to make now in the 
legislature, well long after the system has been rolled out and 
forced onto the people in the Moose Jaw district, into the 
Regina district, I believe the Saskatoon district, as well as, Mr. 
Speaker, the Humboldt district which is next. 
 
And you know we continue to hear concerns about the rollout. 
So we’re playing catch-up here in the legislature today, Mr. 
Speaker, in this session, trying to fix the holes in their ISC plan, 
well after the people, the legal community, people that want to 
do land transactions, have had to put up with the holes 
themselves, to put up with the failings themselves. 
 
And now we understand that in the Prince Albert district the 
government has chosen one of the busiest times in the land titles 
season, if you will, to go ahead and automate the system there 
in the Prince Albert district. 
 
And we understand — and if we’re not correct here, we hope 
the government will clarify this — but the legal community in 
the Prince Albert area understands that the land titles office will 
now effectively be closed for up to four weeks. Right in the 
middle of the land titles season. 
 
They have asked already in a letter that we received, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ve asked why . . . they asked the rhetorical 
question, why wouldn’t the government wait, if it involved 
shutting down the land titles office there, the process that they 
rely on, why wouldn’t they have waited until the winter, for 
example, when the transactions are fewer? Or, more to the 
point, why wouldn’t they have done it in the winter? 
 
The truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, there just seems to be 
mistake after mistake after poor judgment after poor judgment 
on the whole automation of the land titles system by this 
particular government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the concerns that people have 
with the new system is how they do treat multiple parcels 
within one transaction. And it looks like at least the government 
half realizes — half realizes — they have this problem. And so 
they’ve introduced this Bill — actually reintroduced the Bill, 
because we had it last session and they didn’t get it quite right 
then and now we’re doing it again here in the legislature today. 
 
So as I say though, most of the concerns that people have with 

this system, especially in rural Saskatchewan, is the treatment 
of this system, is the treatment of the new land titles system of 
specifically rural, and even more specifically agricultural 
transactions, that involve multiple parcels in one particular 
transaction. 
 
There are other significant concerns that have been raised, 
including the fees, Mr. Speaker, that the industry and that 
landowners are looking at. Again, a lot of the concern comes 
from the rural area — even rural communities, small urbans if 
you will, where many of the lots of course are non-conforming. 
Many of the lots in any one given parcel, or any one given yard, 
shall we say, Mr. Speaker, there could be four or five lots 
because as you will know, Mr. Speaker, in those smaller centres 
many of the lots are non-conforming. So one particular 
homeowner may have a home on a 25-foot front lot, but have 
three or four other 25-foot lots to form his yard. 
 
And the problem is with the system is they seemingly didn’t 
anticipate that, if you can believe it. Automating land titles in a 
very rural province such as Saskatchewan, you would think that 
the government would ensure that there would be a great 
sensitivity to the realities that exist in rural Saskatchewan — 
both with respect to residential lots as well as agricultural 
purchases. 
 
You know the other concern that we raised in the legislature is 
as a result of their treatment of these multiple parcel yards, for 
example, it also has an impact on industry. And this 
government claims to be a friend of the energy sector, but again 
you would never know it by how they have gone ahead and 
automated land titles in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we introduced in this legislature an alert that was sent out 
by a Calgary based law firm to its clients that operate and have 
investments in the province of Saskatchewan. And it has to do 
with the new land titles system. And I quote from this, Mr. 
Speaker. They advise their clients in this alert and update: 
 

There are significant increases in registration costs, in 
converted LRDs that must be considered (in these) in 
(your) transactions. In a midsize (southeast) Saskatchewan 
transaction involving a modest number of surface and 
mineral caveats, expect registration fees to increase from 
hundreds to thousands of dollars. 

 
Well that certainly isn’t another . . . isn’t an incentive for those 
companies to continue to operate and be active in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’ve asked that question of the minister earlier this session 
if he would sit down with the energy sector and try to solve 
that. And we don’t have an answer to that yet, Mr. Speaker, but 
we hope that we will. We hope that we will. Especially those of 
us that represent the energy sector in our constituencies. 
 
This is an important, this is an important issue, because, Mr. 
Speaker, what we don’t need, what we don’t need are any more 
barriers for investment in the province of Saskatchewan by the 
energy sector. We have enough of them as it is. And they ought 
to be doing whatever they can with this . . . with the information 
. . . with the automation of the land titles to ensure that doesn’t 
happen. 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

 

Now there are several members that wish to speak to this Bill. 
And I know they are going to have those concerns. And we’re 
going to ask questions, continue to ask questions about whether 
or not these Bills represent the government fixing some 
significant problems, very significant problems with the LAND 
project in the province of Saskatchewan. We are not certain, 
Mr. Speaker, that that’s the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the hon. 
member for Regina South just chirps from his seat about why 
would . . . why we would ask questions about Information 
Services Corporation. Well we would ask questions of 
Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker, because this 
government and that member promised the people of 
Saskatchewan an automated land titles system that would cost 
the taxpayers 20 to $30 million. 
 
And when the smoke cleared and when the NDP got through 
with their usual mismanagement and when they got through 
with adding yet another member to the family of Crown 
corporations, the cost wasn’t 20 million, it wasn’t 30 million, it 
wasn’t 40 million or even 50 million. The cost today is $60 
million and rising. In fact they got another credit limit on the 
taxpayers’ credit card, did ISC, from this government that will 
take it up to over $80 million if it’s all spent. 
 
That is exactly why we ask questions of ISC and why we will 
continue to ask questions of ISC of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I’m grateful for the member for Regina South for letting us 
clarify why we would ask those questions. And at this point, 
because other members wish to speak to it, I’d move 
adjournment of the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR12) 
 
The Chair: — This is the fifth time for a total of five hours that 
this has been before the committee. And I would invite the 
Minister of Finance . . . pardon me, the Minister of Northern 
Affairs to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m not as handsome as the Minister of Finance but I’m the 
Minister of Northern Affairs so I’ll just correct that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re a better hockey player. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Better hockey player though, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I just wanted to point out . . . I’d like to introduce my officials. 
To my immediate left we have Alan Parkinson who’s our 

deputy minister. Directly behind Alan, more to my left in the 
back, we have Cheryl Stecyk who’s a business manager. And 
directly behind me we have Dean Desjarlais, acting director of 
the Northern Development Fund administration. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Mr. Minister, welcome to your officials this 
afternoon. And I want to thank you for giving us the 
opportunity for an hour and a half of your time. I know your 
officials have many irons in the fire and it’s a pleasure to be 
able to get this amount of time to go over the many subject 
areas that we need to go through, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I think it’s appropriate that we get some appropriate amount 
of time today. And maybe we can get some more, a little more 
time in early July to be able to finish things up, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, four weeks ago when you and your officials were 
here in Committee of Finance, we wound up the day discussing 
the issue of monies on the table brought forth by the federal 
government to enhance forest initiatives, forestry initiatives in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We received certainly, and you sent a letter to the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood outlining provincial initiatives that 
are going on in northern Saskatchewan, but you still did not get 
to at that point, dated May 29, give us any indication as to the 
monies on the table that we have heard of on this side of the 
House, Mr. Minister, some $45 million — $15 million a year 
for three years — a project that should have already been 
ongoing. 
 
And I’m wondering if you have any further update on the 
availability of those monies and what kind of initiatives are 
taking place for forestry initiatives in northern Saskatchewan in 
regards to this $45 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would ask that member for clarification on the $45 million 
that he mentioned — if this is related to training or if this is part 
of the investment. 
 
I would point out that forestry as a whole is something that we 
have been putting a lot of effort into. And most recently we’ve 
announced a partnership that spoke about investment into the 
OSB (oriented strand board) mill in Meadow Lake. And we’re 
talking about the Beauval saw mill; we’re talking about the 
Buffalo Narrows post treatment plant; we also speak about the 
Peter Ballantyne Band — like we’re talking many more 
millions of dollars at stake here. 
 
But the $45 million in connection with the federal government, 
I’m just trying to get clarification as to what you understood 
that money to represent and what it was supposed to mean. 
Because we don’t have any $45 million figure from the federal 
government in any of our books or records. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, to the minister, certainly we have received some 
understanding that there was monies that could be accessed 
from the federal government for forestry initiatives by First 
Nation peoples in northern Saskatchewan. 
 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Maybe it might be more appropriate, rather than to continue to 
question you on this at this time, we could bring this up the next 
time that you and your officials are back. It will give you an 
opportunity to meet with federal officials to try and to find out 
just where this program is at in regards to this issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, continuing on this same line in the area of forestry 
development in northern Saskatchewan, we certainly 
understand on this side of the House the relevance and the 
importance of expanding forestry initiatives in northern 
Saskatchewan. We also have a clear understanding that at this 
time of course the bulk of Saskatchewan’s forest products are 
sold into the United States of America. 
 
They have some trade distortion tariffs that they have on our 
products at this time. But we also understand that, you know, as 
markets shift in North America — and of course on this side of 
the House we also understand, Mr. Minister, that the American 
economy is starting on an upswing; the economy across Canada 
is also on an upswing — that the prices in the future for forest 
products are certainly going to move upward which will eat up 
in an appropriate manner the trade distorting tariffs that the 
American forest industry has lobbied for and managed to 
succeed getting placed on Canadian forest products. 
 
So I’m wondering then, in your initiatives in northern 
Saskatchewan for forestry development, if you can help the 
members of the House today, Mr. Minister, explain to us what 
kind of initiatives are taking place in the forestry sector that the 
Department of Northern Affairs is involved in to help 
encourage new initiatives in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I think that’s a very good question. 
What I’ll do, Mr. Chairman, just to — and I’ll try and be as 
brief as I can here — but to basically explain the training 
comment or good training question that you asked about. 
 
First of all, forestry and training initiatives are led by the 
forestry training subcommittee (FTSC) of the Northern Labour 
Market Committee. It includes industry representatives, First 
Nations and Métis interests, as well as post-secondary 
organizations and other stakeholders. So this forestry training 
subcommittee supports both formal academic programs and 
on-the-job training. 
 
And a year ago, June 2001, this subcommittee formalized a 
forest sector memorandum of understanding. This MOU was to 
address human resources planning and to secure stakeholder 
support for forestry training initiatives. The MOU is modelled 
after the multi-party training program plan in the mineral sector, 
whereby responsibilities and funding are shared between the 
various stakeholders, including the province. 
 
And the efforts of the forestry subcommittee are guided by two 
critical elements: partner contributions, both financial and in 
kind; and the support training, as long as the training is being 
directly linked to employment in the forestry sector. 
 
The province, through the Department of Learning, provides 
$859,000 to the forestry subcommittee. These funds, combined 
with other financial and in-kind contributions, are expected to 
assist in delivering approximately $3.5 million of training in 
2002-2003 to about 230 people. This is similar to 2001 and 

2002 activities. 
 
Over 2001 and 2002 academic years, approximately 500 
participants have been involved in forestry training and the total 
training value is about $6 million. And for the participants of 
last year’s academic year, 83 per cent were Aboriginal people 
which is First Nations and Métis or non-status. And participants 
were from throughout the commercial forest region with over 
80 per cent from the northern administration district, NAD 
(northern administrative district) line. And this certainly goes 
on for quite a bit but clearly I think last year that . . . this year is 
about $3.5 million and that is directly associated to some of the 
training plans that we have. 
 
At this stage of the game as well, in terms of forestry initiative, 
we have a number of issues we’re working towards in terms of 
training. We train, you know, people to . . . how to build roads, 
silviculture, harvesting. We’re trying to get many more 
businesses of course moving in this direction. We’re working 
with many of the First Nations and Métis communities. A lot of 
the Aboriginal people are also part of the ownership structure, 
as you are aware. So there is an exciting opportunity for us to 
build on forestry. 
 
I’m very familiar with the northwest part of the province that 
talks about having Buffalo Narrows and La Loche now become 
part of the Northwest Communities. Eventually what we hope 
to see happen is an FMA (forest management agreement) 
forming part of the base of the operations with the communities 
of Green Lake, Pinehouse, Patuanak, Beauval, La Loche, 
Buffalo Narrows, all work in tandem and working together to 
develop the forestry sector. 
 
So Northern Affairs has been very actively involved with trying 
to develop that forestry file. Again I could be corrected on this 
but I believe we have well over 8 million acres of land that we 
are going to be dedicating to these communities to form their 
FMA. 
 
And as we speak, the Northwest Communities Wood Products 
is the company that’s representing all these communities’ 
interests. And Northern Affairs works with the Northwest 
Communities. We work with trying to provide them with as 
much support as possible. They’re partners in this . . . in the 
larger projects, for example the OSB project, the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council. They have 13 years of experience, they have 
technicians, they have an office staff, they have revenues from 
their saw mill, and they have the capacity to certainly be a very 
valuable partner in all these forestry initiative that we speak 
about. 
 
So the Northwest Communities are beginning. They’re starting. 
So La Loche and Buffalo Narrows and all the communities that 
we spoke about, in their initial start-up phases, there’s a lot of 
work that needs to be done. You’ve got to get a board of 
directors established. You’ve got to travel to meetings. You 
need legal counsel. You need business plans. You need some 
staff members. You need to make sure that, you know, you 
have some ongoing consultation with the parent company and, 
in this instance for example, Tolko is one of the senior partners 
in OSB and they got to have those talks. 
 
(15:45) 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

 

So it is a lot of work that is being undertaken. They have a lot 
of need. And this is certainly where Northern Affairs in the 
province is trying to help. 
 
So clearly, I think, in one hand you have some very solid 
partners like Peter Ballantyne and the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council. But you also have some junior partners, if you will, in 
this whole exercise of trying to come on stream. And the intent 
is not to make them junior partners but they’re junior in the 
sense that they’re just starting off. They will be equal partners 
eventually, but this capacity building phase that they’re in 
certainly requires some support and certainly requires a lot of 
dedication of time and staff and effort to make sure that they’re 
well positioned to take part of this opportunity. 
 
Now because they’re well positioned, we tell a lot of folks some 
of the challenges we have in terms of accessing the American 
market is they have these softwood duty taxes that are attached 
to the price of lumber now coming from Canada going into the 
States. 
 
And it’s kind of a tricky act because we don’t . . . we, as you 
know, that’s a fairly big market for softwood. The American 
economy needs our softwood. We have better products, in my 
opinion. We have better wood. And over the years, many 
Saskatchewan-based companies have been able to sell that 
wood to the States, and despite some of the levies, they still 
need our wood and still demand our wood. 
 
So over the years we’ve built up a client base and we’ve had 
that kind of, you know, relationship with some of the American 
consumers. 
 
Now obviously this tariff that they put on recently is very 
disappointing in the sense that we don’t know where this is 
coming from. The relationship has been good. The product has 
been good. The service has been good. The prices have been 
fair. And then, bang, you get this softwood trade dispute that is 
really putting a lot of people, you know, in some very tough 
positions. 
 
Well as time goes on, as you know, we’ve tried the negotiated 
route with the American folks and they simply didn’t feel that 
we’re doing anything to try and address their concerns. This is 
obviously a trade issue. So that was the first track that we tried 
to pursue on in terms of trying to get some resolution to 
withdraw that unfair export tax. 
 
And of course the next track, of course, is going to the Word 
Trade Organization to try and appeal that through their court 
system. 
 
So I think that the WTO (World Trade Organization) is where 
we’re going to continue fighting this whole unfair trade law, 
and we’ll be certainly trying to make sure that we protect 
Saskatchewan’s interests and especially make the northwest 
communities aware that we’re fighting for their interests as 
well. 
 
So I imagine, Mr. Chairman, I could go for a number of hours 
here, but I want to make sure that we walk before we learn to 
run on some of these issues. 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, to the minister, and certainly on this side of the 
House, Mr. Minister, we recognize clearly the effects of the 
trade distortion tariffs that the Americans have put on, the effect 
it’s having on the Saskatchewan softwood lumber industry. But 
equally important, the . . . of equal importance, Mr. Minister, is 
that the effect it’s having on the American consumer because 
they’re the ones that are going to be forced to eventually have to 
pay for that. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you mentioned — and it’s certainly a 
company that I am quite familiar with — the Northwest 
Community Wood Products Limited. You mentioned that the 
northern communities of Buffalo Narrows and La Loche are not 
part of that limited company now. And you spoke that your 
department is working diligently to have them as part of the big 
picture, that there’s approximately 8 million acres of forest 
management area there that you’d like the northwest 
communities to be able to access and to make it . . . take 
advantage of as they work towards increasing economic 
development in that area, in the northwest part of the province, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Is that then, to my understanding — I need to get a clear 
understanding of this, on this side of the House, Mr. Minister — 
is that the FMA, the forest management agreement, is going to 
be contingent upon communities being a part of the Northwest 
Community Wood Products Limited; or is there going to be 
opportunities for communities to have their own FMAs, Mr. 
Minister, and to be able to create economic development for 
their own communities, through their own initiatives, through 
their own ability for . . . to develop capacity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
What I’d point out is that we have made a conscious effort of 
trying to make sure that we get as many communities involved 
with this whole process as possible, and giving the economies 
of scale. If you’re to certainly have a larger area in which you 
could manage, a large area in which you could harvest, and a 
larger area in which you can plan, that would make the whole 
notion of having a very viable forestry industry for all the 
communities within that area as being a sound manner in which 
to proceed with the forestry strategy. 
 
I would point out that it’s very clear that many communities 
will say, well give us our own little allocation. And it’s much 
better to manage one FMA as opposed to 10 little ones, because 
there’s got to be exchange of wood, there’s got to be exchange 
of best practices, and it’s much . . . probably wiser that we have 
the communities become a partnership in a larger FMA. 
 
And I think that’s the direction that the people wanted to go as 
well. It’s not something that we forced upon them, but it’s 
something that we spoke to them about in terms of the value. 
And this is kind of basically the thought behind making sure 
that if we are going forward with a forestry project, that the 
larger the land mass, the better and more viable your forestry 
opportunity and planning will be. And that certainly makes a lot 
of sense. 
 
What we’ve also done is that we’ve had other contractors that 
were working out in the field prior to this new forestry strategy. 
Well we have begun to address their issues as well. Because it 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

didn’t make any sense putting one business . . . or putting 
somebody out of business, you know, to establish another 
business. 
 
So we’ve been working with the contractors. We’re still not 
completely done with working with a number of them to make 
sure that they are part of the forestry industry build out. And our 
logic there is right now you’re harvesting X amount of cubic 
metres; perhaps you can find a market for your wood that gives 
you a better return for your harvesting, but we also want to see 
three or four other people from your home community also do 
harvesting. 
 
One of the things we’ve been working with the Northwest 
Communities is to also ensure that they look to the private 
sector to make sure that they engage in a small business, folks 
that are able to, not only manage your forest but to harvest, and 
truck, and so on and so forth. So I think the Northwest 
Community appreciates that the role of the private sector, so 
they’re engaging them as well as we begin to have this forestry 
build out, and we begin the process of capacity, and eventually 
working our way to an FMA. 
 
I think it provides great opportunity. So while there is some 
merit in small community allocations, we and certainly when I 
say we, I’m talking about the northern communities, feel that 
it’s wiser to have a large area with more wood to manage as 
opposed to 10 smaller FMAs. And certainly I think in the long 
run certainly the people of the North will prove that this was the 
best way to go. 
 
Thanks. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, to the minister, certainly you spoke about the 
advantages to having larger scale operations where all the 
communities would be better off if they performed under one 
organization. The entire 8 million acres then would be 
harvested in a prudent manner. Everyone then would not be just 
operating next to their own little community. 
 
But obviously, Mr. Minister, there must be some problems with 
that theory because you haven’t got all the communities buying 
into it. And I don’t think in northern Saskatchewan we can 
afford to wait. 
 
What if La Loche and Buffalo Narrows continue to negotiate 
for the next three years? Unemployment levels in La Loche 
cannot remain at 90 per cent while we continue to negotiate. In 
the meantime, there’s lost opportunities. 
 
A couple of weeks ago, Mr. Minister, I spoke about an 
opportunity that was going on in northern Saskatchewan that 
was lost, where a small operator was taking out birch, turning it 
into hardwood flooring. That opportunity was taken away from 
him in order to accommodate this new initiative. 
 
I think when we lose something to create something new we 
don’t gain anything. All we’re doing is shuffling the deck 
around. So, Mr. Minister, I think we need to move at a much 
quicker pace than what we’re moving at. 
 
This initiative was first announced prior to the 1999 election. 

This is 2002 and you spoke earlier about, you know, we still 
need to work towards creating a board of directors. Well in 
three years you haven’t got a board of directors yet. Where do 
we go from here? If it takes you three years to get a board of 
directors, it’s going to take you 30 years to get a program in 
place. 
 
And certainly on this side of the House we don’t want to be 
having just meetings. This doesn’t create economic 
employment in the North. Certainly it may help out a few 
people a little bit, but the fact of the matter is, is that there’s a 
lot more people involved than that, that need to be addressed. 
And we’re hoping that you can move on this issue a lot quicker 
than that. 
 
I see also in your letter to the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood you spoke about the Peter Ballantyne 
Cree Nation and that they’re working towards some opportunity 
on the northeast side of the province. And certainly there’s 
some challenges in that area with infrastructure that’s going to 
be necessary for the expansion of economic development in the 
forestry area. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, do . . . is there a clear forest 
management agreement now in place for the Peter Ballantyne 
Cree Nation and does it allow them the freedom then to simply 
start operating business and get into forestry operations, or what 
stage is that at now, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What I think is very important is that 
certainly from our perspective we have a lot of confidence and 
we have a lot of proven success in forestry. 
 
And earlier this week I understand . . . or earlier this month, 
people spoke to the opposition about a $800 million 
development in forestry. And that’s a fairly aggressive agenda. 
It’s a very proud record. And I think the area that you 
particularly come from, the Big River area, we’re seeing the 
forest economy move. We’re seeing that people are making a 
great amount of progress and certainly profit. And profit is a 
good word. 
 
And we certainly want to undertake that effort and make sure it 
happens further north as well. Because while Big River is 
clearly in northern Saskatchewan, La Loche and Buffalo 
Narrows are further north. So we want them to be part of that 
economy; we want them to be part of the $800 million success 
story that we often talk about. 
 
And on this side of the House, we’re going to make sure that we 
incorporate the Aboriginal people in every sector, in every 
industry, in every economic plan that we as a government have. 
Unlike that side, where constantly and time after time, the 
northern and the Aboriginal people have been excluded from 
being part of the resource economy of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now on this side, we have said forestry is just the beachhead, it 
is just the beachhead to get the communities together, to get the 
capacity moving, and to build on bigger and bolder things. We 
want to expand, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, into outfitting. 
 
And when your provincial cousins were in power, the Tories in 
the ’80s, there was not one allocation in the North given to 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

 

northern Aboriginal people when it come to outfitting. And 
today now we’re try to get outfitting done for northern 
Aboriginal people, and you know what we’re told? Sorry, Grant 
Devine and company gave away all of the outfitting allocations 
to non-northern people. And we have been trying to fix up that 
mess since day one. 
 
And I can tell you that work has been very thorough, that has 
been very thorough in the sense that you tried to remove 
opportunity from the northern people when it comes to 
outfitting. You have tried to remove opportunities from the 
northern people when it comes to commercial fishing. You have 
tried to remove opportunities from people when it comes to 
forestry. You have tried to remove from the northern Aboriginal 
people when it comes to tourism. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Well I say shame on you. And I say today on this side of the 
House, we are going to build that economy that’s going to 
involve northern Aboriginal people, not like . . . unlike that 
party on that side of the House, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I would highly suggest, I would highly suggest in the 
future that if you’re going to make charges against this 
government, turn around and look at your track record. It is not 
impressive. There’s a big, fat F for effort in trying to make sure 
the northern people are part of the economy. You enjoy a great 
economy in Big River; northern people want that economy as 
well. 
 
So I’d be very careful, Mr. Chairman, when you start talking 
about northern people and not trying to support northern people. 
It is on this side of the House and certainly Northern Affairs 
and many other departments are working very hard to make 
sure that northern Aboriginal people are part of that economy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll stand on our record any day compared 
to yours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I would advise all hon. members 
that in Committee of Finance and in Committee of the Whole, 
there’s general lessening of the rules of putting it to the Chair 
and through the Chair because the goal is to get things done. 
But if it gets to the point where it is actually hindering 
achieving the work, then I would insist that the comments be 
directed to the Chair and through the Chair. But I hope that 
won’t be necessary. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister. I 
believe, Mr. Minister, I was speaking about the arrangement, 
the forest management agreement you have with the Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. And I’m not sure what the tourism 
harangue had to do with that. In fact it has nothing to do with it, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And certainly you have been in government since 1991 and 
there has been absolutely nothing in this province, Mr. Minister, 
to prevent you, to prevent this government, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, from having more tourism licences in northern 
Saskatchewan. Instead, they’re going to blame the days of 
Grant Devine. 

But I didn’t see any initiatives from this government. And they 
certainly could have stepped forward, Mr. Chair, and opened up 
tourism in northern Saskatchewan. But instead they blame 
Grant Devine for their lack of initiative. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, I want the minister to answer the 
question that I brought forward the first time. How is the forest 
management agreement going with the Peter Ballantyne Cree 
Nation? And what kind of initiatives is the Peter Ballantyne 
Cree Nation taking at this time through the encouragement of 
the Department of Northern Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
would point out that we work very closely with SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). And 
SERM has all the information on all the activities to date when 
it comes to where Peter Ballantyne is. 
 
And certainly as Minister of Northern Affairs, we’re intimately 
involved. But the allocation process, the planning process, and 
certainly the FMA process is clearly within SERM. And SERM 
is now, of course, the lead in terms of making sure that the 
objective of government’s are followed when it comes to the 
sustainability of forestry. And certainly, as I mention out in my 
opening comments, is they are intimately involved with 
allocations. And I would ask the member to look at possibly 
deferring that question to SERM estimates when they’re up 
next. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Chair. I 
want to move on to the fishing sector of northern Saskatchewan. 
Certainly we’re aware on this side of the House, Mr. Minister, 
that in the fishing industry that the Department of Northern 
Affairs has some involvement with allotments for the different 
lakes in northern Saskatchewan, how much is to be harvested, 
and who gets those opportunities. 
 
And I wonder to begin with in this sector, Mr. Minister, if we 
could just get you to give an overview of commercial fishing in 
northern Saskatchewan and some rough details, Mr. Minister, of 
the Department of Northern Affairs’ involvement in the 
commercial fishing sector of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
One of the reasons why we’re trying to have a industry build 
out in commercial fishing is to make sure we do two things. 
 
Number one is you want to be able to respect the traditional 
business opportunities that the northerners associate themselves 
with. And commercial fishing, as you know, is one of the 
industry that people have been doing for many, many years and 
they’ve been working the Freshwater Fish Marketing 
Corporation for many years. And they’ve been saying, we are 
stubbornly and steadfastly going to believe in our industry. 
 
So as a province we should not be fighting them; we should be 
supporting them. So clearly it is a respect for the commercial 
fishing industry that we’re trying to achieve. 
 
And secondly, as the mining sector will tell you, the mining 
sector themselves have reached a capacity to create employment 
opportunities for northern Saskatchewan people. They’ve 
reached a plateau, if you will, for awarding contracts to northern 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

contractors. 
 
So the mining sector themselves have asked us, as a province, 
we can do our part but what we’d like you to do as a province is 
to work with northern people to make sure there’s other 
corresponding activity in other sectors of northern 
Saskatchewan to lessen the pressure on the mining sector so the 
mining sector can do what they do well and begin to mine. 
 
So one of the things we’re trying to do is look at the tourism 
opportunity, as I mentioned. And the commercial fishing 
industry is one industry that we’re trying to build from a $4 
million annual industry to an $8 million annual industry. We’re 
trying to double the industry and what that means is not trying 
to double the harvest. We’re trying to double the amount of 
lakes that we’re able to access so that we can have that harvest 
level to really stimulate some of the northern economies and 
some of the northern commercial fishing opportunity. 
 
Last year, for example, Northern Affairs spent 
700,000-plus-dollars on trying to modernize and trying to repair 
and expand lakeside facilities for packing fish. And more 
recently, they have been looking at a number of options which 
include fish processing here in Saskatchewan. We’ve also 
looked at opportunity to work through Freshwater Fish 
Marketing Corporation to have a special export dealer’s licence 
so we’re able to market some of our fish. 
 
So these are some of the things that are being looked at and 
being considered when it comes to commercial fishing. And 
there has been a great amount of work being undertaken by a 
great number of people to make sure that this commercial 
fishing industry is part and parcel of our northern development 
strategy. 
 
And I’d point out as well that one of the most important things 
is that there isn’t conflict between the sport fishing industry and 
there’s not conflict with the outfitting association. I think these 
two organizations represent the two other interests when it 
comes to fishing in northern Saskatchewan. They recognize that 
the commercial fishing industry is very valuable. I think they 
recognize that it’s not going to go away. I think they got to have 
a coexistence, so they’ve accepted commercial fishing as a very 
viable part of our economy. And naturally, many more people 
will want to see commercial fishers begin to evolve into sport 
fishing opportunities. Well we certainly see the merit in that as 
well. 
 
What you don’t do is you don’t force things on people. You 
allow that transition to take its time and to take its direction. So 
that also is being fostered. 
 
So if you consider the lakeside facilities 700,000-plus, consider 
the fact that we’re protecting some of these lakes and deem 
them as commercial fishing lakes, you look at some of the 
opportunity we have working with Freshwater Fish Marketing 
Corporation, look at the 4 to $8 million expansion that we want 
to see happen — and the list kind of goes on as to what we 
think that the commercial fishing industry should do in order to 
make itself a very viable entity and a very valuable part of our 
economy. That work is continuing. 
 
And so again, this is clearly a response to create more jobs, 

more opportunities for northerners. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. I was glad that my colleague from 
Prince Albert brought up the questioning regarding commercial 
fishing. I understand that there’s two cities or towns that are 
looking at creating a commercial fishing plant. One is Prince 
Albert, and one is also La Ronge, and they’re both bidding for 
that same project. 
 
To date, Mr. Minister, what’s happening in regards to the 
commercial fishing plant that is going to be proposed in that 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for a very good 
question. And I would point out that Mr. Peterson and Mr. 
Morin are getting their birch allocations. They are going to be 
doing wonderfully well, that was the business that we’re 
speaking about. And that I think that we’ve had discussions 
with Mr. MacLeod of Buffalo who of course is trying to help 
these two gentlemen establish the business and has been very 
happily helpful to the two young gentlemen to make sure that 
they do get part of their forestry opportunity afforded to them. 
 
Now in commercial fishing what is paramount to me, as a 
minister, is to see the commercial fishing entity and the 
value-added process for the processing plant put more money in 
the commercial fisherman’s pocket. In fact, there’s three 
communities that are fighting for that fish processing plant — 
one other is Buffalo Narrows. Buffalo Narrows, La Ronge, and 
P.A. (Prince Albert) want the fish processing plant. 
 
And as a minister working very closely with the Economic 
Development minister to try and develop this opportunity, and 
people in Buffalo Narrows and La Ronge have said, we would 
like it here. And as the minister I said, well obviously as the 
Minister of Northern Affairs, I would like it north. 
 
And then what the fishermen’s co-operatives have told us is that 
please don’t jump in and interfere, the fishermen themselves 
will be figuring out this process on their own. We want to make 
sure that we look at the contract, we look at the business plan, 
we look at the whole economy as a scale argument, and see 
where we’re at when it comes down to deciding where this 
facility should go. 
 
And certainly they like to have the government’s opinion. And 
what I’ve said often in my travels is I’ve said well there’s . . . 
could be a merit in having three locations. Perhaps La Ronge 
could serve the east side of the province and make sure it’s a 
central place to get the fish, and to prepare the fish, and to fillet 
the fish to a certain standard. And perhaps Buffalo Narrows 
could do that on the west side of the province and acts as a 
central location to pull the fish together, to be able to fillet the 
fish, and to pack it in ice, and to sort the fish, and do a number 
of other things. And then perhaps collectively La Ronge and 
Buffalo Narrows could then send their fish out to P.A. for 
further processing and for distribution and for marketing. 
 
There’s a credible opportunity to do these things in a cohesive 
plan. But as a minister, of course I’d like these opportunities 
further north. I’d like every opportunity to be in the North. 
 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

 

But perhaps there is merit in the fishermen saying to us — the 
commercial fishermen — don’t interfere with our plan. 
Paramount to them, is putting more money in every commercial 
fisherman’s pocket, which is a good idea. 
 
If we can do the extras, Mr. Minister, we certainly will. If that’s 
your advice. And my advice is absolutely, do what you can for 
Buffalo Narrows because at one time Buffalo Narrows had 
three processing plants or filleting plants; perhaps we can have 
that entity back in place. La Ronge should take care of the east 
side. And much like the wild rice development, you do have 
collection points all over and that’s how you could have that 
balance. 
 
So there is no question, from my perspective, Buffalo Narrows 
and La Ronge being two areas that have expressed interest, they 
could play a very valuable role. They could create employment. 
But above all else, the result of any commercial fishing exercise 
will result in more money in the commercial fisherman’s 
pockets and that’s what this whole exercise is about. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Chair. I 
didn’t say that Buffalo Narrows was part of this three-plan 
operation for the simple reason Buffalo Narrows already has a 
fish plant in its town already. I thought it was just between 
Prince Albert and La Ronge. 
 
Now I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, when you were talking 
about that the northeast side, which is Buffalo Narrows on north 
— or pardon me — the northeast side is La Ronge, the 
northwest side would be Buffalo Narrows, getting into the 
commercial fishing operation, where would Prince Albert fall 
into line in regards to that? 
 
Now you mentioned that they could send that product down to 
Prince Albert and it could be diversed into different operations 
there and then packaged and sent out. Why can’t that operations 
be done right in the North as where they’re catching the fish 
and doing the processing already? Why does it have to come 
down to Prince Albert? Why is Prince Albert in the picture at 
all? Why can’t it be done in the North where it’s going to create 
jobs and wealth for the northern people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well as I mentioned before, it is the 
commercial fisherman’s co-operative that are doing this 
strategy up. They would not want the politicians to interfere. 
 
They have said, and as I’ve said, that they’re trying to put as 
many benefits in the North where they should belong. And as I 
mentioned, one of the things that the commercial fisherman 
have said is that perhaps there is merit in your argument, Mr. 
Minister, that more of these facilities should be north. But if we 
do a business plan that says yes, the facilities should be in the 
North, but the distribution centre, the marketing centre for the 
northern fish could be in P.A. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now that’s not up to me, nor is it up to the opposition to decide 
how the industry is going to look. It is up to the commercial 
fishermen. 
 

Now we can advise them, I could tell the commercial fishermen 
I would like to have all these facilities in the North, as I would. 
I’ve been very clearly stating that I would. But it is not up to me 
to interfere with the commercial fishermen’s activities. Nor is it 
up to me to interfere with their business plan. Nor is it up to me 
to interfere with their industry. 
 
We take their advice. We can certainly give them advice back. 
And we support them no matter what they do. 
 
Now as I mentioned, I would like unequivocally to state that I’d 
like more of these opportunities in the North. But I’m not going 
to interfere. Paramount to us is to put more money in the 
commercial fishermen’s pocket. That’s what this whole 
industry is all about; that’s what this whole exercise is about. 
 
Now if they decide to do exactly as I suggest, then of course I 
would look brilliant. But perhaps they’ll say no, Mr. Minister, 
we’re going to do this our way. And I would appeal to the 
opposition to allow the commercial fishermen’s co-op to design 
this thing and to figure out the best way to serve their industry 
because they know it better than all of us put together here. 
 
And one of the things that’s paramount to them is a better 
revenue base for their members, and I think all they ask in 
exchange of us is support and to not interfere. And that’s what 
we’re trying to do. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker. To 
the minister, you just made comments that you don’t want to 
interfere with the commercial fishing association in what they 
want to plan and do with the operation. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, if you go over to La Ronge and talk to 
La Ronge fishermen — the commercial fishermen — they are 
stating clearly that this should be in the North and that Prince 
Albert should have nothing to do with this operation. 
 
And the same focus is on Buffalo Narrows, and Buffalo 
Narrows already has an operation going where they do all the 
processing of the fish and then they package it and send it off to 
Winnipeg 
 
La Ronge can do the same thing, but if they’re going to do a 
one plant operation it should be in La Ronge where it’s, like I 
said, going to benefit the people from the North. 
 
I don’t think that Prince Albert should be involved in it 
whatsoever. And I find it ironic when you’re stating that the 
commercial fishermen are looking at where’s the best place to 
put it, well there is . . . or there isn’t, very many commercial 
fishermen from around Prince Albert. The base part of the 
commercial fishermen come from the North and La Ronge is a 
perfect area for the commercial fishermen’s plant — complete 
plant. 
 
So why is the minister second-guessing the fact that maybe 
Prince Albert should have a chance at this? Why not go with the 
fact that La Ronge is the ideal place for this commercial fishing 
and that’s where it should take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well what I would — thank you very 
much, Mr. Chairman — what I would again urge that member, 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

is to point out the fact that I believe that . . . Many times people 
ask me for advice and the advice I give is sound. But it may not 
be — I may be wrong many times, and there’s probably a 
million times I’m wrong. 
 
Now what’s very important here today is to not interfere with 
the process of the commercial fishing entities doing exactly 
what they think is right, to add value to their industry. Now 
that’s a fundamental . . . that is a fundamental point that I make. 
 
Now what I find ironic, what I find ironic, is on one hand we 
often hear members of the opposition say, don’t interfere with 
business, don’t interfere with business; government get out of 
business’s way. And then today talk about commercial fishing. 
And the interests in commercial fishing are saying to us, don’t 
interfere; we don’t want any interference; we want to be able to 
use our judgment and our plan to develop this industry. 
 
So as a minister I say fair enough, we won’t interfere. Now the 
opposition’s saying, oh hold it, let’s interfere, let’s go to La 
Ronge now. 
 
Now I’d like an explanation of the member why you would not 
interfere with Weyerhaeuser’s plan and why you’d want to 
provide advice to the commercial fishing industry. It’s kind of a 
conflicting signal here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I would point 
out that it’s confusing as to what the motives are. 
 
But I would say this, I would say this, is Buffalo Narrows does 
have a fish-packing plant. It’s not processing. They have a 
fish-packing plant where they pack fish for shipment off to 
Winnipeg. Now I have a very good idea for you. Why don’t we 
not just pack fish. Suppose we fillet that fish now in Buffalo 
Narrows and we sort that fish and we can value add as much as 
we can in Buffalo Narrows, and then we send it off to P.A. for 
marketing and distribution. That’s better than Winnipeg. 
 
And that money that we make extra, not only in saving the 
freight of having to ship all that raw product out, but value as 
much as we can, and then we go to P.A. and we distribute it 
there would make sense, you know, according to the business 
plan. And then that puts more money into the commercial 
fisherman’s pocket. So what is wrong with that picture? 
 
So I would point out again, I would point out, that that’s a very 
good idea that the commercial fisherman may implement. So 
that’s my point, is that you’re going to go to La Ronge and out 
of all the commercial fishermen out there . . . or perhaps 75 per 
cent of them are happy with the deal, perhaps 25 per cent are 
not. 
 
But I would suggest that you don’t approach the 25 per cent to 
create trouble for the other 75 per cent because that is clearly 
interference. Let the commercial fishing industry do what it 
does best — make the right decisions for their industry with 
their interests in mind and they not ask you to interfere with that 
process. As the minister we’re saying, we’re not. We’ll support 
you. We’ll support you. We’ll advise you. But at the end of the 
day, it’s your decision. 
 
And I think you will find that primary to them is putting more 
money into the commercial fishermen’s pocket and this is their 
way of doing it. Mr. Speaker, I think we should respect their 

wish. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Mr. Minister, you made comments regarding Weyerhaeuser. 
What’s Weyerhaeuser got to do with fishing? Weyerhaeuser’s 
with forestry, not with fishing. 
 
And in regards to fishing, Mr. Minister, the people of La Ronge 
are asking you to look at their proposal for a simple reason — 
that’s jobs for them in the North. Why can’t La Ronge do it on 
their own there without having to send it down to P.A., and then 
from P.A. send it to Winnipeg? Why can’t it all be done in La 
Ronge and then sent to wherever it’s got to go? But why does it 
have to be sent to P.A.? Or unless it’s the minister from P.A. 
that would like this. 
 
So that’s the question I’m asking you, Mr. Minister. The people 
up in the North are asking you to intervene and help them with 
this proposal because they want it. They don’t want the 
government to sit back and do like you guys constantly do — 
study and study and study it. Do something and get it set up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would 
point out one of the things that when I talked about 
Weyerhaeuser, I have said that Weyerhaeuser is forestry and 
you guys don’t interfere with Weyerhaeuser. You say business 
. . . let business do what they want to do. Weyerhaeuser, we 
don’t interfere with, you know, the Weyerhaeuser plants. That’s 
what you guys often say, get out of business’s way. 
 
Well we are working with business. So the same principle I’m 
saying today applies to commercial fishing. I would ask that 
opposition . . . You got a whole pile of advice. I would say to 
you today, as you do at Weyerhaeuser, don’t jump in there and 
interfere, don’t try and politicize the process because you’re 
confusing the people. And I’ve maintained all this time that the 
problem with the opposition is you guys vote right and you 
spend left, and you end up confusing a whole whack of people. 
 
And I would challenge that member today, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
would challenge that member today to give me the names of the 
people in La Ronge that he supposedly spoke to and asked for 
their political interference by the Sask Party. 
 
And all I will do, Mr. Speaker, is I will forward to the 
co-operative association, to the Commercial Fishermen’s 
Co-operative, and I would say to them, these guys have 
concerns, could you decide for us as to what you’d like to do to 
make sure this industry works. And that’s what we’re after, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, three individuals seated in your gallery. We have 
with us today Pete and Tracy Darmokid and their 18-month-old 
son, Cole. 
 
Pete and Tracy are originally from the Chelan/Porcupine Plain 
area and, in fact, they owned the Chelan Hotel for six years. 
They have since relocated to Minton and recently acquired the 
hotel that they are operating in Minton. 
 
So I would ask everyone to join with me and welcome Pete, 
Tracy, and Cole to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR12) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As I was saying, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 
think it’s very important that we recognize that the commercial 
fishing industry is a very valuable opportunity for northern 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 
Economic Development has been very helpful. He has not 
created any problems with the commercial fishing file. He 
understands the economics of having a sport fishing industry 
being very, very . . . a big part of our economy and perhaps a 
bigger part in the future. 
 
But I think the Minister of Economic Development also 
understands that the Aboriginal people have to make these 
choices on their own. They choose commercial fishing as one of 
the entities that they believe in and he has not in any way, 
shape, or form interfered. And I would point that’s very wise, 
Mr. Speaker, because $700,000 in trying to assist many of these 
lakeside facilities becoming better is not a study. It’s actual 
money spent. The Centenary Capital Fund was one of the areas 
that . . . One of the areas we spent that money on was to support 
the commercial fishing industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have also identified lakes out there that 
are deemed commercial fishing lakes. And what we’re trying to 
do there is to make sure that these lakes are recognized and 
protected as commercial fishing lakes. Now we don’t do that 
against the sport fishing industry. We do that in concert with 
them. So the commercial fishermen know if they don’t bother a 
lake . . . I’ll tell you one of the policies that we did change. 
 
When your cousins were in government, they had a policy and 
they were saying that if a lake is not commercially fished within 
two or three years, then that lake gets lost to commercial 
fishing. And the commercial fishermen would say to me, well 
that’s got to be the silliest idea in the world; the reason why we 
don’t fish a lake for two or three years is to allow the lake to 

rebuild — that’s why we leave it alone for three years. 
 
But then all of a sudden the Tory government comes up with 
rules like this that say, we’re taking it away from you guys 
because you’re not using it, we want to maximize our 
opportunities, so bring somebody in from Idaho or bring 
somebody in from Quebec and then they’ll have that lake. Well 
excuse me. And that’s what I’ve told, that’s what I’ve told 
many people out there is that you have worked hard against the 
commercial fishing industry. I give you good credit for that. 
 
But on this side of the House — and that includes the Minister 
of Economic Development — we are going to work hard to 
make sure that the northern Aboriginal people are part of every 
economy, of every resource industry, of every sector of that 
resource industry that they’re intimately involved. 
 
And not just as guides, Mr. Speaker, but as owners and people 
that can operate businesses and people that make decisions 
about FMAs, about forestry and so on, and about fishing. They 
can make that choice. We’re going to position them to do that. 
The success of that particular industry depends on how well 
they manage that, but the positioning is being done by this 
government in concert with their demands for fairness after all 
these years. 
 
So again, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think there’s been some good 
work being done. If it is going to be in La Ronge and if it’s 
going to be in Buffalo Narrows, so be it. But it’s the 
commercial fishermen’s decision. We can advise them as much 
as they want, but it’s their choice. 
 
And I think if you want to build an industry, you recognize their 
decision-making ability, and above all else you respect it and 
you don’t interfere with it. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s quite a 
rant. What I take from that, Mr. Minister, is that you’re looking 
for somebody from the United States to come up and invest in 
the commercial outfit. You’ve done it with ethanol and 
everything else. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made a point that some of the commercial 
fishermen don’t fish in some lakes to give the lake a rest. That 
brings up a lake that I’ve been presenting petitions on for some 
time and that Besnard Lake. Now that’s one of the commercial 
fishing lakes in the somewhat North that commercial fishing is 
taking place. 
 
Now the numbers of the fish in that lake have depleted 
drastically, and it’s not only just the commercial fishermen . . . 
or the sports fishermen that are complaining about the numbers 
of the fish in that lake; even the commercial fishermen 
themselves are complaining about the fishing in the lake. 
 
Now as you made a point, Mr. Minister, that the commercial 
fishermen sometimes leave the lakes for one, two, three years or 
whatever to let the population build up. Now there has been 
restrictions on the sport fishing aspect of that lake, but there 
hasn’t been on the commercial fishing aspect of it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, have you heard from people fishing on 
Besnard Lake or from the commercial fishermen regarding that 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

lake as to what precautions could be taken in regard to that lake 
to bring up the commercial fishing aspect of it and also give 
more benefits to the sport fishermen? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I would point out again, this is . . . SERM would be responsible 
for the fish allocation processes. I can’t make any comments as 
Minister of Northern Affairs. The SERM officials have all the 
information as to how they allocate lakes and how they deem 
the harvest of that lake as being the right, you know, the right 
levels and so on and so forth. So without the officials being here 
from SERM to be able to elaborate on what I think is 
happening, I would ask that you defer that question when 
SERM estimates are on. Kindly, of course. 
 
But I would point out that your seatmate sitting right next to 
you, the member from Saltcoats, gets up here and presents 
petitions on Lake of the Prairies where the same problem . . . 
But your associate thinks it’s that of the sport fishing, and says 
the First Nations don’t have any rights; they should listen. 
 
Once you give an allocation of fish to the First Nations — Well 
nobody gave the First Nations the right to fish. First Nations 
have always had that treaty right to fish and hunt for 
sustenance. And that’s — we got to be very careful there — and 
that’s why I warn you today, is be very careful when you 
choose between the commercial fishing industry and the sport 
fishing industry. These are both very powerful lobbies for the 
right to access that resource that everybody enjoys. 
 
And I’ll just ask that you, again, don’t interfere with the 
process. We have some very good commercial fishermen on file 
and the last thing you want to do is heighten tensions between 
the sport fishing industry and the commercial fishing industry 
as is witnessed in the Lake of the Prairies or, in your case, 
Besnard Lake. I think in the long run, if you engage them in the 
management, you respect their role, you’re patient with the 
process, you begin to build on that success, that you will see 
that the . . . many of the commercial fishermen, First Nations 
and Métis commercial fishermen, will indeed become part of 
the solution. If you try and push them off and you try and not 
recognize their rights to some of that lake, that’s when the 
problems erupt. 
 
So again, I don’t have all the allocation stats and all the 
allocation processes when it comes to fish. But I can tell you, 
make very certain that you incorporate all the needs and don’t 
try and alienate one particular group. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well I just wonder if 
the minister, seeing as he brought my constituency into this, Mr. 
Chair, would like to answer questions now on Lake of the 
Prairies or would he also like to answer those questions in 
SERM? Because he’s actually brought up this issue once again 
which we were going to ask the questions in SERM. If he 
would like we can ask them right now, whichever he prefers, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well that member was, the member 
was sitting there not more than two minutes ago when I said 
when the SERM estimates are there, we will answer the 

question on the allocation process. But as I mentioned before, 
the fundamental principle here, folks, is we would want to make 
sure we involve as many of the people involved in this whole 
process to make sure that their rights or their industry and their 
access is also part of the whole process. 
 
So I would ask the member from Saltcoats to defer his 
questions to SERM and then I’ll look, surely look forward to 
answering them then in the event that I still occupy that 
capacity in the acting ministerial role. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
maybe this is a question for SERM when the department comes 
up but you brought the point up about commercial fishing in 
regards to Besnard Lake. 
 
And the question I want to ask is the fact that sport fishermen 
have been cut back on their limits in that lake but yet the 
commercial fishing part of the lake hasn’t been. And that’s 
where the concerns are and that’s where the petitions are 
coming from in regards to the concerns on Besnard Lake. But 
we will revert back to Environment when that position comes 
up to ask questions there. 
 
One more question in regards to the commercial fishing and the 
whole idea of commercial fishing regarding the two northern 
states or cities of Buffalo Narrows and La Ronge. Will the 
minister stand today and say that he will look seriously at La 
Ronge or even go up to La Ronge and talk to the commercial 
fishermen in La Ronge? 
 
And there’s a number of commercial fishermen — he knows 
this better than I do — and if he doesn’t know the names I’m 
sure if he talks to his colleague, the previous minister for 
Northern Affairs, or even Harry Cook, the Chief from Kitsaki 
Reserve at La Ronge, they will give you names of the 
commercial fishermen that are looking at you taking a stand and 
getting the proposal for a fishing plant up at La Ronge 
established and up going in the immediate future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, again I point out that 
this is the problem with the opposition is they’re clearly 
confused. Every time they get up and put forward an opinion 
they contradict themselves the next minute, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a serious case of flip-flop once again. Not only did that 
member get up a minute ago and say, well the commercial 
fishermen are not cutting back on their harvest and yet the sport 
fishing are, and then he turns around and says why don’t you try 
and build it up and put it in the North. 
 
Well I wish, Mr. Speaker, we’d have some leadership from that 
side and decide whether you’re going to go to the dance or 
you’re not. The bottom line here is that if you want to support 
the commercial fishing industry the best way to do it is to make 
sure that you involve them and you don’t interfere and that you 
make sure that their abilities and their rights to exist under the 
economic front is certainly protected. 
 
And that’s what we’re trying to do on this side. We’re trying to 
develop that opportunity. 
 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

 

Now you mention, now you mention that the . . . the former 
minister of Northern Affairs. Well, Mr. Speaker, the former 
minister of Northern Affairs took over Northern Affairs when 
guess what, Mr. Speaker? They had, they had, 500 people 
working in the northern mines from the North, Mr. Speaker. 
And I believe when the Tories were in power, your provincial 
cousins, there was 500 people working in the northern mines 
and I think the contract, all the contracts for the North, was 20 
million bucks, Mr. Speaker — 20 million bucks. 
 
And now you look at it, Mr. Speaker, after 10 years of good, 
solid work and effort, now they have over 1,000 people 
working in many of these northern mines from northern 
Saskatchewan. And not only that, there’s 200-plus million 
dollars in contracts for northern people. 
 
So any day of the week I’ll put your record against the former 
minister’s record when you talk about northern Saskatchewan. 
So when you bring him into your debate, sir, I would ask, Mr. 
Chairman — sorry — I would ask that he not bring the minister 
of Northern Affairs into the debate because he has no way, no 
way, to compare their record to his. 
 
And we have done a tremendous amount of good for northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to continue doing 
a tremendous amount of good despite their opposition, despite 
their howls. 
 
So I would say to that member, make up your mind. Either 
you’re on . . . part of this effort or you’re not. Don’t try and 
confuse the issue. Don’t try and play politics. And above all 
else, don’t try and be an instant commercial fisherman for the 
sake of elections, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I am having difficulty hearing the 
speakers and the person doing the questions and the person 
doing the answers. I’m also having a hard time hearing myself. 
So if hon. members could please come to . . . Would hon. 
members on both sides of the House please come to order. 
We’ve got lots of work to do so . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. To the 
Minister of Northern Affairs, and certainly I can understand, 
Mr. Chair, why the minister got upset. It’s certainly in the past 
we’ve had lots of compliments for the former minister of 
Northern Affairs. And maybe sometime in the future we’ll be 
able to do the same for the present one. 
 
But just to wind up this area in the fishing, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, certainly on this side of the House we received a 
significant mixed message from the minister today. The 
minister on one hand said that he would like the decision 
around the fish-packing plant to be left in the hands of the 
people of northern Saskatchewan, and more specifically, the 
commercial fisherman. We applaud that effort. 
 
He also, quite clearly — very clearly, Mr. Chair of Committees 
— indicated that they would agree with their decision as long as 
they agreed with the minister. As long as they agreed with the 
minister, then he would agree with their decision. We’re not 
sure which minister, whether it’s the Minister of Northern 
Affairs or whether it’s the minister . . . one of the other 
ministers in the department who are going to be making that 

decision. As long as the commercial fishermen in northern 
Saskatchewan agree with the government, then everything will 
be just fine. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Chair, what will happen in the future, in the 
very near future, if the commercial fishermen disagree with the 
direction that this government wants to go in with the 
establishment of a fish-packing plant in Saskatchewan. 
 
In the wrapping up of this area of fishing and commercial 
fishing in northern Saskatchewan that the Department of 
Northern Affairs is involved in, one of the concerns that has 
been raised is that because you . . . and you’ve talked about it 
very clearly, Mr. Minister, that you want to double the amount 
of take in commercial fishing in northern Saskatchewan. When 
you do that, of course, there’s a price to pay. Fishing lakes will 
be depleted to some, to some degrees. 
 
What role does the Department of Northern Affairs play in the 
re-establishment of fish stocks in northern Saskatchewan when 
you talk about a plan to double the commercial fishing capacity 
in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again, as I pointed out, one of the 
things that Northern Affairs has done is they would work to the 
Centenary Capital Fund to try and make sure that some of the 
lakeside facilities that are throughout the North are upgraded 
and are able to serve the commercial fishermen better. 
 
We also work very closely with them. It takes a lot of staff time 
and travel to make sure that their issues are clearly worked on 
in terms of making sure that SERM is aware of some of their 
challenges. 
 
And when we said we were going to double the industry from a 
$4 million industry to an $8 million industry, that’s not an 
overnight allocation process. What you have to do is, to build 
capacity to harvest more fish, you have to open up more lakes. 
And what you don’t want to do is just harvest fish — you want 
to value-add. And thus you talk about the argument of the 
fish-processing plant. 
 
And I would point out that absolutely when the commercial 
fishermen come forth with a concept and they come forth with 
their idea as to how to make this commercial fishing facility 
work, this fish-processing plant work, and as a minister, I’m 
going to support them. I’m not going to work against them. I’ve 
said that time and time again. And of course, we want to 
encourage them to look at northern facilities as much as they 
can. But the final decision has to be theirs. And I’ve stated that 
about five or six times. 
 
So this clearly, through the process of protecting their industry, 
fixing up their lakeside facilities, working with SERM, 
identifying new lakes, not having silly policies of taking away 
lakes after three years of non-use of the commercial fishing 
industry as a reason to pull out that lake. 
 
So I think there’s been a lot of good effort being undertaken. 
And I would point out further that one of the fundamental 
problems, and I’ve often asked the opposition questions of this, 
and I would ask you in terms of a question is: is do you support 
Northern Affairs work with the commercial fishing industry? 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Mr. Minister, it’s certainly interesting that at this 
time of the day you’ve decided to take on the role of asking 
questions of this side of the House. We would suggest that you 
wait probably until . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. I would ask certain 
members on both sides of the House to please come to order 
and stay in order. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Certainly we’ll have to go back and start over 
again. It’s unfortunate that the members on the other side of the 
House weren’t paying attention, because certainly it’s important 
that the minister understands clearly that he’ll get ample 
opportunity to ask questions should he be re-elected after the 
next provincial election, which we’re anticipating in the very 
near future. 
 
Because certainly, Mr. Chair of Committees, there won’t be that 
many of them left over to ask questions. There’s an outside 
chance that the Minister of Northern Affairs might be back, and 
so we’ll give him ample opportunity to ask questions at that 
time. In the meantime, Mr. Chair of Committees, I’ll ask the 
questions and the minister can answer them. 
 
The question I asked was, and I’ll repeat it again, and I hope I 
don’t have to repeat it a third time. What role does the 
Department of Northern Affairs play in the re-establishment of 
fish stock in northern Saskatchewan to ensure that commercial 
fishing will remain viable for the decades in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as we mentioned 
time and time again, we have put $700,000 in lakeside facilities, 
as Northern Affairs has done, and we have worked very closely 
with SERM. We have afforded much time and many staff to 
making sure that we stay in collaboration and concert with the 
commercial fishing industry. 
 
So Northern Affairs clearly is the lead when it comes to the 
province of Saskatchewan to ensure that this industry’s 
concerns are being heard, and certainly are being met, and 
certainly as the finances permit, some of these issues being 
settled. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And I would point out that we don’t lead the industry but we 
lead industry’s activities within government. Industry is being 
led by the commercial fishing industry themselves. They have a 
co-operative. They have a very large support base. 
 
And I would point out today that again, yes, you have the right 
to ask questions and I have to give the answers — that’s fair 
enough. But in the scheme of things, again I ask a question of 
you now. And if you don’t give me an answer, what that clearly 
implies to me — and I would suggest to the commercial fishing 
industry — that you don’t have an answer or the answer you 
have is not going to be of any benefit to them so you might as 
well not give one. 
 
So the question that I have: you were very open and we’re very 
clear as to what we’ve done and what we support, so going back 

to the member of Saskatchewan Rivers, I would ask that 
member, do you support what Northern Affairs is doing to 
support the commercial fishing industry? Yes or no? Don’t be 
evasive; answer the question. Yes or no? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, to the Minister. I asked a very clear 
. . . I thought, I assumed, Mr. Chair, a very easy question for the 
minister. His original answer in the previous response was that 
they were going to open up more lakes and certainly that’s a 
good . . . I think that’s a very good idea that they’re talking 
about an expansion of the commercial fishing industry. 
 
Now what the minister is asking is he wants, he wants me for 
policy for the government. The government, Mr. Chair, has no 
policy in regards to commercial fishing in northern 
Saskatchewan, so now they’re coming to the opposition to seek 
policy so that they can go North and tell them this great policy 
that they have invented. Well, we’re going to disappoint the 
minister once again. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, to the minister. One of the pitfalls, one of the 
pitfalls of expanding the commercial fishing industry is that 
there is going to have to be future fish stocks, not only for the 
commercial fishermen of today but for their children and 
grandchildren. And on this side of the House, Mr. Chair, we 
believe that it is a responsibility of a government with good 
stewardship, very good stewardship, Mr. Chair, that the fish 
stocks be protected and insured past the next about three years, 
as this minister appears to be looking at. He’s looking at about a 
three-year window. 
 
What we’re saying, Mr. Chair, is to the minister, can you assure 
commercial fishermen in northern Saskatchewan that you have 
a plan in place today to re-establish fish stocks so that fish 
stocks will be there for not only the present expansion that this 
government is looking at, but maybe even future expansions of 
the commercial fishing industry in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 
I will say that I support Northern Affairs doing all that it can for 
the commercial fishing industry and we’ll continue building on 
that. 
 
In terms of the fish stocking, had you taken about five minutes 
to try and realize the answer, you would know in certain lakes 
fish restocking does not work as well as people think it can. 
 
What you have to do is allow the natural buildup of the 
commercial fishing stock to be able to have it done naturally. 
And there’s some lakes that are adept at doing that and 
sometimes fish stocking really does work. But sometimes it 
doesn’t work as well as people think it does. So we have to 
incorporate that balance to make sure at the end of the day we 
have healthy fish populations, which we have. 
 
And I would point out to all the people that may be listening to 
this, your non-answer, in my opinion, is really a 
non-commitment to the commercial fishing industry. You 
refuse to answer the question because the ulterior motive here is 
to get rid of the fishermen and put in sport fishing and again sell 
out northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ve pointed out, I’ve pointed out that a new slogan we 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

 

have on this side of the House is not Saskatchewan Party, it’s 
sell Saskatchewan Party, or sell out Saskatchewan Party. And 
you guys done it once in the 1980s and we ain’t going to allow 
you to do it again. This side of the House is not going to allow 
you to do that again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And secondly, when it comes to economic building, when it 
comes to economic building, well we’re not going to ask any 
advice from the opposition — absolutely not. We’re going to 
ask a lot of hard questions of the government, and the 
government’s going to work very . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing. I’m having difficulty hearing the minister finishing his 
answer. And I would appreciate if all hon. members would 
come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. And what I 
would point out, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about . . . The 
reason I asked Northern Affairs . . . The question they asked of 
Northern Affairs today — oh come on, Northern Affairs, do 
something, do something for the commercial fishing industry. 
And they were crying crocodile tears across the way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because what happens at the end of the day when their great 
leader, the one-page economic wonder, travelled to La Ronge 
and the La Ronge people asked the Leader of the Opposition — 
your leader — and they asked him, well, what would you do if 
you were in government? Would you do away with Northern 
Affairs? Would Northern Affairs exist? And I believe the quote, 
Mr. Deputy Chair, was, probably not. 
 
So I would suggest the reason why I’ve been asking you, do 
you support Northern Affairs and the commercial fishing 
industry — you wouldn’t give an answer. And the reason why 
you wouldn’t give an answer is you’re across the way crying all 
these crocodile tears and the bottom line is you have no interest 
in supporting the commercial fishing industry. 
 
You don’t even have interest in supporting the North through 
Northern Affairs. You leader was unequivocal when he said, 
probably not. We interpreted that in the North as no, Northern 
Affairs would be cut. Northern Affairs would be slashed. It 
would be gone. 
 
And all the activities in mining and forestry and ecotourism, 
and oil and gas exploration, and protecting the land and 
commercial fishing, all these industries would come to a 
standstill because Northern Affairs is assisting many of these 
industries. 
 
So when you get up and you cry crocodile tears for the North 
and you say commercial fishing, the one entity that has been 
doing wonderful work for the North is Northern Affairs. And 
your leader has said, he has said, no, Northern Affairs is going 
to be cut. 
 
So I would ask that member, before you get up and pretend to 
be concerned, maybe you should talk to your leader first and get 
your leader to withdraw his comment about chopping off 
Northern Affairs thereby killing any hope for commercial 
fishing, for tourism, for mining, for training, and all the other 

activity that northern Saskatchewan people want. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, to the 
minister: again we’ve asked the question . . . Three times, Mr. 
Chair, I’ve asked the same question. It was a rather easy 
question. He should have been able to have the answer on the 
tip of his tongue, I would assume. After all he is the Minister of 
Northern Affairs. 
 
Northern Affairs has talked about having strategies in many 
areas and . . . but he doesn’t know what they are. Mr. Chair, he 
doesn’t know what the strategies are. Instead what he’s done, 
Mr. Chair, is he’s looked at this side of the House and asked us 
to help him develop a strategy for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, we can do that — we’ll have a strategy for 
Northern Saskatchewan. And the people of northern 
Saskatchewan are going to have that strategy right after the next 
election, Mr. Chair. So what we need to have happen . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I would ask all hon. members on 
both sides of the House to please allow the minister to answer 
the question and the member to ask the question. That is how 
it’s supposed to work. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I would 
suggest to the minister that what he needs to do is he needs to 
poll his colleagues on the other side of the House, go through 
them one at a time and ask them, are you ready to fight an 
election today. Because if they are, we’ll, over on this side of 
the House, we’ll have the plan ready for economic development 
in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
Because what we have seen today, what we have seen today, 
Mr. Minister, is that time and time again questions have arisen 
— they’ve come from the member from Saltcoats; they’ve 
come from the member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood; a month 
ago, there was a member . . . a question from the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood — and time and time again, Mr. 
Chair, what happened? The minister would get up and ask 
questions about what we would do about this issue. 
 
Well somewhere along the line, Mr. Chair, that minister is 
going to have to explain to the House the strategies that his 
department has for economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
He stands there time and time again. I asked the same question 
three times, Mr. Chair. Three times I asked him, do you have a 
strategy to expand . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Obviously 
on the other side of the House, Mr. Chair, we’ve, we’ve hit a 
nerve. They want to talk about economic development in 
northern Saskatchewan but in order to talk about it, they have to 
have . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. This button isn’t an 
on/off button for heckling. You’re supposed to stay . . . Stop 
heckling when I turn the button on. 
 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. And certainly it has generated much enthusiasm 
here late this afternoon when we talk about economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan. And again, the minister 
has said over and over again that we need to provide answers on 
this side of the House so that they can develop policy on the 
government side of the House. 
 
We have a suggestion, Mr. Chair. We have a very good 
suggestion for the Minister of Northern Affairs. We have a very 
good suggestion for all the cabinet ministers on that side of the 
House, Mr. Chair. Why don’t they develop policy and then call 
an election and we’ll go out and discuss those policies and 
match them up against our policies on this side of the House, 
Mr. Chair, in a provincial election, a general provincial election. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, they should, they should call an election 
instead of standing over there and asking us questions about 
what has to happen for economic development in . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Would the Government House Leader 
please stay in order? All hon. members please stay in order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Well maybe 
I seem to have hit another nerve over there. Maybe it’s not his 
own, his colleagues, that he needs to poll; apparently maybe 
what the Minister of Northern Affairs needs to do is have a 
discussion with his boss, Frank Hart, and ask him if it’s okay, if 
it’s okay for him to call an election. 
 
Because that’s what needs to happen. If we’re going to have 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan this 
government needs to call an election and the members on this 
side of the House will then have the capacity to develop 
economics in northern Saskatchewan and that people up there 
will have jobs and there will not be any more 90 per cent — 90 
per cent, Mr. Minister — of unemployment in La Loche. 
 
Mr. Chair, that’s what needs to happen and the members on this 
side of the House are ready to fight that election tomorrow. 
We’re ready to fight that election tomorrow. So what they 
should do is go across the pond, ask permission from Frank 
Hart to call an election, and we’ll show them how to run the 
province. That’s what’s going to happen. 
 
In the meantime I’ve been asking the question over and over 
and over again when, when, is this minister going to tell us the 
strategies that his department has developed for the 
continuation of commercial fishing in northern Saskatchewan? 
And what have we received, Mr. Chair? We have received 
absolutely nothing. 
 
He has said over and over again he wants us to tell him how to 
continue, how to continue commercial fishing in northern 
Saskatchewan beyond the next five years. Well, Mr. Minister, 
what we have a clear indication on this side of the House is, 
you’re going to get that answer when the next election’s called 
and you’re going to see that policy developed after the next 
election, when the member who normally sits in this chair . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. It now being 5 p.m. this House . . . 

the committee will stand recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


