















































Hansard: June 04, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1785 
 June 4, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the prescription drug deductible. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
I have three petitions signed, Mr. Speaker, by citizens of 
Hudson Bay, Mistatim, Prairie River, Tisdale, and Porcupine 
Plain. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today with a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who 
would like to maintain the Saskatchewan Housing Authority 
Humboldt territory operations office in Humboldt. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew the commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
city of Humboldt, the community of St. Gregor, and Bruno. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
petitions on behalf of people who are really concerned about the 
deductible for prescription drugs. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
People that have signed this petition are all from Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens who continue to be concerned 
about the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
And I’m pleased to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present to do with overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge and Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the deplorable 
condition of Highway 42. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm River 
constituency in order to prevent injury or loss of life, and to 
prevent the loss of economic opportunity in the area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Eyebrow, Tugaske, Brownlee, Central Butte, 
and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise, Mr. Speaker, to present a petition to you concerning crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers and associates 
of producers in the community of Eastend. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the crop insurance program. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Gladmar, Bengough, 
Ogema, and Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increase to crop insurance 
premiums. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Battleford, Landis, North Battleford, 
and Clavet. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
will be surprised today that I have a petition of citizens 
concerned about the closing of the office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority in Humboldt. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the proposed closure of the 
Humboldt territory operations office for Saskatchewan 
Housing Authority, and to renew their commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan and maintain a full, functioning territory 
operations office in Humboldt. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Middle 
Lake, and Lanigan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Rabbit Lake, from Mildred, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise with a petition today from citizens concerned about 
the lack of cellular coverage in rural Saskatchewan. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good folks of Climax, 
Bracken, and Val Marie. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
no. 7, 11, 18, 23, 24, 31, 59, 129, 132, 134, and 147. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: (1) with regard to 
provincially owned Crown land not in the northern 
administrative district, how many parcels of land are 
currently being leased; (2) what is the total area of that 
leased land; (3) how many lessees are there; (4) what is the 
projected revenue from these leases in the current year? 

 
Mr. Speaker, further to that I give notice that on day no. 59 ask 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: (1) with regard to 
provincially owned Crown land in the northern 
administrative district, how many parcels of land are 
currently being leased; (2) what is the total area of that 
leased land; (3) how many lessees are there; (4) what is the 
projected revenue from these leases in the current year? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have questions . . . exact same thing for 
seven more departments. 
 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 59 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for ISC (Information Services 
Corporation): (1) does ISC have an assurance fund; (2) is 
this fund used to compensate those individuals or 
corporations who suffer financial loss due to delays in 
transactions caused by ISC; and (3) if so, how much was 
paid out of this fund for this purpose in 2001? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the Assembly 42 grade 3 and 4 students from 
Sunningdale School in Moose Jaw who are seated in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re here today accompanied by their 
teachers Ms. Sudom-Young and Ms. Quon, and by chaperones 
Ms. Hushy and Ms. Weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members may remember that students from 
Sunningdale School are frequent visitors to the Legislative 
Assembly and we’re always pleased to see them. They’ll be 
leaving about 2 o’clock for a tour of the building and I look 
forward to meeting with them for photos and perhaps a brief 
visit at 2:30. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all our members to join in 
extending a warm welcome to the students from Sunningdale 
School in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the members of the Assembly 20 
students from Dr. George Ferguson School in my constituency, 
seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. And I believe they are 
in the first two or three rows. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher Ms. Lynda Gellner, 
chaperones Wendy Herom, Hazel Batty, Cindy Cullen, Shelley 
Aisaican, and Ed Whitehouse. And I’m going to have the 
opportunity in a little while to meet with them and I’ll let them 
answer questions after they have an opportunity to see the 
proceedings in the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I hope all 
members will welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues and our 
guests in the Assembly today, my brother Dennis Elhard, 
formerly of Eastend and now a resident of the community of 
Caronport, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. You may notice 
the family resemblance. I’d like to . . . 
 
You know, I’d just like to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that my 
brother and I have been in partnership on a farm and in other 
businesses for about 30 years. We’ve spent all of our lives 
working in close proximity and now that he’s a student in 
Caronport I don’t see him nearly as often as I used to. 
 
However, today when he came to the city in his capacity as a 

bus driver for students from the Thunder Creek School 
Division, he phoned me and said the students were touring the 
Science Centre and the Imax Theatre and could we get together 
for lunch. Well following lunch I suggested he come here 
because I’m sure the entertainment value will be much higher 
here than at the Imax this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Queen’s Golden Jubilee Anniversary 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
honoured to rise in the House today and ask all members to 
recognize the Golden Jubilee celebrations honouring Queen 
Elizabeth II. 
 
These celebrations have taken place over the past few days in 
London, England at various points throughout that great city, 
including, of course, Buckingham Palace. This great event, Mr. 
Speaker, commemorates Queen Elizabeth’s 50-year reign as 
head of the monarchy. In her five decades of presiding over the 
Commonwealth nations, Her Majesty has seen many changes 
not only within her country but around the world. 
 
On a sadder note, we would be remiss if we neglected to 
mention that when Queen Elizabeth ascended to the throne in 
1952, there were countries embroiled in battle. Sadly, today, 50 
years later, peace among nations has yet to be realized. 
 
On a lighter note, Mr. Speaker, and as testament to Queen 
Elizabeth’s longevity on the throne, she is in some very royal 
company as only four other monarchs have ruled Great Britain 
as long as she has: Henry III, Edward III, George III, and Queen 
Victoria. 
 
And for those who may be wondering about the duties of the 
Queen, according to Buckingham Palace officials, Queen 
Elizabeth II has approved more than 3,000 Acts of Parliament, 
received three million pieces of correspondence, conferred 
nearly 400,000 awards and honours, entertained more than one 
million guests at parties, posed for a 120 portraits, sent more 
than a quarter of a million telegrams to couples celebrating 
wedding anniversaries, and has owned more than 30 Welsh 
corgis. 
 
Long live the Queen. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Children’s Festival 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The week of June 2 to 
8 has been declared Tourism Awareness Week and since 
summer is for kids and for the kid in all of us, I’m happy to 
announce to the Assembly that Saskatoon is offering a great 
way to kickoff the summer and to make us aware of some of the 
sights that will attract tourists from far and wide. 
 
Tonight on the beautiful banks of the majestic South 
Saskatchewan River in the scenic Kinsmen Park beneath the 
stately turrets of the Delta Bessborough Hotel, the 14th annual 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

Northern Saskatchewan International Children’s Festival will 
get underway. 
 
After the first night gala on the riverbank, the festival will come 
alive on Wednesday celebrating its theme, Faces of the World, 
with non-stop entertainment and education for children and 
adults alike. There will be jugglers, singers, musicians, and 
more singers, and puppeteers. There will be mime and theatre 
from around the world, and there will be activities and games. 
On Saturday, there will be a pancake breakfast followed by a 
parade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this award winning festival is a non-profit 
organization dedicated to challenging the minds and enriching 
the lives of Saskatchewan children. Like so many events in 
Saskatchewan, it is helped by hundreds of volunteers. The 
festival expects, once again over 25,000 children will attend. I 
can think of no better way than this way to kick off the summer 
festivities, and I remind members that the International 
Children’s Festival is just the first of many summer attractions 
that draw us to Saskatoon. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Melfort Resident Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, today Fannie Fidyk of Melfort is celebrating her 
100th birthday. She is of Ukrainian descent, born in Poland, and 
at the age of 19 she married Alex Fidyk. In 1926 they decided 
to immigrate to Canada. Alex came ahead to prepare a new 
home for his family and a short time later, with the help of her 
sister, Fannie made the three-week boat trip and long trek 
across Canada with their two small children, Tena and Fred. 
 
They settled on a farm in the Silver Park area where Fannie and 
hired help ran the farm while Alex was employed with the CPR 
(Canadian Pacific Railway) railway. Alex and Fannie were 
blessed with two more children, Anne and John, and in order to 
feed her family Fannie grew a huge garden which she often 
shared with neighbours. Her daughters remember filling a 
horse-drawn wagon with cabbage in the fall. She loved to cook 
and her grandchildren claim she makes the best perogies and 
cabbage rolls. 
 
Alex and Fannie were able to celebrate their 60th wedding 
anniversary before Alex passed away. Fannie now resides in the 
Melfort Hospital, first floor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, please join 
Fannie’s 4 children, 11 grandchildren, 13 great-grandchildren, 
and friends in wishing her a very happy 100th birthday today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environment Week — Seedling Distribution Program 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in the Assembly today to inform the members that as part of 

this year’s Environment Week celebrations, SaskPower is 
making free green ash seedlings available to customers across 
the province. These seedlings come from SaskPower’s own 
Shand Greenhouse located just outside of Estevan. 
 
The Shand Greenhouse plays an important role in the 
corporation’s efforts to minimize the impact of its operations on 
the environment. 
 
Since 1991 SaskPower has distributed over 3 million tree and 
shrub seedlings free of charge to non-profit agencies, service 
clubs, conservation agencies, and individual landowners eager 
to preserve Saskatchewan’s natural landscape. The seedlings 
also help offset the impact of greenhouse gas emissions. As the 
seedlings grow, they absorb carbon dioxide from the 
environment, helping to reduce the effects of the coal-fired 
generation that we depend upon. 
 
This seedling distribution program is just one example of 
SaskPower’s comprehensive strategy to tackle the challenge of 
climate change. The seedlings will be available at any of 
SaskPower’s 37 customer service offices across Saskatchewan, 
as well as the Poplar River power station, from June 3 to 7. For 
anyone with less than a green thumb, information on how to 
care for the seedlings will also be provided. 
 
I urge all members to get a free seedling and do your part to 
green our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moosomin Holds Two Special Events 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Saturday two special events took place in the Moosomin 
constituency. 
 
At 1 p.m. the Kipling and District Veterinary Clinic along with 
veterinarian Dr. Don Smyth cut the ribbon to officially open 
their new veterinary clinic. This special event began with a 
kick-off roast beef barbecue hosted by the Kipling and District 
Beef Club. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that everyone attending, 
including the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, truly 
enjoyed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this veterinary clinic has certainly provided a 
worthwhile service to our community and I want to congratulate 
Dr. Smyth and the past veterinarian, Dr. Gerald Kessler, for all 
their hard work and dedication to providing veterinary services 
in the community. 
 
As well, at 4 p.m. the community of Wolseley held a 
sod-turning ceremony to officially launch the construction of 
their new pelleting plant. Mr. Speaker, recently I mentioned that 
West Central Pelleting of Wilkie and local promoters in the 
Wolseley community conducted a very successful share 
offering leading up to this sod-turning ceremony. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend congratulations to President 
Margaret Skinner and the board and directors of West Central 
Pelleting for the official launch of their new pelleting plant, as 
well as the Kipling and District Veterinary Clinic and Dr. Don 
Smyth on the official opening of their new veterinary clinic. 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Establishes Urban Conservation Area 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 
this is Environment Week, and in the spirit of the week the city 
of Moose Jaw has adopted a burrowing owl conservation plan 
that creates one of the first urban conservation areas in Canada. 
 
The conservation plan will be on the northern part of Moose 
Jaw from the Lynbrook Golf Course through Sunningdale Park, 
and the exhibition grounds to the Western Development 
Museum. This area also houses the burrowing owl interpretive 
centre that informs visitors about the ecology of the burrowing 
owl, which we all know is an endangered species. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment and several nature and conservation 
organizations are participating in this program, Mr. Speaker. 
This is another example of the environmental leadership 
demonstrated by the city of Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw was the 
first city in the province to start cleaning up abandoned gas 
station sites and one of the first to start effluent irrigation and 
urban composting. 
 
This is another example of the community coming together to 
create a better environment for everyone and I ask all hon. 
members to join me in congratulating this good work in the city 
of Moose Jaw. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame Inductees 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not one, but two 
residents who live in Rosetown-Biggar are being inducted into 
the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame. Inductees are the late 
Walter Anderson, formerly of Wiseton, and the late S. Burns 
McDonald, formerly of Elrose. 
 
Mr. Anderson was born in Dinsmore in 1934. In the late 1940s 
he began his career with the King George senior baseball team. 
Mr. Anderson played numerous positions, including outfielder, 
second and third base, and also pitcher. Walter’s playing career 
ended in 1969 but then he began his umpire career. He was 
recognized as an outstanding umpire by the Saskatchewan 
Baseball Association. 
 
Mr. S. Burns McDonald was born in Elrose in 1932 and grew 
up on a family farm near Wiseton. In 1956 he coached his first 
team, the Saskatoon Royals. In 1965 he and his wife Kay 
moved to Wartime where he started to coach the eight- to 
ten-year-old boys baseball team. Playing numerous local sports 
days and tournaments province-wide, his team won a majority 
of their 60 games per season. In 1970 when the Wartime School 
closed, Burns and his team moved to Elrose where they 
continued to play. As a dedicated coach, Burns coached the 
team until the youngest player from the original team graduated 
in 1978. The love of coaching was not only in baseball but also 
hockey as he coached the Saskatoon Blades and several local 
Elrose hockey teams. 
 

I wish to express appreciation to the families and friends of 
Burns McDonald and Walter Anderson for their contribution to 
baseball and to their communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Investigation of Harassment Allegation 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix is now reporting that the former 
Environment minister may have slapped one of her staff 
members. If this allegation is true, it goes beyond workplace 
harassment into the area of physical assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has commissioned an independent 
report on this incident. The Premier will soon be receiving that 
report. If that report confirms that a physical assault took place, 
will the report be turned over to the police? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the 
comments that the Premier made yesterday because members of 
the opposition asked this question yesterday and I want to 
reaffirm what the Premier said yesterday. 
 
The Premier indicated that on Monday, that the mediator will 
submit her report to the deputy minister, Mr. Perrins, in the next 
few days. And the Premier went on to say that he will be 
making . . . Mr. Perrins will be making recommendations to him 
based on that report, and that the Premier will be making 
statements on that matter later next week. The Premier then 
went on to say that the government . . . the Premier said that the 
position of the report may be released to the public, including 
the general circumstances surrounding the incidents. 
 
That was the comments that the Premier made yesterday, and 
this is what the Premier intends to do when he receives the 
report. He has not received the report yet, but when he does 
he’ll examine it through his deputy to the Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, on May 8, 2001 the Government 
House Leader made the following statement: 
 

. . . (if) any member of this legislature or any member of 
the general public has any . . . evidence to suggest . . . 
inappropriate activity, they have a responsibility to forward 
that to the proper process, which is (to) the police. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the independent report suggests there is 
evidence of physical assault or any other illegal activity, will 
the government follow the NDP (New Democratic Party) House 
Leader’s advice and forward the report to the police? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier answered that 
part of the question yesterday for the member and I think the 
member was present when he answered the question, and then 
answered it out for the media as well. When the question was 
asked, Mr. Speaker, by the media in regards to what would 
happen, when the media asked the Premier what would happen, 
Mr. Speaker, he said in regards to whether the report would be 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

released or handed over to the police, the Premier stated that he 
wouldn’t speculate on the contents of the report because he has 
not yet received the contents of the report. 
 
When the Premier receives the report, Mr. Speaker, he will 
examine it through his deputy to the Premier and will then 
determine what parts of the information, as he says in his scrum 
yesterday, and I think to the Leader of the Opposition 
yesterday, that he would provide the information based on the 
content of the report. And to date, Mr. Speaker, he yet does not 
have the report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assistance to Municipalities for Firefighting 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Environment. Yesterday in 
estimates the Minister of Public Safety confirmed that there are 
no specific financial resources that are triggered or available to 
a community upon the declaration of a state of emergency. 
 
He also stated that the provincial disaster assistance program is 
not designed to assist with fire, as fires are not normally 
classified as a natural disaster. So after all the circles that the 
NDP have led us on with this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re still back at the original question. Is there going to be 
assistance to help municipalities in this province cope with 
some of the enormous costs that they’re facing to fight the large 
fires that have ravaged this province in the last few weeks? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the Assembly if the NDP are 
considering any financial assistance to help communities and 
RMs (rural municipality) to bear the costs of using water 
bombers and other heavy equipment to fight fires? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
thought I was fairly clear on this last night in the discussion in 
estimates. And the Minister of Environment was sitting two 
chairs away from me. I don’t know where other members were; 
I’m not to speak to that. 
 
But what we are certainly looking at is how this situation is 
dealt with. I think SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) has taken the extraordinary step of 
making sure we’ve made heavy equipment available to get into 
the forest fringe to help the municipalities. 
 
In terms of the cost, we do work on a cost recovery basis. This 
is the way that we’re working and there may or may not be 
special circumstances. We’ll look at those as they come up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the Premier visited Nipawin after the devastating fire in 
that community, he said it would be appropriate if the costs 
were shared with the province. 
 
Since then we’ve had a number of other fires in the province 
including the community of Archerwill which required large 

equipment, Tobin Lake, Turtle Lake, Loon Lake — these fires 
are all causing tremendous damage, Mr. Speaker, and using 
considerable resources to control the situation. 
 
The province bears the cost of fighting fires on Crown land, but 
many of these larger fires so far have been devastating to RMs 
and communities. 
 
On May 24 the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities wrote the provincial government and asked that 
any charges for the use of water bombers, helicopters, and 
firefighting crews be waived for rural municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what was the minister’s response to this request? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we went over this last 
night again, and we’ve been through this many times. The 
request from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) is that what they are asking for is that we pick 
up all the cost for the firefighting. Well that is not the way that 
this has worked in the past and it’s not the way it’s going to 
work today. 
 
What we’re taking a look at is where there are special 
circumstances, we’re prepared to deal with that. That was the 
commitment that was made in Nipawin where there are in fact 
issues that need to be addressed with. 
 
Now the question here is whether or not the opposition 
continues to support the approach that we are taking — where 
we are putting in the resources now and we’ll sort out the 
details and the costing afterwards — or whether they want 
something else. Because that’s really what the issue is here. 
 
We’re prepared to make the equipment available; we’re 
prepared to go in and fight where we’re asked for. And that is 
what we’re doing and that’s the responsible approach. That’s 
this government’s approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, the SARM letter says, and 
I quote: 
 

Already this year rural municipalities located in the “forest 
fringe” area of the province have estimated that the costs 
incurred are reaching up to one million dollars for an 
individual municipality. 
 
We are pleased that you recently recognized the province’s 
responsibility in regard to such fires, as municipalities are 
not in a position to absorb these costs . . . We therefore 
request that you waive the cost of the Department of 
Environment services for fighting fires. As well, 
municipalities have incurred large costs for fighting these 
fires using their own limited resources and hiring additional 
backup from the private sector. We also ask that a program 
be established to help municipalities cover these unusually 
large costs. 

 
(14:00) 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier made a commitment for cost sharing 
in Nipawin. How long are they and other communities and RMs 
going to have to wait for a decision from the NDP on whether 
they will be receiving any financial assistance or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely a 
confused opposition. First of all, we have the member from 
Wood River who has his head in the clouds fighting a 1960s 
battle against communism. Then you have a one-page economic 
wonder in their leader. And then you have the gas expert from 
Swift Current who’s going to cost the province millions of 
dollars. 
 
And now you have a firefighting expert, Mr. Speaker, that 
doesn’t know that when you look down the scheme of things 
that you have to wait for these costs to be very clear, Mr. 
Speaker. This Premier travelled to Nipawin, and I’ve said 
before — good for the Premier, good for Nipawin, and good for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We said we would stand by SARM, we would work through 
these details, we’d look at a case by case scenario. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the reason why I call them an incredible opposition is 
we stood up today and we fought alongside of the many 
communities and RMs to fight fires. And, Mr. Speaker, last 
year the Sask Party voted against the hiring of 88 new 
firefighters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What damage would have been created 
if we had less resources, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
For the second time in this legislative session the NDP appear 
to be fudging the books. The first set of books to get fudged 
was the NDP’s budget to try and hide $250 million deficit. And 
now the NDP is being accused of fudging the books at 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company), the NDP’s failed potato company. 
 
According to documents filed in Regina court by Idaho potato 
grower Chad Neibaur, the NDP wanted him to sign a draft 
agreement to buy some potatoes — to buy some government 
soon-to-be-rotten potatoes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Neibaur claims SPUDCO officials told him the only 
purpose for the draft agreement was to make it look like 
SPUDCO actually was selling potatoes, when in fact no potato 
sales were being made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did SPUDCO officials try to use American 
potato grower Chad Neibaur to fake a sale of potatoes for the 
NDP government? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all I welcome that member back. I didn’t recognize that 
member; he’s been up on his feet so rarely. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I was 
about to bring the member to order because I thought at first he 
was referring to a member’s absence or presence; however, I 
recognized that he didn’t. But the member was not on tape, so I 
would ask the member to resume his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact the member suggests that we fudge the books. Well we 
fudged them so badly that Moody’s gave us a credit rating 
upgrade, Mr. Speaker. So that’s how badly we fudged it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as well I would say it . . . 
this will be good for political fodder, but the member will know 
of course that this matter is before the court, and as a result it 
makes it very difficult and impossible for me to respond to any 
accusations that he or that individual might make, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the NDP 
everything’s almost like the Liberals — it’s before the court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is suing an American potato grower . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP is 
suing an American potato grower for breach of contract after 
SPUDCO officials badgered him to sign a draft sales 
agreement, an agreement made to look like the NDP had a 
market for its rotting potatoes in the spring of 2000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
According to Neibaur’s sworn affidavit, SPUDCO officials 
pleaded with Neibaur and his partner to come to Saskatchewan 
and grow potatoes so that SPUDCO had something other than 
hay to store in the NDP’s multi-million dollar potato storage 
facilities. When Neibaur said he had no interest, SPUDCO 
officials asked him to sign a draft sales agreement to at least 
make it look like SPUDCO was actually selling potatoes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government suing an Idaho potato 
grower for not being interested in either growing potatoes for 
the government, or selling government potatoes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well unlike 
myself, Mr. Speaker, his light was on but he wasn’t making any 
sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to say again that while this might be 
wonderful political fodder, the matter is before the courts and 
it’s impossible for me to comment or respond. 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

I would ask the question though, Mr. Speaker, that if that 
member believes that in the best interests of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers we should not pursue this, then he should say that 
outside the House as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under investments made by the previous provincial 
government, Mr. Speaker, and under investments made with the 
federal government, there were . . . there was, I should say, in 
excess of $100 million invested by way of infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker. And we have developed a potato industry out in that 
area in partnership with many of the private sector, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government has money for potato storage facilities to store 
hay, but no money for people’s water in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, at the risk of making a 
statement that is blatantly obvious, Chad Neibaur makes his 
living growing seed potatoes — growing seed potatoes, Mr. 
Speaker, in Idaho and then selling his seed potatoes to make a 
profit. So why would Mr. Neibaur want to buy seed potatoes 
grown by the NDP government? 
 
Why was the NDP so desperate that SPUDCO officials actually 
faxed Neibaur a sales contract clearly marked draft after telling 
him they only wanted to make it look like the government was 
selling potatoes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again this is a . . . 
it’s very difficult for me to respond on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d ask the 
members to allow the minister to make his response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult for me to 
respond on an issue that’s before the courts as a minister 
responsible, but I will respond to one part of his question where 
he talks about hay being stored in those facilities. 
 
I don’t know if that member or members opposite would 
believe that we should leave those facilities sitting empty when 
we had an opportunity to provide space for some of the local 
area farmers who came to us. And I would point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that that was used on a very limited basis; it was not 
that as if the facilities were full of hay — although that would 
not have been inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the province got involved in development of growing 
potatoes in that area, Mr. Speaker, there was about 200 acres 
grown . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Fifteen seconds to the Minister of Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the 
province got involved, there were about 200 acres grown of 
potatoes out in that area. And I note when the province made its 

announcement to get out of that industry, Mr. Speaker, there are 
now about 10,000 acres of potatoes being grown and there 
looks like a bright future for the potato industry in that area. 
And I thank the farmers and the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, when the government got 
involved, the minister said there was about 200 acres of 
potatoes grown. Well, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that there’s even 
less than that now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP lost 28 million taxpayers’ dollars by 
interfering in the potato business. In the process, the NDP took 
and then lost millions more from local investors in the Lucky 
Lake/Outlook area. 
 
And now we find out the NDP was so desperate to make it look 
like SPUDCO was actually selling potatoes that SPUDCO 
officials were trying to convince other potato growers to sign 
phony potato sales agreements. Even more interesting, 
according to the sworn testimony of Idaho grower, Chad 
Neibaur, the NDP was also desperate to get its multi-million 
dollar potato storage facility filled with something other than 
hay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was the NDP trying to convince an American 
grower to sign a document to make it look like SPUDCO was 
selling and storing potatoes, when in actual fact no real 
government potatoes were being sold and very few government 
potatoes were even being stored? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I don’t 
quite understand the argument, Mr. Speaker. On one hand, he 
said that we lost money through that investment, Mr. Speaker. 
On the other hand, he says to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan we 
shouldn’t try and recover what we believe belongs to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, the courts will decide who is 
right and who is wrong here, Mr. Speaker. And it’s before the 
courts and it’s impossible for me to respond to the question that 
the member raises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, we’ve just heard 
how the NDP lost 28 million taxpayer dollars on an intervention 
in the potato industry that they arguably should never have been 
in in the first place. And now it looks like they’re going to risk 
. . . at least risk doing the same thing in the ethanol industry, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, last Friday as the Minister for Industry and 
responsible for the ethanol file wandered outside to the rotunda, 
Mr. Speaker, there was at least reason for hope. Because here’s 
what he had to say. He said that Saskatchewan has a reputation 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

 

for too much government involvement in private business. And 
he said we need to stop putting so much public money into 
private economic development initiatives, Mr. Speaker, proving 
once again that even a blind squirrel finds a nut every now and 
then. Mr. Speaker, even a blind, very angry squirrel can find a 
nut every now and then. 
 
We’re glad the minister has seen the light. And now we would 
ask him, through you, Mr. Speaker, to do the right thing. Will 
he simply admit that the government didn’t give the private 
sector enough time to take the lead on developing the industry, 
that two months wasn’t long enough, and that they are now 
prepared to step back and give the private sector the time to 
develop the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I do appreciate the humour of the 
member from Swift Current even though I’m not 100 per cent 
convinced that anyone in this province would buy his advice. 
 
Now the old guitar museum curator there tells us that we 
shouldn’t be, for any reason, ever looking at government 
investment. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I was interested in 
a Western Producer of May 30 of 2002, you know. And it’s 
interesting in a community that one of his members represent, 
the town of Mossbank, the owner of that operation said that it’s 
not going to last in this province without some public support. 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that member would close that 
plant down, and I know that. 
 
And I also want to say to the member opposite that one of the 
proponents of ethanol development in this province has said 
that he wants the support of the provincial government and 
wants an investment from the province in terms of bringing his 
investment to the province. 
 
Now if he’s saying that there should be absolutely no deal under 
those circumstances, he should stand up in this House and say 
so. And the member from Shaunavon should, and the member 
from Mossbank should, and the member from Tisdale should as 
well. Because you see, Mr. Speaker, in second reading of that 
Bill in a couple of days, all of the people who support this 
decision will be here to tell them they’re wrong. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister wants to play 
that game, then he should also be directing the people of the 
province to the former minister of ethanol, the member for 
Regina South, who said the private sector should lead the 
development of this industry. He should check with the 
Minister of Government Relations, the member for Melville, 
who last . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, he should direct people to check 
with the member for Melville, the Minister of Government 
Relations, who last week said it should be the private sector that 
leads this industry. Mr. Speaker, with this government, the left 
hand doesn’t know what the far left hand is doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week that minister said that we need to move 
away from government intervention in the economy to have a 

successful economic development strategy. So, Mr. Speaker, 
how is the government ever going to change the perception that 
there’s too much intervention in our economy by the 
government if this government continues to intervene in the 
economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
is consistent. He’s inaccurate as all get-out, but witty. Because 
you see, Mr. Speaker, what the former member of ethanol 
development indicated in that press conference was that we 
would be willing to look at circumstances that may in fact 
require some public sector investment. 
 
I want to say he’s inaccurate in this too, Mr. Speaker, because 
there needs to be a private sector driven industry and there will 
be. But that shouldn’t, Mr. Speaker, preclude investment from 
smaller entities here in this province if a large, major investor 
comes in, and it shouldn’t preclude the public sector investment 
if it means that the development won’t go without it. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, they can call for delay and they can 
call for no ethanol industry; they can call for no jobs; they can 
call for no livestock industry development in this province. But, 
Mr. Speaker, they won’t get any support from anybody on this 
side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of questions ago I 
think the minister was trying to quote from The Western 
Producer which would have worked out quite well except that 
he didn’t have The Western Producer. 
 
But we want to direct him to another newspaper — his own 
local newspaper, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what the editorial in the 
P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald reads, Mr. Speaker. They said in 
the P.A. Herald editorial: 
 

There’s no need for CIC to be involved in ethanol. Ethanol 
is an instance where Saskatchewan has advantages. With a 
little help from government in the form of tax incentives, 
either homegrown investors or an outside firm can make 
this industry work. 
 
Instead there is yet another instance of the would-be 
entrepreneurs in government mucking about. CIC is 
providing funds and exclusivity to Broe industries — a 
company linked to the provincial government through a 
former political adviser. 

 
They go on to say: 
 

Perhaps, Minister Lautermilch . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member go directly to the 
question, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — I’ll conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying: 
 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

Perhaps, Minister Lautermilch, a far more radical approach 
should be taken. Have the government (butt out of CIC) . . . 
butt CIC out of people’s businesses. 

 
Here’s a question to the minister: if he doesn’t want to take the 
advice of his . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member go directly to the 
question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — . . . will he take the advice of his local paper? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe I have to 
take the advice of the member from Wood River, who stands in 
here and says, well golly, you know, maybe we will take some 
public sector investment. 
 
And you know what he says to the people who are calling on 
him to butt out of this? Mr. Speaker, the people who have been 
developing this initiative from Shaunavon — I’d really like to 
know what he says to them. Because you know, Mr. Speaker, 
this is the guy who is trying to stop, along with his friend from 
Swift Current, the development of a very positive industry here 
in this province. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have second reading here of this 
piece of legislation and they will have the opportunity to go 
through this with us on a clause by clause basis. And they will 
have the opportunity to vote against economic development, 
and they’ll have an opportunity to vote against the development 
of the livestock industry in this province, and then they’ll have 
the ability, Mr. Speaker, and the responsibility to go back to 
their constituents and tell them why they voted against 
development of a good industry here in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 67 — The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 67, The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority Act be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 68 — The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 68, The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 70, 

The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions no. 256 and 257 and hope they are 
finally coming to an end. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to 256 and 257 have been 
tabled. Why is the Government House Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask leave of 
the Assembly to go to government business. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Drought Assistance for Livestock Producers 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the 
conclusion of my remarks I will be moving the following: 
 

That this Assembly urges the federal government to 
recognize the seriousness of the current drought on 
Saskatchewan agriculture industry and commit $10 million 
to a program to fund digging of new wells, digging new 
dugouts, and the purchase of more water pumping 
equipment in order to avoid a massive sell-off of cattle this 
year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, let me start by saying, for water-short livestock 
producers there’s nothing that we can do or say that’s going to 
make things right. We can’t as legislators make it rain any more 
than those drought-stricken producers can make it rain, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let me express a sentiment that is widely held in here and that 
is a view of frustration, Mr. Speaker — frustration that we can’t 
make it rain and frustration that in fact there are such desperate, 
in some instances, such desperate choices that are going to be 
made by livestock producers. 
 
Choices I’ll describe as for me, what seems to me up to and sort 
of including the ultimate choice of hugely, hugely cutting their 
livestock herd. Which, for people who maybe didn’t grow up on 
a farm or maybe don’t know, Mr. Speaker, the seriousness of 
this is that livestock producers spend years building up their 
livestock herd and they cull the least suitable livestock sort of 
on an ongoing basis. And they’re very proud, the best producers 
are very, very proud of the stock that they have. 
 
So this water shortage, this drought, is causing just unbelievable 
angst. We’ve got a water shortage combined with, of course 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

 

when you have a drought, a feed shortage. You can’t force 
pastures to grow when it’s too dry. Nor, Mr. Speaker, when it’s 
as dry as it is in many parts of central Saskatchewan, you can’t 
even grow grain feed to feed these livestock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been times when I’ve felt like I’ve been 
under a personal cloud. Well a couple of weeks ago I 
experienced it first-hand. My wife and I were returning from 
visiting our daughter and son-in-law and their family in 
Kindersley, driving back to Regina. And we weren’t very far 
this side of Kindersley and the dust cloud appeared and it blew 
and hung over us all the way until about Chamberlain, maybe 
Dilke, on the way to Regina. I’ve never seen such a massive 
cloud of dust, which really just is by way of typifying or 
signifying how dry it really and truly is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say of course how troubling it is from all vantages, but 
I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about what the 
Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture, the Saskatchewan 
government is doing, and what the Canadian government are 
doing. I just want to go over a few of the things. And I just want 
to cap it. It’s rather a lengthy list, Mr. Speaker, more than a 
dozen things of significance. 
 
Things like what we spend on and what we do for crop 
insurance for not only livestock producers but for all farmers, 
crop insurance that this administration enhanced this year by 
some $14 million. 
 
I know that there are some, particularly in opposition benches, 
who would tell you, Mr. Speaker, that crop insurance has been 
somehow gutted or hurt . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . gutted, 
thank you, this year. But how in the world you can describe a 
$14 million provincial enhancement as a gutting of livestock — 
I think it requires a lot of selling and a very long bow, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re very proud on this side that even in this troubled year, if 
I can describe it that way, when our finances are not as buoyant 
as we would like at the provincial level — oil has been troubled 
and there’s been some other areas, softwood lumber, now the 
US (United States) farm Bill dealing with export enhancement 
— all of these things sort of combine to not make it a banner 
year for the Saskatchewan . . . provincial Saskatchewan 
treasury. 
 
Despite that, we found $14 million more for crop insurance and 
indeed we’re very, very proud that the province of 
Saskatchewan, taxpayers of Saskatchewan are paying fully a 
third of the premium, roughly a third of the premium for crop 
insurance for farmers and livestock producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s the NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) program; there’s the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) program; there’s a feed grain and forage listing 
service; Sask Water has a pumping equipment rental program, 
Mr. Speaker. The stated view is that they want the pumping and 
related equipment rental program to be rented at cost. 
Unfortunately it’s rented — or fortunately, depending on your 
perspective — it’s rented for far less than the cost of said 
equipment. And indeed we view it as sort of part of our ongoing 
obligation. 
 

The federal government has a income tax deferral system. If 
you come as a livestock producer, Mr. Speaker, to what I 
opened my remarks with, that is where you’re drastically 
reducing the side of . . . size, rather, of your livestock herd, then 
there’s a income tax deferral system where you can for example 
sell — I’m going to use a third of a herd — you could sell a 
third of a herd, defer that income tax with the view that you can 
purchase a similar value of livestock, perhaps next year, 
perhaps two years; I think in fact some of it can be even a bit 
longer, like up to three years, to purchase back a herd. 
 
One of the weaknesses . . . I mean this is a very laudable 
program, Mr. Speaker, but one of the weaknesses of course is 
quite literally when a livestock herd is culled as they are or 
reduced as they are in Saskatchewan, much of that beef winds 
up being quite literally sliced and diced. And it’s not . . . no 
longer available as breeding stock. That is the ultimate fate of 
most livestock anyway, so the loss is the genetics much more 
than anything else. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past year the province of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture, has contributed — this past winter 
in fact — one and a half million dollars into what I will describe 
as a emergency well-drilling program. We ponied up a million 
and a half dollars, and the federal government ponied up 
another million and a half dollars, and that’s a welcome 
addition. I want to point out it’s an addition to the normal 
Prairie Farm Rehabilitation rural water development program. 
This is 3 million in addition, half of which came from the 
province of Saskatchewan just in recognition of the fact that 
there’s such demand on our water supplies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s very important that we would recognize that 
according to today’s Business & Agriculture, Leader-Post, 
there’s a story, a headline, Mr. Speaker, titled “May in 
Saskatoon driest since 1919”. Now that’s a long time and that’s 
very, very dry. 
 
The reason that I brought out that headline is simply this. In a 
normal year livestock producers . . . particularly as herds tend to 
grow, perhaps fewer herds but larger herds as we have fewer 
producers, wells have more demand on them. That is individual 
wells are providing water to more and more livestock. 
 
Every year you’re going to have some wells that deteriorate and 
they’re no longer usable. Some of them will collapse or simply 
become unusable for whatever reason. In a normal year you 
have that going on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year because the dugouts are all too often dry, that the 
normal . . . the sloughs, the other sources of water for livestock 
is dried up, Mr. Speaker, this year we have exceptional demand 
on our wells. We have exceptional demand on existing water 
supplies. 
 
This year what we’re calling for is an additional $10 million 
just to recognize exceptional need for more water. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, exceptional need. Frankly, digging a dugout this 
year isn’t likely to provide any water this year. It may next year, 
given some runoff or . . . but it’s not likely to provide any help 
this year. 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

Drilling wells will provide immediate relief where they hit 
water. So that’s really what this is about. 
 
And I want to stress this $10 million request for emergency 
water drilling capability and water pumping capability, Mr. 
Speaker, has nothing to do with the US farm Bill. It has nothing 
to do with trade enhancement program put out by the United 
States government or anything that’s happening in the EEC 
(European Economic Community). 
 
It is strictly related to getting water to livestock on 
Saskatchewan’s farms immediately, this year. It’s related to the 
emergency that is added to us, an emergency that is — as I 
started my speech, Mr. Speaker, saying — an emergency that is 
no fault of Saskatchewan’s producers. It’s no fault of legislators 
on either side of the Assembly here. 
 
But it is . . . there is something that can be done and $10 million 
additional to the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) experience would be most welcome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some are going to ask why we ask for the federal 
government . . . The seconder of my motion, the member for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld, is going to deal with the Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Act that was originally passed in 1935 as a 
five-year Act. And in 1939 the federal government of the day 
recognized the value of water, the necessity of water to 
Saskatchewan farmers, to rural people across the Prairies — it 
wasn’t just Saskatchewan. They recognized that and ended the 
original five-year limit on the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Act). 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is additional to the great work that PFRA 
has done over the years. And I know that the member for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld has a history of it and I don’t want to go 
too far into that history because I don’t want to steal his speech. 
 
But the PFRA has a great history in Western Canada. It’s 
helped rural Saskatchewan. It has helped us on the farm I grew 
up on a number of times. It helped us with water development 
projects, none of which seemed to be wildly satisfactory but 
they got us through and they, in fact, saw that we had water for 
our own households and saw that our livestock had water to 
drink and I guess, at the end of the day, that may be as good as 
it gets. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation. We have a drier prairie 
than I have ever witnessed. I no longer can claim to be a young 
person. Call me whatever you want, but we have the driest, 
driest record in the past year that I’ve ever seen. I remember 
1961 as the first what I would call a very dry year in my 
lifetime — ’61 was relatively wet compared to what we’ve seen 
so far in this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to conclude by moving the motion, 
seconded by the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld. And I move: 
 

That this Assembly urges the federal government to 
recognize the seriousness of the current drought on 
Saskatchewan’s agricultural industry and commit $10 
million to a program to fund digging of new wells, digging 
new dugouts, and the purchase of more water-pumping 
equipment in order to avoid a massive sell-off of cattle this 

year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, thanks 
for the opportunity to join in this very important and timely 
debate. 
 
Without a doubt we are facing a most severe drought in this 
province. Not the first one, but it is pretty severe. Yesterday 
CTV (Canadian Television Network Limited) Farm News 
quoted Neal Hardy, president of SARM, as estimating 70 per 
cent of the farm land in this province as being baked by 
drought. The StarPhoenix today, as my colleague reported, says 
the Saskatoon area records the driest May since 1919. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers are in dire straights 
as farmers wait for water for the crops and ranchers are worried 
about their pastures and hay drops. And we’re all in agreement 
on this, and that’s with no doubt. But that’s not what the debate 
is about today. It’s about where can we go for the resources to 
solve this issue? 
 
The motion put before us is: 
 

That this Assembly urges the federal government to 
recognize the seriousness of the current drought on 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry and commit $10 
million to a program to fund digging of new wells, new 
dugouts, and purchase of more water-pumping equipment 
in order to avoid massive sell-off of our cattle this year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the motion put forward by the member from 
Regina Coronation Park is indeed the best plan of action as we 
must act quickly to provide relief for our agricultural producers. 
 
I will second this motion because I believe it is the federal 
responsibility; they have the resources, they have the expertise, 
and they have the mandate. Mr. Speaker, I’m speaking 
specifically about the PFRA. 
 
Now last night in preparation for this, I went on their Web site 
and I took a look to see what exactly was their mandate. Well 
the PFRA was established by an Act of Parliament in 1935 in 
response to widespread drought, farm abandonment, and land 
degradation of the 1930s. 
 
Its role was to, at that time, to secure the rehabilitation of the 
drought and soil drifting areas in the provinces of Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, and Alberta. And to develop and promote within 
those areas systems of farm practice, tree culture, water supply, 
land utilization, and land settlement that will afford greater 
economic security. 
 
And with this mandate, PFRA has served to promote 
sustainable development on the rural prairies for six decades 
and they’ve done a good job. 
 
Now as I was on the Web site last night, I was looking for some 
of the success stories, what have they done well, what are some 
of the new innovative things that have happened around the 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

 

issue of water and drought protection, that type of thing. 
 
And I came along this very interesting success story, and I’d 
like to quote this extensively. I think it’s very interesting to 
show how people who were experts in this area are doing some 
very interesting things in this province. 
 
Now, and I’ll quote now: 
 

New Plough Helps Install Pipelines 
 
Take one old cutting blade, add a fresh, innovative idea, 
sprinkle in a few twists and hydraulics, and you have 
yourself a simple, yet effective pipeline layer. 
 
This is what (the) staff at the . . . (PFRA) office in Swift 
Current did earlier this spring. Using a very basic plough 
design, workers took a discarded Noble blade, attached it to 
a three-point hitch, engineered a simple yet rugged 
hydraulic system, and created an apparatus for installing 
shallow buried pipelines. 
 
(Now) “The idea came from knowing there are lots of these 
Noble blade ploughs sitting idly on farms,” said Sherman 
Veitenheimer, head of water programs for PFRA’s Swift 
Current office. 
 
Veitenheimer helped design the plough. (He says) “Having 
built previous ploughs . . . (on) our pastures division on a 
three-point hitch system, the Noble blade has a one-inch 
shank which can be utilized as a cutting tool. We converted 
it into a plough that would enable us to thread in a pipeline 
while causing very little disruption to the ground.” 
 

The story goes on: 
 

The scar this new plough leaves on the ground’s surface is 
minimal, while cutting at a quick pace. Veitenheimer 
estimates the plough can lay a mile of pipe in an hour. The 
pipes — made of . . . (plastic) — are usually submersed 
between six and 12 inches into the ground, leaving them 
well out of harm’s way. 

 
Most producers use pipelines as an alternative to watering 
directly from dugouts. Water is sent from a nearby source 
and away from where cattle have direct access, ensuring 
better water quality as well as longer dugout life. 

 
One Saskatchewan producer who put PFRA’s new plough 
to use is Brian Weedon. Weedon owns a livestock 
operation 20 kilometres northwest of Swift Current, raising 
cattle on his 13,000 acre chunk of land. 
 
Before installing his pipeline, Weedon relied heavily on 
windmills, pumps and dugouts to water his herds. As a 
result, watering areas were limited, costs high, and the 
livestock were taking a toll on the land. Different sections 
of land were getting grazed more heavily than others. But 
in the end, a reliable water supply was the main objective. 

 
In total, (Mr. Speaker) Weedon laid ten kilometres of 
pipeline in May (of 2000), causing very little 
environmental damage. He now has numerous outlets on 

his land where he can set up remote watering sites for his 
livestock. But the real benefit is on the financial side of the 
equation. 
 
(He says, and I quote) “I would have needed four windmills 
to supply the same amount of water as the pipeline and the 
mills alone would have cost a lot more. We also would’ve 
needed to put in wells or sand points,” (he says) . . . “I’d 
recommend shallow buried pipelines to anyone, but also 
suggest you do your homework first and find out what kind 
of terrain you have to go through.” 
 
Other benefits of shallow buried pipelines include having 
access to . . . reliable water supply in drought-stricken 
areas, consistent quality, and the ability to place outlets 
nearly anywhere they are needed. Veitenheimer cautions 
that because most pipelines are supplied by one source of 
water, regular maintenance is essential. Back-up sources 
are good to have just in case . . . (their) first (one) fails. 

 
Now the last paragraph I want to read carefully. 
 

“Where a producer has more than one water source, you 
can use one for . . . backup, but if you only have one source 
and the well goes down, then you’re out of water,” said 
Veitenheimer. “However, pipelines are becoming very 
popular in this area. Anyone who comes into our office and 
inquires about a dugout, we (usually) find ourselves 
changing their minds and thinking (about) pipeline.” 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I talked to Mr. Veitenheimer just about an 
hour ago asking him, how is this program going? And he says, 
well, they started out in 2000 with 10 K (kilometre) of pipeline 
in farms and now they’re up to 100 K in the southwest area. 
 
Now the reason it’s in the southwest area so much is he’s very 
protective about his little tool he’s developed — and it’s pretty 
neat. But what he says, there’s two key important points about 
the work that he’s done. One, is improving pasture land; and 
two, eliminating the need for a secondary water source. And he 
made that really important point. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Now I want to talk just briefly about the history here. As the 
member from Regina said it’s very important that we look back 
over the past six decades and we look at the PFRA and what are 
some of the innovative things that they did. 
 
Well in 1935 they started out and they only had a five-year 
mandate because they were talking about a . . . and we can all 
. . . we’ve heard the stories about the dirty thirties and how 
important . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: —We don’t remember them. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Yes, we don’t remember them. But we’ve 
heard stories about them. And I was looking at this and at that 
point they had a lot of initiatives but they were paying up to $50 
per dugout. Then came along 1957, yet the beginning of another 
drought period. Unusually dry years across the prairies from 
1957 to ’62 dramatically increased demand for water 
development projects. Pastures are stocked to capacity. 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

And my colleague talked about 1961 as a year that he 
remembers — one of the driest years on record across most of 
the prairies. PFRA boundaries are extended northward to cover 
all agricultural areas of the prairies. And they opened five new 
districts in that area, in that time. 
 
As well in 1975, the 40th anniversary of the PFRA. They’ve 
opened . . . they’ve helped out with over 95,000 dugouts, over 
10,000 wells, over 11,000 dams, and their work is well 
documented. 1977, the start of yet another dry period that will 
last more than 10 years, well into the ’80s. 
 
I highlighted this: 1981 farmers now receiving up to $1,500 per 
dugout, up from the original $50. 1988, another dry year 
comparable to the droughts of ’36-37, 1961, ’84-85. PFRA 
delivers government emergency drought programs for livestock 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and water supplies. So the PFRA has a long 
history of doing the work in drought. And these are the people 
who have the mandate. 
 
Our province has done an awful lot to help farmers. We spend 
over 5 per cent of our budget on agriculture — the federal 
people only spend less than 1 per cent. We spend on average 
$430 per capita. This is by far the highest of any province — 
three point . . . three times the national average. And so we do 
our share. 
 
But I think we have to go with the people who have the 
resources, the expertise, and the mandate. They’ve had this 
mandate for well over six decades and we should go . . . and I 
think it’s imperative that the federal people do put in at least 
$10 million on this project to help eradicate the drought this 
year. 
 
So I would be seconding this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few comments regarding the motion that’s before us and 
the effects of the drought in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part about this motion brought 
forward by the member from Regina, is the fact that this 
government, as it has in the past, continues to always blame or 
look towards somebody else. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not disputing or arguing the fact that 
the federal government doesn’t have a responsibility when it 
comes to a number of agricultural issues. We talk about trade 
related issues and the federal government has a responsibility 
there, and certainly my colleagues and our leader have enforced 
that point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina talks about 
Saskatchewan’s commitment, and I believe the Minister of 
Agriculture talked about the fact that there was a little more 
money in the agricultural budget. But if you take a look over the 
past 10 years, agriculture has actually been lowered 
significantly — the funding of agricultural projects and 
concerns in the province of Saskatchewan — which begs one to 
ask whether or not this government is very concerned at all, or 
actually is concerned in any way regarding rural Saskatchewan 

and the agriculture community. 
 
However I would have to add that I believe even the public in 
Saskatchewan, and people living in our large urban centres, are 
beginning to understand the impact of a downturn in the 
agricultural economy. People in our cities like Regina, and 
more specifically Saskatoon right now, as they continue to . . . 
like the agricultural community, the rural community around 
them, are looking for much needed moisture and trying to 
maintain your lawns or your gardens if you’re putting in a 
garden. And the need for water is an important factor that 
everyone understands. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a couple of recent headlines say it all. 
Basically what they say, Leader-Post this morning says, “North 
didn’t get (the) rain.” And the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, the 
headline is “Drought curtails seeding.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, those of us in this part of the province, the 
southern part of the province, certainly appreciate and are truly 
grateful for the rain that has been falling. And we certainly feel 
for the rest of the province, not only the agricultural community 
but also the forest industry where there’s a significant lack of 
moisture resulting in forest fires that are destroying large acres 
of forestry and forest land that is an economic blow to this 
province, as well as private property. 
 
But coming back to the motion before us, and the fact that many 
agriculture producers and specifically livestock producers in the 
province of Saskatchewan are facing a significant problem at 
this time. 
 
Areas outside of this southern belt that has received rain . . . 
however, in some cases, even in the southern areas of the 
province, while the rains have been welcome and we’re really 
grateful for them — whether it’s been an inch, inch and a half, 
or half an inch of rain, the fact that it’s come over a period of 
some . . . almost 48 hours and it’s been cloudy and most of the 
moisture has soaked into the land, this wasn’t a rain that really 
put a lot of water reserve into reservoirs if they’re being 
depleted. So even in southern Saskatchewan many producers 
are facing the need for water. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government does have a 
responsibility. While we look to PFRA . . . and I remember last 
fall the Minister of Agriculture going to PFRA and arguing with 
the federal government for the fact that they should look at 
expanding the funding the PFRA program was putting into 
water resources because they had run out of money fairly early 
and many, many rural producers were finding themselves — 
even prior to last winter — in a situation where they were short 
water supplies, their water resources had dried up or the wells 
had dried up and they had to drill new wells. 
 
And at that time I believe the federal government came through 
with some funds. And it’s imperative that the federal 
government recognize the importance of not only meeting the 
trade subsidies with the United States, but recognizing there’s a 
program, that PFRA has a program available and that it should 
be funded adequately. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we talk about the provincial 
government has to show some leadership and show us that they 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

 

have . . . that they’re committed to rural producers. 
 
The water pumping equipment in the province of Saskatchewan 
I believe is handled by Sask Water. And if a person has access 
to water, if they’re . . . If a water reservoir they have is actually 
low or pretty well depleted, Mr. Speaker, you make an 
application to Sask Water and apply for a use of their 
equipment and get access to a water source and pump your 
reservoir full of water. 
 
The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is that there isn’t a lot of 
equipment out there and the demand for that equipment far 
exceeds the ability . . . or the amount of equipment that’s 
available, or the ability of the equipment to meet the needs, to 
try and supply the water resources that are needed to water and 
to provide the water for the livestock herds that . . . And the 
livestock producers whose livelihoods are in jeopardy as they 
watch their pastures dry up, and as they watch their water 
supplies slowly dwindle to the point of forcing them to make a 
decision: do I look elsewhere? Do I look to other parts of the 
province? 
 
And we notice that certainly in my area, Mr. Speaker, last 
spring, last summer, we noticed cattle liners moving in from 
Alberta bringing cattle into our area and also into the western 
part of Manitoba. We’ve noticed last fall hay moving from our 
area and western Manitoba into western Saskatchewan and 
Alberta. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately even the eastern parts of 
Saskatchewan are running short of grassland and producers are 
forced to look further afield. And one has to ask themselves, at 
the end of the day what is this going to cost me and is it an 
economic benefit or is it . . . or will this make my operation 
economically viable if I have to move livestock great distances 
in order to find pasture and water? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while it’s important for us to continue to hold 
the federal government’s feet to the fire on a number of issues, I 
believe the provincial government has a responsibility as well to 
show some leadership; to actually make some efforts to provide 
more pumping equipment so that producers who have made 
application to fill reservoirs can gain access to some of the 
equipment, or to equipment from Sask Water, to actually 
replenish their water reservoirs in order to provide the much 
needed water for their livestock, and in some cases, as the 
member from Regina indicated, even for their homes and the 
lack of water that they face and the hauling that takes place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have all at some time or other driven in other 
areas of the province that haven’t been as fortunate as the area 
that I represent. We’ve been actually quite blessed with 
moisture even this winter, and this most recent rain. And it is 
somewhat disturbing to drive through an area and just see the 
land just totally brown — nothing on it and yet there’s livestock 
trying to graze. Livestock producers cutting their herds trying to 
at least keep a few animals around to keep their herd viable. 
 
And yet, you see them . . . one case we saw last year where an 
individual was driving out of the field with a large water tank 
while he had just left another one there to fill a . . . replenish the 
water supply that was available. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, our hearts go out to those producers who are 
in this situation. But at the same time, while we are concerned 
and we empathize with those individuals, we realize that 
provincial governments and federal governments do have a 
responsibility in helping to reach out, and in this case, we’re 
suggesting the provincial government has a responsibility to 
show some leadership in areas where they already have access 
and provide some of the resources to meet some of the drought 
condition needs. 
 
And we’re not going to meet it all. We realize that. We’re not 
. . . we don’t have it. We’re not asking the provincial 
government just to dig so deep and just let the federal 
government off the hook. It’s imperative that the federal 
government realize that responsibility. But it’s also imperative 
that the provincial government realize they have some 
responsibility to show some leadership. 
 
And when you go arguing and lobbying for the federal 
government to come forward with some money and you’re not 
prepared to show a bit of leadership and you continue to cut 
your agricultural budget, you wonder at the end of the day, how 
is the federal government going to respond? If they say no, you 
can hardly wonder why they would say no when there’s no 
leadership at the local level. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while in a large part we can agree with the 
motion that’s before us, we believe that the provincial 
government needs to provide some leadership as well. 
 
Ms. Jones: — . . . I also welcome the opportunity to enter into 
this debate. And I was listening fairly carefully to the previous 
speaker who seems to me that on that side of the House they’re 
always having something negative to say about whatever efforts 
that the government makes. 
 
And it seems to me also, Mr. Speaker, that it would be a lot 
more useful if, instead of always criticizing the provincial 
government, that they would get on board and help in making a 
concerted effort in lobbying the federal government for the 
funds that are so desperately needed to help our agricultural 
producers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think in terms of him saying that we ought to show some 
leadership, I think that the provincial government, in expending 
approximately 5 per cent of our annual provincial budget on 
agriculture, indeed shows a great deal of leadership in showing 
other provinces and our federal government the importance of 
agriculture to a province such as ours. 
 
And I think it’s very important to note also that in contrast to 
the 5 per cent of our budget that we spend on agriculture, the 
national government puts in something just over 1 per cent, I 
believe, of the total budget that they have which is substantially 
greater than ours and is supported by many, many more 
taxpayers as well. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So I think that our province indeed does show leadership in this 
area. And we would be much better served by an opposition 
who joined in in an effort to secure help for farmers that are 
facing a very serious drought situation and as previous speakers 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

have said, perhaps the most serious situation since 1919. 
Perhaps even drier than the dirty thirties that everyone loves to 
hate to talk about. So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Substantially drier than that. And so I think that a little help 
from the other side would go a lot further than the criticism that 
they simply like to always extend. 
 
I was very interested to hear the member from Idylwyld’s 
remarks about the PFRA. And most of us likely have some very 
fond memories of a project, a dugout, something that was 
assisted with on our farms when we were growing up. 
 
And in my particular case, we had a coulee that ran through, 
actually through our farmyard. And through the help of the 
PFRA, that was dammed off and a road built across it to give us 
better access to our farmyard and a very nice swimming hole 
and a place to do a little bit of rowboating. 
 
My dad was a Red Cross swimming instructor and was able to 
provide swimming lessons to all of the village children in the 
Alsask and surrounding area. And all of that and all of those 
badges very likely came about as a result of having the PFRA 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, two water holes in a 
50-mile radius, says my colleague over here. So we all have 
memories, I believe. 
 
I also thought it might be quite handy for everyone to have 
access to that new, noble plough. If it’s going to lay such a nice 
trench, perhaps it would be good for underground sprinklers in 
cities as well. 
 
So there’s been some very interesting comments made this 
afternoon. And I’m pleased to be able to participate in that. 
 
I think in terms of leadership as well that our provincial 
government provides, I want to recount some of the programs 
that are available to people. Much as the opposition doesn’t 
seem to think that we’re showing leadership, I believe that we 
are. 
 
And we have a rainfall forage program which was available 
from Saskatchewan Crop Insurance to protect producers in the 
event precipitation on native forage and tame grazing acres is 
below historic levels. And under that program, Mr. Speaker, 
producers are eligible for coverage for up to $7 an acre for 
native forage and up to $9 per acre for grazed tame forage if the 
weighted average precipitation at weather stations falls below 
80 per cent of the average precipitation. 
 
So it is a bit of a complicated thing. But in spite of that 
complication, 4,000 producers insured $3.3 million acres under 
this program in 2002. So obviously it was considered beneficial 
by the producers and well worthwhile. 
 
We have an annual crop rainfall pilot program, and that has had 
a very great uptake as well. Producers are eligible for coverages 
of up to $10 an acre if the precipitation falls below 80 per cent 
of historic level. And 2,363 producers participated in that pilot 
rainfall program covering just over 900,000 acres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not perhaps used to the same extent by livestock producers, but 
NISA can be triggered if the producer is falling below their 
traditional income. CFIP is available to provide protection to 

producers against severe drops in the producer’s gross margin. 
 
We have a range assistance program, Mr. Speaker, where 
lessees of Crown lands that are experiencing the effects of dry 
conditions can apply for reduced rents under this program. And 
I think that that is as well a very helpful program that the 
government has made available to producers. 
 
They must indeed sign a range of improvement agreement 
covering a term of five to ten years, where they agree to reduce 
the level of stocking because the lands are stressed as a result of 
a lack of moisture and it’s going to be necessary to make 
changes to improve the utilization of these. 
 
But the rents are reduced by an amount that’s equivalent with 
the level of reduction in stocking so it works its way out. 
 
We’re also able, Mr. Speaker, to accommodate drought-affected 
livestock on Crown land. And this program includes allowing 
lessees to custom graze drought-affected livestock, and 
allowing forage crops to be sold to others that require the feed. 
 
So community pasture managers can assist this by moving 
cattle, as many cattle as they can, to other community pastures 
that have unutilized capacity. So they are able to move the stock 
back and forth and hopefully be able to feed in a better way. 
 
There’s the farm dugout pumping assistance program, which is 
operated by Sask Water, to provide farmers with pumping 
equipment at cost. And where it may not be a permanent 
answer, it’s certainly a temporary solution that helps out with 
filling small storage reservoirs. 
 
Power takeoff pumps and aluminum pipe and pipe trailers are 
available on a fee-for-service basis from regional Sask Water 
depots, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have rural development programs where the PFRA provides 
financial assistance for the development of dependable, secure 
water sources for domestic and livestock uses. And it’s 
important to note that in 2001-02 they did come through with 
some money and Saskatchewan made a one-time contribution 
of 1.5 million as well, matching the federal contribution to 
allow more producer access. And that was an important start. 
And then in 2002-03, 2.2 million in federal funding is allocated 
to this program. 
 
So we have requested . . . officially Sask Agriculture and Food 
has requested an additional 5 million, but I think that there’s an 
understanding amongst everyone here that 5 million is going to 
be a very great help but it isn’t going to be sufficient. 
 
So along with those programs, the one thing that I came across 
in doing some research here was a very interesting article that 
has a grant from Sask Power, I believe. And I think . . . I don’t 
have time to talk about that very much now but I think it’s 
going to be an important thing that producers will enjoy 
learning about and I’m sure there’ll be an opportunity to talk 
about it at a later date. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll take my place and I urge 
support for this motion. 
 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a great 
deal of pleasure to speak on this 75-minute debate concerning a 
real, very severe situation in much of the province, much of the 
northern part of the province. As we know the rains have not 
come to much of Saskatchewan. It’s created a huge impact on 
the farming community. As we know, it’s affecting right now, 
affecting the livestock producer more right now. It soon will be 
having a devastating effect on the grain producer as well. 
 
As we know, without spring rains the pastures have not grown 
and very little snow means there was very little runoff to fill 
any sloughs or dugouts. And this has put the livestock 
producers in the province in a very tenable position and one 
only has to take as an example a RM in the constituency of 
Redberry Lake, the council of RM Great Bend, No. 405 has 
declared itself a disaster area. 
 
The reeve, Ron Saunders, confirmed after talking with various 
grain and livestock producers within the RM the lack of 
moisture had taken its toll on pastures, dugouts, and fields. In 
his words: 
 

There just isn’t any water. In the northern part of the RM, 
there are sloughs that many elderly have never seen without 
water before. 
 
Ground wells have run dry putting a strain on the cattle 
industry. Many cattle producers have been hauling water 
for their cattle all winter. 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 

This (is not a common sight) was a common sight all over 
the Riverbend area, not just Great Bend. 

 
And he says: 
 

This is (very) serious. Community pastures are refusing to 
admit cattle unless there is some rain and the potential for 
fires is (very) high. 
 
(Of course) grain producers from all over the Riverbend 
area have been checking their fields for moisture only to 
find powder dry soil. Lack of winter snow cover and spring 
showers has added more strain to the struggling farm 
economy. 

 
That’s just one example in one part of northwest Saskatchewan 
that has sought to declare itself a disaster area. 
 
It’s a very traumatic situation because this is not the first year of 
drought in much of this area and much of this part of 
Saskatchewan. In some areas, this is the third and fourth year of 
drought, so it’s been a very serious concern for quite some time. 
And it’s taking a devastating effect on the livestock producers. 
 
As we know, what choices do many livestock producers have? 
It’s fundamental to the provincial economy and the provincial 
livestock industry that farmers and ranchers keep their basic 
breeding herd on the farm, on the ranch. And these animals are 
not animals that can be sold and replaced easily or without 

considerable expense in another year. 
 
It’s one thing to sell off the yearlings and other animals that 
may be around, but to sell off the breeding herd that has taken 
many years, in many cases, generations of breeding and 
selecting to find the optimum animal that suits that particular 
rancher’s or farmer’s situation and the . . . also reflecting the 
market conditions that do change over time. 
 
So it’s very fundamental that we as legislators put in place 
finances to help these producers keep their livestock on the 
ranch. As I said, once they’re gone, it’s a tremendous loss to the 
economy and to that individual producer who may not be able 
to get back into the livestock business with that particular type 
of breeding stock again because of the years it takes to replace 
quality animals. 
 
I have heard from many constituents that they’re beginning, or 
have been for some time feeding . . . supplementing the feed to 
their breeding animals on the farm out in pastures. If they have 
dugouts or wells out in the pasture, they are taking feed out to 
the livestock, in many cases hay or straw if it’s available, but 
that’s running out. 
 
And there’s other products that livestock producers can use. 
Grain screening pellets is a very important product that can be 
used for livestock feed. And normally these feeds are used in 
the wintertime and not used in the summer, of course, relying 
on the grass and pastures that in normal years are available for 
the livestock producer. So there’s a tremendous cost of buying 
extra feed, basically feeding your animals year-round, which 
has added a tremendous financial strain to the producers of this 
province. 
 
But that is also an added problem if the pastures do not have 
adequate water. Then the producer must also haul water to the 
cattle out in the pastures or dig very expensive wells or dig 
dugouts or clean dugouts out. 
 
Now many dugouts do not . . . are not supplied by springs and 
they need runoff. So digging dugouts at this time of year is not 
necessarily going to help in the short term. Now of course wells 
are definitely more effective if you can get water in that 
particular area, but it’s a very high cost. 
 
And there’s other problems with livestock. When you are 
feeding them year-round, there’s a reproductive problem that 
could occur. Normally breeding stock need to be flushed before 
breeding season and . . . so that they have a higher conception 
rate. And feeding animals dry feed in the summertime during 
breeding season can cause considerable loss in production and 
conception rates, which is an added financial problem to the 
livestock producer. 
 
There’s a number of constituents that are considering and are 
digging in pipes. They are pumping water from the yard to 
pastures a mile or two miles away. And this is the area where 
these producers need financial help now to help them with the 
cost of pumping and putting in the piping to give water to the 
livestock. 
 
(15:15) 
 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

And so we as legislators must take a serious look at helping 
these livestock producers to help offset some of these costs 
now, because now is the critical time of the . . . of this . . . in 
this drought that these producers are needing help. And if we do 
not help them soon, these producers will be forced to sell off 
their . . . their very important breeding stock and this breeding 
stock will be gone for . . . for generations in many cases. 
 
Now these animals are going on the market. We know that 
cow-calf pairs are being sold in record numbers. Normally this 
time of the year the markets are fairly slow and there aren’t a lot 
of cattle being sold, but this year that is not the case. There are a 
number of breeding stock going to market, as well as feeders. 
And so this is added . . . has added the extra weight of concern 
to the . . . to the crisis in the livestock industry right now. 
 
The other thing that some producers are doing are going into 
. . . actually taking their animals into Manitoba, renting and 
leasing pastures in Manitoba and moving their livestock there. 
And again, hopefully, if the weather is good to Saskatchewan, 
when the rains come back these cattle will come back. But in 
many cases people may just continue to leave their cattle out in 
Manitoba or elsewhere and start their productions out there and 
continue their operations out there. 
 
I believe that a commitment of $10 million to the program of 
digging new wells and digging dugouts and purchase of more 
water, pumping equipment, and I hope that also would include 
piping and underground trenching and things like that, it would 
be very important at this stage. 
 
And I believe the way the federal government has always 
operated in the past, if the provincial government was willing to 
put some money into a plan, the PFRA or other . . . or another 
plan, the federal government would come in and top up that 
amount or on some basis increase the amount of money that’s 
committed to these projects. So if there was $10 million put into 
the fund, the federal government would certainly add to that as 
well. So that’s something we as legislators must take into 
account, the dynamics of how the federal government thinks 
and works. 
 
I would, just in conclusion, like to emphasize the deep concern 
that we must have for the livestock industry and we must take 
all the initiative and give help wherever it’s needed in the . . . in 
this drought disaster area and to help the livestock producers of 
this province to basically survive for one more year until next 
year or . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. Next 
speaker. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to be able to stand today to speak to this particular 
motion. 
 
As the members of this Assembly will be aware, drought has 
been a major concern to the constituents of Cypress Hills for a 
number of years now. It’s not just a recent phenomenon. It isn’t 
something that just occurred last summer. In many parts of the 
constituency drought has been a matter of serious concern for at 
least two years, three years, and in some small parts even more 
than that. 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that drought is just now becoming an issue 
of provincial concern is a bit of a surprise I’m sure to the 
constituents of Redberry Lake and of Lloydminster 
constituencies and some of the other constituencies in the 
Northwest where, as I understand it, they’ve been affected by 
drought for maybe half a dozen years now and are in desperate, 
desperate need of help in those constituencies — maybe even 
more so than producers throughout the rest of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s rather easy in our short memories to forget 
about the impact of drought when you’ve just experienced a 
weekend of beautiful rain. And I know that we have seen some 
nice moisture fall in the extreme southern part of the province, 
generally, approximately from the No. 1 Highway south. And 
the impact of that rain, both physically and emotionally and 
mentally, is tremendous. You know, the attitude of producers 
improves dramatically after a rain of any kind. And I think that 
we noticed that at home over the weekend when we talked to 
producers who were enjoying the first decent rainfall of the 
spring season. 
 
But we don’t want to let this small amount of rain that we 
received very gladly cloud our perception of the problem. 
Because the problem, Mr. Speaker, is tremendously serious 
through the vast areas of this province. Through the areas north 
of the No. 1 Highway in particular, up into the mid-range of the 
agricultural areas of the province in the Saskatoon area, into the 
Melfort/Tisdale area, Prince Albert — all those, all those areas 
are experiencing very severe drought. And I’m sure that any 
member who has rural components to their constituency has 
heard first-hand the stories from producers who are suffering 
seriously as a result of the current drought. 
 
I think it’s been mentioned in the House this afternoon that, 
statistically speaking, this past year was the driest year in 
recorded history in this province. We’ve all heard either our 
parents or our grandparents talk about the impact of drought in 
the Depression era of the ’30s, but if I understand the data 
correctly, Mr. Speaker, even in the driest part of the Depression 
era, in the driest years of the 1930s, there was lots of snow, a 
large amount of snow available for spring runoff. We had heavy 
and hard winters in the ’30s, and the runoff produced pools of 
water and opportunities to dam water in certain places where 
dams existed, even though the summers were very dry. 
 
So having come through a summer now that was even drier than 
those historical years of the Depression era is really something. 
And I think that having had that kind of statistical information 
made available to us, Mr. Speaker, it behoves us as legislators, 
people who represent this province, and producers that have 
been hit harder than at any time in this last century, it behoves 
us to address their problems in a more specific, serious, and 
deliberate way. 
 
And I think the motion today talks about a $10 million fund that 
could be used to good advantage for water sources, and 
developing new water opportunities for hard-pressed producers. 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that it insinuates very clearly that 
the responsibility all rests with the federal government. 
 
I heard a bit of the history delineated concerning the PFRA and 
how they’ve done good work over the years, and how they have 
traditionally taken the lead in this particular area of 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

 

development. But, Mr. Speaker, when push comes to shove, is 
the federal government going to feel the consequences of the 
drought as much as this province is? Is the federal government 
and the treasury of the federal government going to be impacted 
as seriously as our provincial treasury? Is it the federal cattle 
herd proportionately that’s going to be hurt, or is it the 
provincial cattle herd that is going to be hurt worse? 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are very real and specific questions. And I 
don’t think there’s any doubt, if you did the math, if you looked 
at the consequences, that the herd sell-off that’s going to be 
happening in this province, which has already happened to a 
large extent and which will continue to increase, the herd 
sell-off will have a financial impact in this province of far 
greater proportions than the impact will be felt at the federal 
level. 
 
It only makes sense, Mr. Speaker, when it’s your house that’s 
burning down, that you participate in a fire brigade. And I think 
that to lay the burden of this particular relief effort solely on the 
federal government is an abdication of responsibility by the 
provincial government. 
 
Now there might be some room for compromise and there 
might be some room for working together. But to just say it’s 
not our problem, it’s their problem because, historically, the 
PFRA has been responsible for water development ignores the 
reality, ignores the reality of the current circumstances and the 
reality of the impact that will be felt in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did some research in my own constituency and 
found some serious information that was compiled as of 
February, early February this year, but it talks about what has 
happened in rural Saskatchewan in my particular constituency 
as a result of the drought. 
 
I had one rancher who sold 200 head of cows last year. He 
possibly will sell the balance of his herd this year. And he’s 
already at his own expense, primarily, put in 12 miles of 
pipeline on lease land. Lease land that does not even belong to 
him. Lease land that is owned by the provincial government. 
Lease land that is charged to this man’s account. This man has 
to pay the taxes on that lease land. Now he’s put a water 
pipeline in there at his own expense. 
 
This is the kind of effort people have gone to at their own 
expense and their own initiative to try and assist themselves in 
this very serious crisis. 
 
I have another rancher who sold down 30 per cent of his herd. 
He sent his yearlings to Manitoba at 65 cents per head per day 
last summer. The cows went east. They were being fed there for 
the winter. The calves were being fed there. They weren’t even 
going to come home. And this particular individual put in five 
miles of pipeline for water sources on the lease. 
 
Another rancher reduced his herd by 15 per cent. He had 
$19,000 worth of water work done last summer on lease land, 
Mr. Speaker. Another $5,000 worth of work on deeded land 
where he put in a water system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this list is extensive. I’ve just given you three, 
maybe four examples of the kinds of initiatives taken by people 

in my constituency. 
 
Last year, we asked for a water program. The provincial 
government was warned on March 4 that we had a drought 
impending. It took until late last fall for anything to be done, 
Mr. Speaker. And by then, for many of the ranchers in my 
constituency and other areas of this province, it was too late to 
complete the work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a $10 million program is a minimum given the 
magnitude of the problem. And I believe the provincial 
government needs to take seriously its role and go to the federal 
government and put up at least half the money, start the 
bargaining process someplace and let’s get this work underway. 
We cannot afford to wait any longer. 
 
If APAS, the Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan, is correct, we soon will have very, very little 
herd left in this province. We cannot afford to lose another 
minute, another day, or another cow. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Sixty-five minutes of the debate has 
elapsed. We now proceed to the 10-minute section for 
comments or questions. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question is for 
the member from Cypress Hills. And I was struck by his 
comments about how we all do feel for our neighbours and I 
was struck also by the comments that people in the cities also 
feel the extent of the drought. 
 
But I am concerned that if we don’t ask the federal government 
for $10 million, and particularly in the area of PFRA, that if 
instead Saskatchewan takes that over, is that something the 
member from Cypress Hills sees us doing on a continual basis? 
In effect setting up our own provincial PFRA because we know 
the problem closer? And I would . . . I’d like to hear his 
response to that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 
the member for the question. The reality of the situation is of 
such magnitude, Mr. Speaker, that I think we are wasting time 
by debating this issue. I think, given my experience in the sales 
business, you start out with a price and you have a bargaining 
position, and you know where you want to end up at. 
 
If the province is not prepared to put $10 million into this 
program, then they need to at least go to the federal government 
and say, this is what we’re prepared to do; what are you 
prepared to do? 
 
And I would remind the member once again that a bargaining 
position has to start someplace. You have to have a beginning 
and an end, and every negotiation requires those two elements. 
So I would suggest that we take that approach and we quit 
playing politics with this and get something done for the 
producers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the member from Regina Coronation Park. I was just notified 
that the Deputy Premier, the Agriculture minister, in an 
interview out in the rotunda said that he . . . the government 
would be interested in cost sharing with the federal government 
concerning this very important issue. 
 
And I would just like to ask the member does he agree, should 
the provincial government cost share with the federal 
government? If the provincial government is prepared to put in 
so many million dollars — possibly if the federal government is 
going to put in 10 million, possibly the provincial government 
should put in 10 million and top it up to $20 million and have 
an adequate program in place for this very disastrous situation 
in rural Saskatchewan and the livestock industry. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, to the member for Redberry Lake. I 
don’t believe that question is in order. Simply put, what’s 
debated here is what we’re asking questions about. What he 
said she said somewhere else — what a member might have 
said out in the rotunda, what your member might have said in 
his constituency or anywhere else — has little relevance to the 
debate that’s going on here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Now the question is: do we have $10 million 
from the federal government to help with emergency drilling of 
wells? The answer is yes, we need to get that. 
 
The further part of the member’s question was: what’s the 
provincial responsibility? In my speech I said last winter we 
ponyed up a million and a half dollars, and the federal 
government matched that. That was extra money beyond the 
normal PFRA money, and we welcomed their extra million and 
a half and we were pleased to pony up our million and a half. 
 
But what the Minister of Agriculture may have said out in the 
rotunda has no direct bearing on this particular debate. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank you for that. I 
have a supplementary question to the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
I would like to have the member clarify exactly what the 
government’s position on cost sharing with the federal 
government. I believe it’s very important, as a . . . in a 
negotiating tactic with the federal government, to put some 
money on the table and go to the federal government and say, 
this is how serious of a situation we have in this province. 
We’re prepared to put up, let’s say $10 million. Will you come 
in and match, or come in even with a $15 million package to 
have a total of a $25 million package for this very disastrous 
situation in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, again I thank the member for 
Redberry for the question. This is kind of like asking a 

drowning person to provide their own life jacket, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have is a situation where we’re asking for some 
emergency water drilling. In terms of agriculture policy — for 
the member of Rosthern and others — in terms of agricultural 
policy, we have question period, we have estimates for the 
Department of Agriculture. Those are all appropriate places to 
ask about provincial funding, provincial cost sharing. 
 
What my motion, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, said is we’re asking for $10 million extra — 10 
million extra — simply to provide emergency well drilling to 
deal with an emergency situation that we have right now in our 
livestock producing areas. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question’s for the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
I think that his speech was quite interesting to listen to today. 
The analogy he uses is of a person waiting for their house to 
burn down for the fire department to show up. I wonder if a 
more appropriate analogy isn’t that he is asking for bleeding 
men to give themselves transfusions. Because this is exactly the 
kind of approach the Sask Party has put forth. 
 
Now what I would like to hear is the Sask Party explain why 
this is not Ottawa’s responsibility and why they are once again 
letting the federal Liberals off the hook. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to note that in 
the question the member just addressed to me, he referred to his 
own government as bleeding men. And I think that’s quite 
appropriate under the circumstances because they are bleeding 
red ink all over this province. 
 
You know, we looked at their budget this spring and found out 
that it was not just wanting, it was in desperate need of an 
infusion. Maybe a transfusion would be a better word to use, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t care which political party looks after this 
problem. What I would like to see is some political party with 
the intestinal fortitude to recognize the seriousness of the issue 
and take some action. 
 
Now it was referred to earlier actions last year and for instance 
when we were asking for a water assistance program for 
producers that the provincial government put up $1.5 million, 
the feds put up $1.5 million, and eventually we had another 1.1 
million. It was cost shared then. What’s the problem with doing 
it now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. A supplementary question 
for the member from Cypress Hills. I find it interesting . . . Let 
me preface my remarks by saying I find it interesting that he 
would start off his answer about how serious this is while 
making a flippant comment about the hemorrhaging that is 
going on within the beef producing industry. I find that very 
interesting. 
 
My question to the Sask Party member from Cypress Hills is 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

 

this: if this is their approach today, how long until they fall off 
the bandwagon in terms of the approach that the Leader of the 
Opposition has said in terms of a united front with Ottawa? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re not talking about trade injury here. We’re 
talking about drought assistance — a drought that is being felt 
in our province worse than anywhere else. 
 
You would think, Mr. Minister, that a government that thinks it 
has the legitimacy to govern would do what’s appropriate in its 
. . . in terms of its obligations. The drought is affecting our 
province. 
 
The question is: will this government show some leadership in 
addressing the problem? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot take any action on this side. 
Unfortunately I’m helpless in view of the particular coalition 
that this government has formed. They have all the cards in 
their hands. I wish they would play them so that somebody — 
somebody — would benefit from the game. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the member from Regina Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion called on the federal government — 
and you didn’t hear my colleagues arguing the fact that the 
federal government has a responsibility — but I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, what we have in front of us is the provincial 
government has some responsibility to give some leadership. 
 
And we look at pumping . . . equipment needed to pump wells 
or to pump . . . fill your water reservoirs, and Sask Water has 
equipment. However there’s a real lack; there just isn’t enough 
right now. 
 
And I’m asking, Mr. Speaker, the member, what his 
government . . . the responsibility that his government has in 
providing and giving some leadership to meet some of the 
needs of the drought-stricken livestock producers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank the member 
from Moosomin for the question. Mr. Speaker, it’s a long list of 
things that we’re doing to help agricultural producers. 
 
Let me start with crop insurance where the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . taxpayers of Saskatchewan, we fund 35 per 
cent of the premium — 35 per cent of the premium, Mr. 
Speaker, funded by taxpayers and this is for agriculture 
producers. We’re proud of it. It’s for livestock producers; it’s 
for grain producers. Our portion has stayed the same; the 
federal government has dropped. We increased ours to 108 
million this year, that’s taxpayers’ funding to farmers. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The 75-minute debate time has 
elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 12 — Drought Assistance 
for Livestock Producers 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
with the other motion, I have to agree with the speakers from 
before and with things that we’ve said in the House numerous 
times. 
 
Something that we know quite well in this House on both sides 
is the importance of the cattle industry for our province. And 
statistically, globally, when we look at the markets, the cattle 
markets, and what is needed and what can be supplied and 
where, we know that there is room to expand the cattle industry 
in Saskatchewan. And we know that there’s a good reason to 
expand the industry in our province. 
 
Often we hear different speakers on business and economic 
development that we are behind our neighbouring provinces in 
the expansion of intensive livestock operations and value added 
through intensive . . . or through livestock within our province. 
 
We’ve got one province to the east of us, Mr. Speaker, that has 
developed the hog industry far beyond our own here in 
Saskatchewan. We have a province to the west of us that 
developed the cattle industry far better than we have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it has been to the detriment at the farm gate, I’m afraid, for 
our province. We’ve been more dependent on the grains and 
oilseeds. And therefore our, you know, bottom line incomes is 
lower. So we know that there is a good reason to expand the 
cattle industry in our province. 
 
The ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) 
committee which had done extensive research on what we need 
in order to revitalize rural Saskatchewan to help the rural 
economy, and then subsequently the economy as a whole in our 
province, had on page A-23 wrote the following on the cattle 
industry: 
 

Saskatchewan’s natural advantage in the production of 
low-priced feed grains and forages favours the production 
and feeding of livestock. This conversion from grains to 
livestock is accelerating over the last few years and 
promises to continue in the future. 
 
High transportation costs, low grain/oilseed prices and 
abundance of marginal land, which can be converted from 
grain to grass, have put Saskatchewan in an ideal position 
to expand (the) livestock production. It is expected that the 
cow-herd will significantly increase in the next 5 years. 
 
Backgrounding continues to bridge the gap between the 
cow/calf and feedlot sectors. There is considerable potential 
for growth in the province. Interest in this area is growing 
substantially with grass-fed cattle being a profitable area 
and an important part of sustainable agriculture. 

 
So there could be no little question, or very little question — 
I’m sorry — that there is quite a significant social and economic 
benefit can be achieved in rural Saskatchewan and in 
Saskatchewan as a whole with the development and expansion 
of the beef sector in our province. 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

The value-added returns of backgrounding and fattening cattle 
in our province will achieve a positive economic increase for 
the net income at the farm gate and for the province as a whole. 
And presently we do have the second largest beef herd in 
Canada, but unfortunately it’s drastically below the leader in 
our country. 
 
And in the past we have lagged by percentage of growth as 
well. 
 
There’s a number of reasons why we’ve had difficulty growing 
livestock sectors in our province. There’s a lack of capital 
investment dollars that comes into our province. There’s 
extremely high property taxes. I’ve heard where other tax 
structures are a deterrent to investment dollars in our province 
as well. And there’s a number of other factors that I’ve heard. 
 
But the fact is that, recently, we’ve experienced a renewed 
realization of how important it is to have livestock increases in 
our province. And the leaders within that industry realize that in 
order to sustain the future of the rural economy, we need to 
expand the livestock sectors within our province. And because 
of that, it was indeed happening in our province. The cattle 
industry was growing — not as speedily as some had hoped that 
it could and would, but it has been slowly expanding. 
 
And now that this very important industry that we’ve been 
trying to grow is facing a drought last year and again this year 
. . . And I really stress, Mr. Speaker, that this is the second year 
where it’s facing a drought and that is going to have huge 
effects on the cattle industry. The government knew that there 
was a strong possibility of a second year of a drought and we 
have to really question what they did to prepare for it. It wasn’t 
a surprise. There was a lot of talk last year that, yes, it’s a dry 
year and what will happen if next year is the same. 
 
Well next year is the same, Mr. Speaker. And what they did to 
address the possibility of yet a second year of a drought was 
they decrease the agriculture budget. They designed the most 
inadequate drought program that I’ve ever seen — or this 
province, for that matter, has ever seen. 
 
It involves investing or betting per se on 500 acres at a weather 
station of your choice. It doesn’t matter where that is. And it 
accepts 24 farmers per weather station or less than 2,000 
farmers in the whole province, which is less than 5 per cent of 
the producers in this province and can participate in the 
program. And that’s what they bragged as our drought 
assistance program. 
 
(15:45) 
 
It was sort of championed by our Agriculture minister as the 
greatest thing since sliced bread. But in fact it doesn’t address 
the problems and it doesn’t address the need that we have in 
this province, and it shows a complete lack of action and a 
complete lack of vision on behalf of this government. 
 
And sadly enough, that’s typical of this government. They have 
gone through so many years of crisis management that they’re 
at the point now where they can’t even do that well. They can’t 
even manage the crisis well. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government’s lack of vision and lack of 
understanding, and lack of being able to address the future years 
and what may happen to the future is totally unacceptable. And 
the lack of the understanding of the cattle industry and what’s 
happening, and how drought is going to affect the cattle 
industry in this province, by our very own Agriculture minister, 
is quite appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this drought is going to bring all the plans that the 
industry had and that this province had of expanding the 
livestock sector in this province to its knees. There is a shortage 
of water. There’s a shortage of feed. And there’s a shortage of 
grazeable pasture because it’s drying up right before our very 
eyes. 
 
One of the bigger pastures that I have in my area is the 
Wolverine PFRA pasture. A lot of producers are quite 
dependent upon it, and to date they will not accept any cattle 
into that pasture. 
 
Every day there’s more and more articles in the newspapers of 
how serious that this problem is becoming. To quote some of 
the headlines we have, “Drought put pastures in peril.” “APAS 
calls for drought payment for cow owners.” “Provincial budget 
does not recognize agriculture as an economic driver.” “Drastic 
action needed to save provincial cow herd.” “No time to wait 
and see with livestock.” “Drought areas at point of no return.” 
 
And it goes on and on and on, the number of articles, the 
number of people who are voicing their concerns for the cattle 
industry. And yet what does our government do? Basically they 
just ignore it and they say there’s not a problem. 
 
And APAS has predicted that the producers will have to sell 
between 50 to 70 per cent of Saskatchewan’s cattle at fire sale 
prices. And if that indeed does happen — and it is happening; 
we’ve got a number of auction marts that have contacted us, 
said that the number of cattle going through their rings has 
increased drastically over this time of last year, so it is indeed 
happening — it’s going to take years for industry to recover 
from this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And considering that all this is happening, considering that it’s 
well known in the public, considering that there is a public 
outcry, I was quite appalled that on May 22 during question 
period, our Minister of Agriculture stated, and I quote: 
 

. . . there are a number of things that we have been doing 
with the federal government, the national government, and 
with producer organizations in this province to prepare 
ourselves . . . for the kinds of situations that we might face 
again this year. And these are the kinds of things, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’ve done. 
 
We’ve gone to our Ottawa friends and said that we need in 
this province to have an enhanced crop insurance program 
. . . 
 
We’ve said that we need to take a portion of our crop 
insurance dollars and we need to restructure them so that 
they make their way to the grass program and to the pasture 
program. 

 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t explain to the minister any better than 
the producers in the industry have obviously tried to. This is all 
well and fine but the cattle need water now. They actually . . . 
they need water every day, Mr. Speaker. And our minister 
needs to know that, that cattle need water every day and they 
need feed every day. 
 
And the fact is neither are readily available at this point so that 
we cannot wait for the enhanced crop insurance, such as it is, 
and that’s questionable. They have to have something in place 
now. 
 
And I think it’s time that our Agriculture minister recognizes 
the seriousness of that. And it’s time that he recognizes what’s 
going to happen long term to the cattle industry in our province 
if he continues to ignore this problem. 
 
It’s estimated that 800,000 cattle could be on the auction block 
within our . . . in our province this year due to wells and 
dugouts that have gone dry and that the natural creek-ways in 
some areas has dried up as well. 
 
And this again has been . . . we’ve asked the minister what he’s 
going to do for water in our province and the need for water for 
livestock producers. And his answer to that, Mr. Speaker, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . what we’ve said to the PFRA . . . — which is the Prairie 
farm rehabilitation program, which is managed by the 
federal government — we’ve said to the federal 
government that . . . (we) need to put additional dollars in, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s historical that the prairie . . . (and) the 
PFRA has provided funding forever, Mr. Speaker, for water 
programs . . . 
 
I’m on record, Mr. Speaker, today asking the national 
government to put in additional money into the PFRA 
program, Mr. Speaker, because there is a drought in 
Saskatchewan of which we know — a serious drought, Mr. 
Speaker, for livestock producers and for cattle producers in 
this province. 

 
So I guess my question to the minister has to be like how’s that 
going for him so far? And what if . . . My understanding to date, 
there is no further funding beyond the traditional or the regular 
available PFRA programs. So he can continue to bicker away 
along with the federal government and he can continue to wait 
for the federal government, and in the meantime, the producers 
can keep on selling their cattle. 
 
And I’m curious, Mr. Speaker, who the Minister of Agriculture 
thinks that’s going to affect? Because my fear, it’s going to 
affect the economy of the province. It’s not going to make a 
huge dent in the federal government’s economy. It’s going to 
make a huge dent in the provincial economy. It’s going to make 
a huge dent in the incomes and the viability to earn a living for 
people who live right here in our province. 
 
You know the Thursday before last, the minister said that he 
met with the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association. And I 
know that they would have described to him the seriousness of 
the situation. And yet, he just doesn’t seem to be getting it. 
 

The following day in question period again he was questioned 
on what was going to be made available provincially, to address 
what is happening provincially — a crisis that’s happening in 
the livestock industry right here in this province. And he talked 
about how they had more hay listed on their Web site than a 
year ago at this time. And he implied that there was more feed 
out there than a year ago. 
 
And I really hope that he was just feeling pressured by question 
period, because I can’t imagine that he was serious. Because it’s 
the most . . . it’s to me . . . that statement was as naive as the 
small child that covers up their face, Mr. Speaker, and they 
think that you can’t see them because they’ve, they put their 
hands before their face. 
 
The Web site, to my understanding, was just set up a year ago, 
Mr. Speaker, and people are . . . last year just started to know 
about it a little bit. The fact that there’s more posted this year 
than last year, when the program was just started last year, 
surely can’t be that big of a surprise to the minister that there 
would be more postings than last year. 
 
But I did go to the Web site, Mr. Speaker, just to see if indeed 
we were flooded by postings of bales and feed that was for sale. 
And I checked it out. And the Web page is called, “Feed and 
Forage Listing Service” and it’s under the Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Revitalization Web site. And I noticed that there are a 
whopping big 21 listings for bales. So I don’t know if the 
minister doesn’t understand the cattle industry. I hope he 
understands better than that. But 21 listings for bales, Mr. 
Speaker, is hardly going to sustain the cattle industry in our 
province. 
 
And a lot of those listings are straw bales. They’re not even, 
you know, hay bales or alfalfa bales or some substantial feed 
bales. They’re straw bales, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not going to 
go very far in sustaining our cattle industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Thursday, May 23, our Minister of Agriculture 
said a number of things. He said that there was 14 million 
tonnes of hay for our producers across the province. 
 
And I have to say that that has to be questionable and I’m not 
sure how he knows that. But again, it astounds me that he’s 
denying that there’s a shortage of feed out there. And it’s time 
that he woke up to reality. The reality is that there is no hay out 
there. There is very, very little; that we are weeks away from 
running out of hay and feed for our cattle. 
 
The other thing that he said that was kind of humorous and . . . 
was that he said: 
 

I want to say . . . Mr. Speaker, that last year at this time we 
had the 2.325 million head of cattle. This year, Mr. 
Speaker, we have 2.235 million head of cattle — (which is) 
up 10,000 head over last year. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if he didn’t know before, he should read this 
and realize that those numbers are down 100,000 head. They’re 
not up. We have less cattle. He needs to do his math on that 
one. And he said: 
 

. . . we’re working closely with livestock producers to make 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

a difference. 
 
So my question is what’s his difference? What’s he going to do 
right now within a week to make a difference to the cattle 
industry in this province? 
 
When we suggested to the government that through Sask Water 
that we should, as a provincial government, spend $10 million 
on our own industry, within our own province, for our own 
infrastructure of water, for wells, dugouts and pumping 
equipment, what did our minister do? 
 
Well, he said no. He said that we cannot pump $10 million of 
the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money into livestock industry in 
rural Saskatchewan. He said that it was a dumb, dumb, dumb, 
dumb idea. 
 
And yet he condones SaskTel trying to spend $80 million in 
rural Australia even if the Australians don’t agree with him, Mr. 
Speaker, because SaskTel is finding a hard time finding a 
partner in Australia. It doesn’t matter. Our Minister of 
Agriculture agrees with it. He feels that it’s quite fine to spend 
$80 million in rural Australia but he thinks spending $10 
million in water infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan is a dumb, 
dumb, dumb, dumb, dumb idea. 
 
So you’ve got to wonder, Mr. Speaker, where the heck our 
minister’s priorities are and it obviously isn’t here. It obviously 
isn’t with the agriculture producers within our own province, 
and I find that unbelievable and unacceptable. 
 
The other thing that he said is that it’s the federal government’s 
responsibility. And you know for this side of the House and for 
the producers in the province, this whole line is getting very, 
very tiresome. 
 
We’re not talking about trade injury to subsidies here. We’re 
talking about our industry, our economic future, our livestock 
producers, and we’re not suggesting an ad hoc, one-year little 
program here to be financed by the province. We’re talking 
about long-term infrastructure for the future growth of the 
industry as well as to address the drought of today. 
 
So there’s a member opposite who’s chirping away saying 10 
million a year, and he knows perfectly well we asked for 10 
million this year, unless he’s predicting a drought every year for 
the next number of years. 
 
And the minister tried to convince the media that this, you 
know if we did all of a sudden invest in our own industry, it 
would hurt our ability to secure assistance for water from the 
federal government. And that simply isn’t true. And I don’t 
believe for a minute if our government invested in some water 
infrastructure on its own that we would then be eliminated from 
the future PFRA monies. Alberta has done so and it hasn’t 
harmed their negotiations with the federal government. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And quite honestly, Mr. Speaker, first and foremost — and 
most people know that in the House — I’m a wife and mother. 
And when I look at my children and I’m thinking, if I had 10 
children and I would — as I only have 3 — but if I had 10, I 

know that I have responsibilities to those children and they 
know that I have responsibilities to them and they rely on me 
for certain things. But you know if I had 1 child out of the 10 
who consistently did absolutely nothing to help themselves and 
kept on coming back to me and saying, well it’s your fault that I 
have this problem, it’s your fault I have that problem, and if I 
said, well what are you going to do to get yourself out of your 
troubles — nothing — I have to say there would come a point 
where I would not be inspired to help that child as much as the 
rest. 
 
So it is time that we stopped using that as an excuse. We can’t 
do that because the federal government won’t help us out any 
more. We simply can’t help ourselves because the federal 
government won’t help us. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — It’s absolutely ridiculous to keep on saying 
it time and time again — it’s the federal government’s 
responsibility. 
 
But again I pose the question: whose economy does it hurt if the 
livestock sector of this province is devastated by a drought? 
Who pays the price? Who pays the price at the end of the day 
— the federal economy or the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I ask the members to allow the member to 
continue with her debate. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — . . . Mr. Speaker. I think it’s naive to deny 
that it’s going to affect our province more than the country as a 
whole. I think it’s lacking in economic knowledge if you 
believe that it’s going to affect the country the same amount as 
the province. I think it’s lacking in vision as to how to address 
problems that are happening in our province. And I think it’s 
time that this government got their priorities straight. This is our 
industry and we need to help them. 
 
And as so many things where the Saskatchewan Party has . . . 
have to give suggestions in the last year on how we could help 
the economy, this is yet another one. This is another suggestion 
of how we could help the problems that are happening in our 
province. 
 
We laid out an ethanol plan and they ended up basically laying 
out the same plan later. We had a motion in the House, not 
once, not twice, but it took three times suggesting that there 
should be a summit with the Western provinces over the US 
farm Bill. And now after the third time of the Saskatchewan 
Party putting forward that motion, it has come about and it 
looks like it will be fruitful. So we’re going to give them yet 
another suggestion. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make the motion, 
seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
recognize the seriousness of the current drought on 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry and commit $10 
million to a program to fund digging of new wells, digging 
new dugouts, and the purchase of more water-pumping 
equipment in order to avoid a massive sell-off of cattle this 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

 

year. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to stand today to second the motion put forward by the 
member from Watrous that the 
 

. . . Assembly urges the provincial government to recognize 
the seriousness (the very serious situation at hand) of the 
current drought in Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry and 
commit $10 million to a program to fund digging of new 
wells, digging new dugouts, and the purchase of more 
water-pumping equipment in order to avoid a massive 
sell-off of cattle this year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government is at all in touch with 
what’s happening in this province, it should be no surprise to 
them that we are suffering a major drought. We have areas of 
the province that are varied in their severity of drought, but 
nonetheless we have a major drought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the way from Canora-Pelly through Humboldt 
up through St. Louis, up to Aberdeen, all the way back to 
Watrous and halfway to Regina now we have a major situation 
of dry, dry land. Mr. Speaker, if one would drive through there 
. . . And I would suggest that maybe some of the NDP members 
get in their vehicles and get out there and have a look to 
understand and feel the impact of what happens when there is a 
drought. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they got on their bus last year, they probably 
didn’t see this sort of a situation. They probably weren’t 
looking for it but the fact is it remains, Mr. Speaker. Dugouts 
are bone-dry. Mr. Speaker, wells on farms are bone-dry. There 
is no water for beef or dairy herds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was at a function, as well you probably know, in 
Aberdeen last Saturday. The Minister of Finance was there also, 
and I really truly wish he would have, after the function we 
were at, talked a little bit further with some of the farmers that 
were there. I wish he would have taken a drive out into the areas 
around there, because I had a farmer speak to me there about 
having to sell off his dairy herd within a period of two weeks 
now simply because it would be totally impossible for him to 
keep on with the lack of water right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a need to take some responsibility, or the 
NDP government certainly does in this province to provide 
means whereby farmers and rural people in rural areas can 
access water. We need to hear the government across say that 
they will take the responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us agree that there is a drought. There’s no 
doubt about that. The words are there; we’re saying there’s a 
drought. Both sides of the House agree with that. 
 
Who is responsible? This is where the debate comes to a head. 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government are saying it is the federal 
government. I mean they need to blame just about everybody 
that they can blame. They need to put the responsibility on 
everyone but themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many, many of the speakers across the way have 
been talking about where are we going to get this $10 million 

from? Well, Mr. Speaker, if they would manage the affairs of 
the province properly and stay out of risky ventures overseas, it 
would be a great deal of help to the taxpayers of this province. 
And we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I guess when you fail the people of the province in so many 
ways as this NDP government has, they need a number of 
scapegoats and they find them very readily. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is a way that they have been wasting money 
on risky ventures, money that could have been used for the 
people of this province — $80 million by the NDP’s new 
Information Services Corporation on a computerized land titles 
system that still doesn’t work, that they’re trying to sell around 
the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, $28 million on the infamous SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) fiasco. 
There appears to be dollars there for rotten potatoes, there 
appears to be dollars for the government to think they can get 
into business and lose those dollars, but no money for the needs 
of rural Saskatchewan with water infrastructure right now. 
 
The NDP has lost $2.3 million on IQ&A. That was a company 
they set up to sell personal health information. Another $2 
million lost on on-line auction companies that the NDP set up to 
compete with eBay. 
 
SaskTel operations — supposed operations — in Australia, 
we’re looking at $80 million there. As the member from 
Watrous has mentioned, instead of doing that, just look at that 
one venture, get out of it, and take $10 million of that and put it 
forward for the rural agriculture producers in this province. That 
would be a more sensible and responsible way of using 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
Another 3 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was lost by the NDP 
trying to buy a power company in Guyana, and millions more 
being invested by the NDP in money-losing dot-coms in British 
Columbia, Ontario and even Nashville, Tennessee. 
 
This government again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is planning on 
spending $100 million in the ethanol industry when private 
investors are more than willing to come in here and put their 
money in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is absolutely no reason why if this 
government had a clue about how to manage the money of the 
taxpayers of this province, that we would not have money 
available for critical situations like the drought we are 
experiencing right now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite are saying we should 
call on the federal government once again. You know, in 
February 2000, the province . . . we were calling on the federal 
government to aid us in a farm crisis already at that time 
because there were many areas of crisis. 
 
And what happened? Mr. Chrétien’s assistant sends a form 
letter to Saskatchewan on the farm crisis. That’s how much the 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

federal government cares. It should be absolutely clear to the 
members opposite that the federal government has not given us 
the time of day and nor will they. And for sure they won’t if this 
present NDP government does not show some good faith, start 
taking some initiative and leadership, and doing something 
themselves first in order to entice the federal government to 
possibly put in a cost-sharing situation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this water shortage on the prairies is the 
most horrible crisis that I’ve seen and I’m sure that many 
people in this province have seen. I’ve talked to many, many of 
my constituents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they’re talking about 
this being worse than the ’30s — worse than the dirty thirties, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we have an NDP government across who has tunnel vision, 
who has got no vision obviously, who do not seem to be able to 
see what a crucial situation this is out there in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government opposite and the 
Agriculture minister have mentioned that we should be able to 
access hay supplies from other provinces. Well once again, I 
have farmers in my constituency and right in Humboldt that 
have talked to me just as recent as two days ago mentioning that 
they have tried to get hay supplies from Manitoba and from 
everywhere around and they cannot do it. There is no hay 
available. There is no water; there is no hay. 
 
It is a sad situation when we have to see farm families selling 
off herds of beef and dairy cattle and trying to figure out how 
they’re going to be paying these high and exorbitant education 
taxes on their land. Their property taxes are sky high because 
the government has not been putting in their share to support 
education. We have had the education portion of the property 
rebate pulled out from under our producers. We have higher 
crop insurance premiums. 
 
We have a situation where we’ve got many, many farm 
property owners out there that are expected to pay these 
exorbitant fees on top of utility rates being hiked to the point of 
no return. They are expected to pay these fees, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; they’re expected to pay for everything, but they don’t 
have an opportunity to even make a dime any more. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this resistance by the provincial NDP 
government to help our producers out there right now is a 
crying shame. It is a terrible shame that we have a provincial 
government like this that is just absolutely without any caring 
for what happens in the province of Saskatchewan not only in 
rural Saskatchewan but in urban Saskatchewan, because the 
businesses in urban Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan are 
going to feel the effects of this situation. If there is not help for 
our producers soon, the whole province is going to suffer 
economically. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has such obvious little 
interest in what is . . . in the successes, rather, of rural 
Saskatchewan and in agriculture. And that’s pretty obvious and 
evident by the kind of funding that the provincial government 
has taken out of agriculture since 1992. 
 
In 1992, Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture . . . the Agriculture 
budget was $1.2 million. In 1999, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

Agriculture budget in this province is $300 million. We actually 
spend more on the Liquor and Gaming budget in this province 
right now, or very close to just as much as we do in Agriculture. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now where are the government’s priorities? For goodness sake. 
I mean it’s time that they just woke up here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and recognized how critical this situation is, 
recognized that farm families are in desperate need of assistance 
right now and that it’s the responsibility of the present 
government to give them that assistance. This is not just asking 
for money any old time. This is not something that the farm 
families of this province do on a regular basis, is ask for 
assistance. This is crucial; it’s a crisis. 
 
In many, many farm homes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no 
water for drinking. In many farm homes, there is no availability 
to access water unless they drive 10 to 15 miles. Many people 
have to drive that distance with tankers on the back of their 
trucks on a daily basis in order to bring water into their homes 
for drinking, for washing clothes, for those kind of simple 
things. They need that same, that same water that they don’t 
have right now to water their cattle, to take care of their 
livestock. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a critical issue and I commend the 
member from Watrous, the Agriculture critic for the 
Saskatchewan Party, for coming up with this suggestion to the 
provincial NDP that they take action immediately to inject $10 
million into the agriculture industry, particularly at this time, for 
digging new wells, dugouts, and to ensure that there is 
water-pumping equipment at hand in order to divert this crisis 
and certainly to avert a crisis of greater magnitude in the future. 
 
We are about at our breaking point out in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government has been very, very hard 
on rural Saskatchewan in many, many ways. And we just ask 
them and plead with their sense of decency at this time and ask 
them to please take the initiative to put this money and inject 
this money into rural Saskatchewan now in order that they may 
have water and are able to sustain their livelihood. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will take my place and 
allow the next speaker to present their debate on this issue. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to enter into this debate today. And no doubt it is a 
timely debate and it’s a serious debate, Mr. Speaker, because 
whenever drouth and drouth conditions are at hand, it’s always 
a serious situation. 
 
It’s probably more serious in Saskatchewan here because we’re 
extensively an agricultural-based industry, an agriculture-based 
province, and with that comes . . . a drouth has of course a 
negative effect on the entire farming community. 
 
And the front line of that effect are livestock producers. And 
this is true and it’s well known: that a number of elements are 
the substance of life, but no one greater than water. And 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

 

livestock are no different than human beings, they can only go 
so long without a drink. 
 
And it’s an interesting thing and I suppose it’s a human flaw, 
and I suppose we’re all . . . we’ll all fall prey to it now and 
again, is that we never really appreciate the things we have until 
we miss it. And on many occasions in the past when we have 
enjoyed wet years and lots of rain and ample water supplies, we 
never take it in serious consideration. 
 
Probably those who would give more serious consideration to it 
is livestock producers. And many of them have prepared 
themselves well for drouths. They have . . . In a lot of cases not 
only do they have their main water supply, which likely may be 
a dugout or perhaps a well, they’ll have a dugout for a backup, 
and in some cases, they’ll even have a second dugout for a 
backup. 
 
And so they’ve prepared themselves fairly well for 
withstanding dry periods of time without rain and without, 
perhaps, even snowfall, and the amount of runoff to fill those 
reservoirs. 
 
But in this case, Mr. Speaker, in some instances in 
Saskatchewan, I think we’re probably on our third year of a 
drouth. Certainly we’re well into the second year of it for all of 
the province, and many of the areas of the province are now 
experiencing their third year so no individual, no individual 
operator out there who’s probably prepared to withstand that 
type of pressure on their water reserves. 
 
So it is for them probably a very stressful time, particularly 
when we had not only a dry summer last year and a lack of rain, 
but as many livestock producers will know and will be the first 
to agree, that it’s not the rain in the summer months so much 
that replenishes their reserves and their water supply as it is the 
snow throughout the winter and the resulting runoff from that 
snow melt. 
 
Although yes, Mr. Speaker, a good moist summer, I guess you 
would say, certainly replenishes the water level in the land and 
the soil and results in less soaking in, in the spring with the 
winter melt and causes a greater runoff and the greater ability to 
replenish their water supply. 
 
And as the members may not be aware, opposite, that it’s not 
exactly the government that controls the weather nor the 
amount of rainfall nor the amount of snowfall — not even my 
colleagues here, not even the Minister of Environment although 
he may have a little more of a direct line than the rest of us. 
 
But I remember as a child, my grandfather in particular — my 
parents too to some degree but certainly my grandfather in 
particular — talking about the dry thirties as they were known, 
the dirty thirties. My family farmed during that period of time 
and suffered the drouths. And I remember them talking about 
the lack of rain. I remember them talking about the land 
blowing — that the winds were so strong and so continuous day 
after day after day and the lack of rain, lack of moisture. The 
ground certainly . . . simply, I should say, dried out, virtually 
pulverized, and would blow with the wind. 
 
I remember them talking about days where the dust would be so 

thick that you would believe it was night. And they would have 
difficult times negotiating even throughout the yard, making 
their way from the house to the barn to look after their livestock 
that was housed in the barn. And it was some very horrid times. 
 
And I remember my grandfather talking about not only the 
drouths and the land blowing, but also about the hordes of 
grasshoppers that came about as a result of the drouth. So it 
really has a domino effect on our economy and on our society 
when we do go through an extensive drouth period. 
 
And as I hearken back to the conversations of my grandfather, I 
can remember him saying that if he had a choice throughout his 
life and his experiences in farming and living in this province, if 
he had a choice to choose between being too wet or being too 
dry, he would choose being too wet any time. He would choose 
that simply because it would be a struggle in many occasions to, 
in a wet year and wet years, to gather feed in for the livestock. It 
would be a struggle to harvest the crops in the fall time, 
particularly fighting wet weather and wet conditions. 
 
But my grandfather used to say, at least there was something 
there to gather. When it’s wet, it will grow. You may have a 
tough time gathering it. You may have a tough time bringing it 
in. You may have even a tough time storing it or keeping it. But 
it would grow. In dry conditions that doesn’t happen. There’s 
nothing there to gather. 
 
So there’s no question the experience of Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan governments of the day, has certainly given us 
the ability to recognize problems when they’re arising, and this 
government certainly has recognized that and has stepped to the 
forefront to address the problem. 
 
The provincial government certainly understands how weather 
so affects every citizen engaged in agriculture. And a mild 
winter and numerous thaws and subsequent freezings has 
extracted a great deal of moisture amounts from the land and 
thusly leaving it open to absorbing whatever snow melt there 
was. 
 
And if . . . I’m not sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as many of my 
colleagues here on both sides of the House have experienced 
over the last little while of driving around Saskatchewan. For 
example, this winter as you drove through Saskatchewan, you’d 
have noticed that there was really a shortage of snowfall. In 
many cases the land was bare. There was virtually no snow. 
 
And what would happen then of course when the springtime 
comes and normally the snow melt would feed the small 
streams that would lead on to larger creeks and then lead on the 
river system and replenish the water supplies for many of our 
producers through their reserve systems, simply isn’t 
happening. 
 
And as a result of the lack of moisture, surface moisture, and 
the lack of rain, we’re seeing in many cases where the water 
table in a lot of communities is dropping. And as a result of the 
drop of that water table, the wells that have maybe produced 
very well for a large number of years under normal moisture 
conditions, which we have experienced for the most part in 
Saskatchewan, maybe those wells were producing very 
efficiently and . . . 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I’d like to thank the member from Regina Northeast. 
 
I’d like to introduce a school group in the east gallery, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There are 17 grade 4 and 5 students from 
Climax School. And with the students is their teacher, Rose 
Calcutt, and chaperones Laurie Bennett, Dennis Klein, Judy 
Klein, and Pam Caswell. 
 
I’ll have an opportunity to meet with you in about 10 or 15 
minutes. What we’re doing in the House right now is debates, 
private members’ debates, and if you’re going to listen to some 
of the proceedings for a few minutes and then I’ll be out and 
meet you. 
 
So, members, would you please join me in welcoming the 
school group to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 12 — Drought Assistance 
for Livestock Producers 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d like 
to join with my colleague from Wood River and welcome the 
school group here. It’s always a pleasure to have school groups 
down here because it gives them the opportunity to see 
democracy at work. Although maybe many of their parents may 
think that the elected members here really don’t work. But I 
can, I can assure you we really do work and on occasions work 
quite hard. 
 
But I . . . Personally it’s always a great pleasure for me to have 
school groups down here, whether they be my own or one of 
my colleagues, because I think it’s quite important that young 
people have the opportunity to see democracy in action. 
 
I believe this to be a very worthy cause because I think all of us 
as elected members fully realize that the youth of today will 
soon be the leaders of tomorrow. And with this . . . such a fine 
group up here, I know that, Mr. Speaker, I think I can speak on 
behalf of all my colleagues here when we realize that these 
youth will soon become the leaders of our society, we’ll be in 
very good hands. 
 
So I want to welcome you all very, very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to get 
back to what I was saying earlier about the drouth crisis that 

we’re experiencing here in Saskatchewan and the fact that, you 
know, we have gone through drouths in this province. I suppose 
the one that’s the most, most — maybe not most recent — but 
the one that stands out in our mind the most of all was the 
1930s, the dirty thirties as my grandfather and my parents used 
to refer to them as. 
 
And I know that many of the members here and my colleagues 
here will probably believe I have a first-hand memory of that 
particular time, but I want to assure them no, I do not. I can 
only relate to those . . . that period of time in our history from 
the stories that I was told by my parents and my grandparents. 
 
And they were horrendous times because, like I was saying 
earlier, I don’t think that we as human beings often realize and 
appreciate the many good fortunes that we have until we miss 
it. 
 
And the same I think can be said about . . . as farmers and 
producers of livestock particularly where water is so important. 
Good quality water is something that we often have taken for 
granted in this province because we have enjoyed ample rainfall 
and certainly ample snowfall and thusly a reasonably good melt 
in the springtime and the ability to replenish our reservoirs of 
water. And those things you take for granted. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But when it comes down to a drouth situation where we see a 
shortage of water, we see the lack of rainfall to replenish the 
level of moisture in the soil, and we see our wells that start to 
suffer. We see the lack of runoff from snow melt and we see our 
dugouts failing to fill to their full capacity. We see sloughs 
across this great province, which is always a source of water for 
emergency purposes, in some cases, but it . . . probably in a lot 
of cases for farmers, for ranchers, and for pasture land, it may 
be the source of water supply for the summer for their livestock. 
And when we see those not filling up to their capacity and see 
maybe only half capacity — in some cases very little capacity 
— going into the spring, we know that throughout the summer 
there is going to be some problems for those livestock 
producers. 
 
And as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the many of us, 
as we have travelled across Saskatchewan this winter, have had 
the ability to look around and notice a bit of uniqueness for 
Saskatchewan, and that is a lot of cases there was no snow. 
There was simply no snow cover. So with that, of course, there 
would be very little, if any, melt. 
 
And I had the opportunity to, on a handful of occasions this 
winter, to travel up into the Yorkton and north Yorkton area. 
And in travelling the province as a whole, that particular part of 
the province probably had the most snowfall of anywhere in 
Saskatchewan. And having been originally from that neck of 
the woods, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I can attest to the fact 
that normal snowfall in that area would be, oh, 3 to 4 feet. 
Certainly you’d see some snowbanks against the fencelines, and 
against the bush hedges, and so on and so forth. And in March, 
that would be, oh, 6 to 10 feet high. 
 
That wasn’t the case this year. That wasn’t the case this year. It 
was an abnormal snowfall for that area. Although talking to 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

 

those people who live there year-round, they were telling me 
that they were experiencing at the height, before the snow melt, 
they were experiencing about a foot of snow, which is well 
below normal. 
 
But in that particular area, there was a reasonable snow melt, 
there was a bit of a runoff. In talking to one of the business 
people there, in Norquay, they were telling me that the runoff 
this year was simply a little trickle. 
 
But for the most part, it was able to replenish the water supply 
in many of the farmers’ reservoirs, and in fact pretty well fill up 
most of the sloughs — that they’re normally full of water in the 
springtime and most of them were pretty well full of water. 
 
But the . . . There’s a real . . . And I suppose again, once again, 
it’s a kind of a human flaw that we don’t always recognize the 
value of things that are before us because we take them so much 
for granted. 
 
But I think as the world is unfolding . . . And I remember . . . 
(inaudible) . . . just harking back here to a television program I 
seen a while back, and I believe it might have been even on a 
Discovery Channel, where it suggested that the fresh water 
supply in the world was dropping. There was some scientific 
study done that indicated that the fresh water supply around the 
world was reducing. We’re seeing that, I suppose, in the Great 
Lakes of Canada, the fresh . . . huge fresh water bodies of 
Canada. The Great Lakes . . . levels in the Great Lakes are 
dropping. 
 
And we’re seeing in many of the fresh water bodies across the 
world, around the world, across this great nation, we’re seeing 
that water level drop. And to some degree then that makes one a 
little concerned because, despite the fact that the world is . . . 
the large percentage of the world is water, there’s actually a 
very small percentage that is fresh water. And fresh water is the 
sustenance of life as a whole. 
 
So when you, when you hear that scientists who have watched 
this and studied this for some time have . . . are indicating that 
the fresh water supply in our globe is dwindling, you can’t help 
but be concerned about that. And it raises the issue of the 
environment and man’s, I guess you would say, disregard for 
the environment and the effects this could have on future 
generations. And it can’t . . . you can’t help but be quite 
concerned about this. 
 
But I think that we, as a society, have to realize that there is a 
value in water and I think for many generations, we haven’t 
done that because we’ve just taken water for granted. It’s been 
at the tap. You turn the tap and the water flowed. And we just 
took it for granted that we’d have the ability to drink that water. 
It would be fresh, pure water without any restraints and we 
basically disregarded water and water conditions. 
 
But there’s a, there’s a real value in water and I think that urban 
residents in our city — in our province, I should say, in our 
cities — have recognized that because they have . . . you know, 
they have been involved in the cities’ approval, I guess you 
would say, to establish water and sewer systems and the cities’ 
leadership have upgraded the systems to ensure that there’s pure 
quality water being provided at the taps, and I think urban 

people have recognized that. And there’s no question at all in 
my mind that rural people certainly recognize the quality of 
water. 
 
There’s an old story I remember my grandfather telling me 
about the 1930s when he was farming at that time in the 
Estevan area. And my grandfather was one of the fortunate 
ones; they had a good water supply. They had a couple of very 
deep wells, at that time at least they were very deep. I think they 
were 250 feet or 300 feet deep and they were into a good supply 
of water and they were able to provide not only the water for 
their yard and for their housing and so on and so forth, but they 
also ran a dairy farm and those two wells produced the water to 
water their dairy operation and maintain that operation. 
 
And my grandfather noticed that a neighbour, every day his 
neighbour would go by with his horse and his wagon which had 
a water tank on, and he would be gone for an hour or two and 
then he would pull his water wagon back. And my grandfather 
noticed that he was doing this day in and day out, day in and 
day out. 
 
So finally one morning he watched for him and he stopped him 
and he got into a conversation with him. And then he finally 
asked him, he said, I noticed that you’re pulling your water 
wagon up and down the road on a daily basis here. He said, are 
you short of water? And the farmer said, yes I am. He said, my 
dugout’s gone dry, my well has quit producing and, he said, I’m 
hauling water now. 
 
So my grandfather, in a bit of humour, said to him, well why 
wouldn’t you . . . why, you know, why are you all in a huff? 
Why are you hauling this water? The farmer said well, he said, 
I’m hauling it five miles. So, he said, I’m making over a 
ten-mile round trip. I went five miles one way filling up the 
tank of water, and fives miles back. 
 
So my grandfather said well, he said, why wouldn’t you dig a 
well? And the farmer said well, he said, it’s easier to haul the 
water five miles than it is to dig the well five miles. 
 
So when you run out of water it’s very dramatic to the entire 
operation. It breaks up sometimes your farming, your farming 
practice, and it’ll also break up even your normal routines of 
living. 
 
So we, quite quickly, recognize the importance of water. And 
like I said earlier, I think we often forget about how important 
water is. I mean it’s one of the main substances of life. And if 
you notice, Mr. Speaker, I myself am consuming a fair amount 
of water here this afternoon. 
 
And it’s one of those things, Mr. Speaker, that if . . . Human 
beings are no different than any other animal — that you can go 
without eating, and you can probably go for a fair period of 
time. And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you are going to 
suggest that I can go longer than most people. I understand 
what you’re about to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I could see that 
in your eyes and that’s why I thought I would say it before you 
did. But I think the hon. member and colleague across there 
from Redberry Lake may even be able to go longer than me. 
 
But despite how long . . . whether the member from Redberry 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 2002 

 

Lake or myself could go without having the ability to sit down 
to a nice steak dinner is one thing, but I can assure you that the 
length of time that either one of us could go without taking on 
some liquid, preferably mother nature’s ale — water — would 
be a lot less. 
 
So certainly water — the very, very important part of sustaining 
life. And I think we as a society are gaining a greater 
appreciation for water and I propose maximizing the use of it. 
And we’ll see our rural people, our farmers, are really, really, 
really experts on being able to maximize the use of moisture, 
not only as it applies to livestock production and replenishing of 
groundwater to replenish our wells and making sure that there’s 
a good reserve of water, whether it be in a dugout system or a 
river system or a slough system. 
 
But if you look at our grain and oilseed producers, how they 
have improved farming practices from those days I was 
referring to earlier — the dirty ’30s. Where my grandfather 
used to call it the dust bowl, where he would relate to me the 
stories of the wind blowing day after day after day and the fine 
dust, simply because the ground was dried out and pulverized to 
the point where the fine dust would drift as if it was snow. And 
it would blacken out the horizon. In some cases he tells me it 
would even blacken out the sun that when you looked outside at 
noon hour you couldn’t tell whether it was noon hour or 
midnight it would be so dark. 
 
But if you noticed, it was suggested that contributing to this soil 
drift was the farming practices of the day, and how those 
farming practices have changed over the last 60 years for 
example. 
 
We’ve seen with the help of departments of Agriculture, both 
federal and provincial, and we’ve seen farmers adopt new 
technologies and new farming practices, much of them first 
tested on experimental farms in this province whether they be 
federally funded farms or provincially funded farms, where they 
would test different techniques of farming and soil management 
to try to identify ways and means to retain trash cover, to reduce 
soil blowing, to greater utilize the levels of moisture that mother 
nature does provide us from year to year. 
 
And we’ve seen really, really great strives in that direction to 
utilize the moisture levels that we do have and to conserve those 
moisture levels. 
 
I remember back in the . . . probably in the ’60s and the ’70s 
there was a move by the extension department of the 
Department of Agriculture to encourage farmers to first of all 
stop burning stubble and burning the straw cover off. 
 
There was a move to cultivate the land in such a manner as to 
do little disturbance to the stubble so it would be retained there 
for a couple of reasons. One would be to catch whatever snow 
was available in the winter months and to maintain a straw 
cover so that when that snow melt did take place it would soak 
down into the ground. And the straw cover would shade the 
ground to preserve the moisture for the farmers for when they 
went out there to seed their crop that they would have good, 
ample moisture for germination and get the crop off to a good 
start. 
 

With that, of course, came the development of machinery that 
would effect that type of farming practice. And we’ve seen the 
. . . in many cases, not only the experimental farms — again 
whether they be federally funded or provincially funded — but 
we’ve seen the machinery companies take up that challenge and 
challenge their engineers and their technicians to develop the 
type of machinery that would have the desired results the 
farmers were looking for across this great province — the 
ability to retain moisture. 
 
And as a result of that we’ve seen, particularly in the last, oh 
10, 15 years, dramatic changes in farm machinery design and 
technology. For example, today we’re seeing many, many 
farmers and more and more acres moving into a zero till 
program where there’s very little soil disturbance, unlike the 
practices of the ’40s, the ’50s, and even in the ’60s, Mr. 
Minister, where farmers would, depending on the moisture level 
of course, would crop and summerfallow. In some areas of the 
province where there was a higher moisture level, they would 
have two crops consecutively, then they would summerfallow. 
 
And of course during that summerfallow period they would 
break up and destroy all the natural straw coverage that would 
be there to retain snow in the wintertime and a shade for the 
moisture in the spring. 
 
But we’ve seen farmers slowly moving away from that with 
new technology, new equipment and a new focus on farm 
practices and farm management to greater utilize the moisture 
levels that we do receive. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And we’re seeing in more recent years the move to a zero till 
operation and to assist this has been some direct air seeders 
have come out. And we have some very large equipment in this 
province. 
 
Prior to the advent of the air seeder was the traditional drill type 
that was a hoe drill that didn’t have to be pre-worked in front of 
it. The hoe drill would have the ability to penetrate the surface 
and lay the seed down into a good moisture bed. And, of course, 
that would stimulate germination. 
 
But we’ve seen a move away from the hoe drill to the air seeder 
for a number of reasons, and primarily efficiency. The air 
seeder can cover a lot more acres between being serviced or 
being refilled. And it has simply been some of the movements 
by our farmers to ensure that they utilize the moisture level that 
they have in their soil as a result of the winter melt or the 
rainfalls, to best utilize it for their agricultural practices and to 
produce the best possible crop possible as a result of getting 
early germination, a constant steady germination where we have 
good growth and good products as a result of it, and hopefully a 
good crop. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that a number of things help but, of 
course, nothing works better than rain; nothing works better 
than lots of moisture. And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I 
believe that the good Lord is going to look after us and He will 
balance this thing out and we will get our ample rain and we 
will address the drouth problem and that’s a problem that’s in 
His hands. But I got a notion that He’s going to be on the side 



June 4, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

 

of this government because He’s always on the side of right. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to adjourn debate. I 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:48 until 16:56. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Addley Atkinson Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order. Order. I ask members to remain in order so that we could 
get the proper vote here, votes properly recorded. Thank you. 
 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 20 
 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer   
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Members, it’s a very serious breach to be interfering in 
the vote of this House. The voting will proceed. 
 
Toth Wakefield Stewart 
Elhard Eagles McMorris 
D’Autremont Wiberg Weekes 
Harpauer Hart Allchurch 
Huyghebaert   
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


