








































June 17, 2002 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2113 
 June 17, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 44 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. With me 
this evening is my deputy minister, Mr. Gordon Nystuen, seated 
directly to my right. To my left is Mr. Don Farrer, who is in 
charge of inspection and regulation. And behind, directly 
behind me, is Dave Boehm, who is the director of financial 
programs branch. Those are my officials, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like 
to announce to the members of the committee that presently we 
are without Hansard and without broadcast services due to the 
recent storm; we’ve lost power but we’re expecting both to be 
underway shortly. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I welcome the 
minister and his officials. Bill No. 44 from my understanding 
gives the minister the right to appoint inspectors rather than 
making it necessary for an order in council. Could the minister 
please tell us why this has been deemed as necessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It’s that when we have an emergency 
situation, which we were quite concerned about as the member 
would appreciate last year when we had the issue with the hoof 
and mouth disease . . . foot and mouth disease, we were in a 
situation where if we needed to bring on people immediately we 
didn’t have the authority or the power to do that. 
 
So the thinking here around this piece of legislation is for the 
purpose of ensuring that we can provide immediate inspection 
services and insurances around quality control, if in fact we 
ever find ourselves in that kind of a situation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. So if I’m understanding 
him correctly this will only be used in case of emergencies. So 
during normal times when there isn’t an emergency will the 
inspectors continue to be appointed through order in council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the answer would be no to that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So I guess my next question would be, are 
they no longer at all appointed through orders in council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct, Mr. Chair, if this . . . when 
this legislation . . . when it passes that’s exactly what would 
happen if that amendment were to be made. There would no 
longer be the appointment through order in council. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Under the Act, process has been put in place 
where animal keepers sell an animal when money is owed. Can 
the minister briefly explain the process that’s in place now, the 
flaws in that process, and why he felt that there needed to be a 
change? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. For the committee’s information, 
we now have broadcasting back. So progress is being made and 

we expect to have Hansard on-line shortly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, there are two reasons here that 
we’re making the change. One is that there . . . we ensure that 
there’s a fair market price here that’s attached to the livestock 
when they’re going through and that in fact the livestock are 
inspected. In the past the way in which it was the custom 
feedlot operators could sell the animals privately and could sell 
them un-inspected. 
 
With these changes now we would ensure that we would cover 
off both of those areas — the inspection and also to ensure that 
there is a fair price through the marketplace. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. There are no further 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Department of Agriculture 
and Food Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — And I’ll ask the minister to introduce 
any new officials he may have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials remain the same, 
except I’ve had departure of Mr. Farrer. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Could the minister 
please tell us when the decision to wind down the Agri-Food 
Equity Fund was made, and when was the announcement 
originally made on this move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, when the finance minister read 
the budget, that’s when in fact the announcement was made, on 
the day of the budget. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Can the minister briefly explain what the 
mandate of the Agri-Food Equity Fund was? Was it strictly in a 
lending program or did it convert any of its loans into equity as 
we’re seen done both in SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation) and in CIC (Crown Investment Corporation of 
Saskatchewan)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you Mr. Chair. I might just read 
from the program literature that was provided within the fund 
and it would read this way. The purpose of the Agri-Food 
Equity Fund was to do really three things, is to invest through 
equity financing in small and medium enterprises that add value 
to Saskatchewan agriculture, firstly. And secondly, the 
Government of Saskatchewan has committed 35 million for the 
expansion of the value-added sector of the ag and food industry. 
And thirdly, partners with Saskatchewan businesses by 
investing in agricultural enterprises which are unable to secure 
adequate equity from other sources. 
 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

And we’ve had a number of these projects across the province, 
of which I’m sure the member may or may not be familiar with. 
I can say to the member that there were two such projects that 
I’m familiar with in my own area that were designed and 
established in advance of me being the minister. And of course 
they’ve been very successful in this fund. It was very, very 
useful in helping to attract some of the risk money. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I’m just going to 
re-ask, is it strictly a lending program or did it convert any of 
the loans to equity positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer is that it has converted some 
of the loans into equity funds. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — How much in outstanding assets does the 
equity fund have currently? And what is its equity positions in 
the projects that it currently has? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials advise me that the 
outstanding equity is 23 million currently and that the equity 
contributions are in the subordinate debentures, in preferred 
shares, and in common shares, is the three areas of which 
they’re held. And if the member’s interested in knowing what 
that exact value is, we’d need to provide that for her on a 
different occasion, I don’t have that number with us. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister; and yes, I would very 
much appreciate a list in the future if you could get that to me. 
 
When was the last time the equity fund did give out a loan or 
funding; and what was the project of its last loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. I’m advised that 
the final loans prior to the budget date were to Phytochem and 
to the Canadian Livestock Services. There were two. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The assets are being transferred to the Ag 
Credit Corporation. These assets were transferred out of ACS 
(Agriculture Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) in 1998. 
Why are we doing a reversal of this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the rationale for doing this is 
that it’s done primarily for administrative purposes. The equity 
to ACS is for administration purposes, from the equity fund. 
And many of their . . . most of the Agri-Food Equity Fund staff 
have been either laid off or they’ve been transferred. 
 
And so this is being done specifically for administrative 
purposes. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — My understanding is that ACS is also in the 
process of being wound down. Where do the assets end up after 
ACS comes to an end? 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the ACS in our opinion would 
still have somewhere in the neighbourhood of 10 or 15 years of, 
if I might call it sort of shelf life, in terms of finishing out the 
loans that they’re currently looking after. 
 
Much of the work that needs to be done on the Agri-Food 

Equity Fund, in our view, would be completed in a far shorter 
time that’s remaining. So the ACS would have, in our view, a 
longer lifetime to ensure that the Agri-Food Equity Fund 
outstanding loans that are currently being administered would 
be completed well in advance of when ACS actually winds 
down completely. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — When that time period does transpire and 
ACS does indeed wind-down, where do the assets go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the life of ACS, as the member 
appropriately points out, we’d have two options. We could 
either sell out the portfolios, ones that are remaining, if in fact 
we were to arrive at the point where we were going . . . when 
we wind-down ACS completely or we would continue to 
collect. And we think the collection period would be completed 
within the period of about 10 to 12 years. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. The minister . . . in your second 
reading speech you went out of your way, I thought, to say that 
the Agri-Food Equity Fund, when it was gone, the money 
would still be available through CIC, so I assumed that the 
assets at the point of ACS winding down would also be 
transferred to CIC. Is that not the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member is right, Mr. Chair, that the 
options that we have available to us is that the way in which the 
second reading speech reads is that we could in fact transfer the 
asset to the CIC. But at this point we would be continuing to 
monitor or manage the fund until such time as we were to make 
that decision. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — There’s definitely a concern on this side of 
the House that funds will only be available in the future through 
CIC because they tend to reflect loans . . . or equity positions 
from CIC tend to reflect the government’s policy to take out 
ownership positions in virtually every project that they get 
involved in, and they don’t seem to have any restrictions on 
CIC, whereas the fund previously was restricted to 49 per cent 
equity in a project. 
 
Will there be restrictions on future lending from CIC to the 49 
per cent equity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, this 
question would probably be better directed to the Chair of CIC, 
when you have an opportunity to have the opportunity to have 
that discussion. But clearly the Crown Investment Corporation, 
when it makes the decision to lend on a project, it would need 
to pass all of the asset tests in terms of the sound business . . . a 
sound business plan and whether or not that particular 
investment would be able to provide the kinds of return that the 
Crown Investment Board currently has set as its benchmarks. 
 
So on any occasion where the Crown Investment Board is 
involved in making a decision about what the investment 
portfolio will look like when they do make an investment, as 
I’ve said already, it needs to really pass the test about whether 
or not it is a sound business plan and it provides the kind of 
return in which it needs to provide. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. And when we’re 
talking about businesses passing the test, would it be possible 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

 

when he provides me with a list of the current assets that this 
fund has, could he please also provide me with a list of how 
many projects that the equity fund has put money in into in one 
shape or another, and how many of those are still in business in 
Saskatchewan, and which ones are not still in business? 
 
And I think that would show if indeed the government has a 
good measuring stick for what’s good, sound proposal. Would it 
be possible for the minister to also provide that information to 
me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, Mr. Chair, we can certainly provide 
that. There’s no problem with us providing that at all. When the 
member is examining the list though, she should be cognizant 
of the fact that the Agri-Food Equity Fund was very much in 
many cases a funder of last resort in some spots. And often the 
fund extended itself — or in most cases — extended itself to 
places where other financial institutions wouldn’t go. 
 
And at the end of the day in some instances you’ll find when 
you review the number of projects of which the fund has 
addressed itself to, that it’s been very successful in assisting a 
business to getting to a spot where they would have never been 
able to get to in terms of success, without the investment. And I 
can speak confidently of some of those for sure without any 
question. 
 
As I said earlier I know of a couple of projects in our own area 
of the province of which this fund has made a contribution to, 
and at the end of the day they’ve been highly successful. Now 
when you examine the fund you’ll find that this hasn’t been the 
case for all of them, but clearly it’s a high-risk fund and it’s 
done a wonderful piece of work in my view, over its life, in 
helping many businesses in the province begin a new way. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I’ll be looking 
forward to that information. Assuming that any other questions 
I have will be in that information I will be able to ask him 
personally. So with that I have no further questions this 
evening. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I will ask the minister to introduce any 
new officials who may have joined him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, my officials remain the same as 
they were for the last piece of legislation. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If I’m understanding 
the Bill correctly, its main objective is to allow the owners of 
feedlots to become members of producer co-ops in order to 
make it easier to access funding under the livestock loan 
guarantee program. Am I understanding this correctly? 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, that’s correct, to the member 
from Watrous. We’ve attempted to do this Bill now on a couple 
of occasions I think. The last time we worked away at it we 
didn’t quite have the appropriate Bill. But you’re right, we’re 
now on the right Bill. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — That’s true, Mr. Minister. Have the feedlots 
and the producer associations been asking for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the answer is that the feedlot 
operators have been lobbying us long and hard for this change 
and this is why we’re bringing it forward. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. The reason why they’re 
lobbying the minister, I would assume, is that they would hope 
to see some growth in the industry simply because they would 
then have financing available to them. Is there any other 
purpose of why they wanted this Bill to take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, this Bill allows the owner 
to participate directly as opposed to having a large producer 
group organization that they need to put together. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I have no further 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I ask the 
Assembly to welcome Darcy McGovern. I think everybody 
knows Darcy to my right here. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the minister and his officials. It’s getting to be the situation 
we’re never totally sure which minister’s going to be where. So 
we’re glad this minister is still around. We don’t know for how 
long. 
 
The Electronic Information and Documents Act deals a whole 
lot with security and safeguarding of personal information. And 
I think this is probably a much bigger issue in the minds of the 
people of Saskatchewan than it was probably when, you know, 
Bill No. 7 sort of came into existence. 
 
Not long ago we brought before this House a situation in 
southern Saskatchewan where an individual had been spied 
upon by a government arm. Then we had the situation here in 
Regina specifically, which was very much a situation of 
entrapment, where an individual was said yes, go ahead, you 
can leave your home to do this and this, and as soon as that 
happened another government arm was out there spying on her. 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

And I’m sure people, groups such as victims of no-fault, have a 
big, long list of how individuals’ privacy and information about 
them sort of has been misused and mislaid. And who knows 
where it all is? 
 
So I would like for the minister to — fairly briefly, not in great 
detail — review some of the safeguards that are in place to 
protect people’s privacy when they’re filing electronic 
information with the government. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member will of course know that 
this piece of legislation, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, doesn’t specifically deal with 
freedom of information but in fact is designed to ensure that 
departments and agencies and other bodies can more effectively 
engage in electronic communications rather than simply paper 
communications. It also provides that a public body’s consent 
to use electronic communications can’t be inferred but must be 
expressly authorized, and it also provides that consumers will 
continue to be entitled to a paper copy of any document when 
conducting Internet sales unless they expressly agree otherwise. 
 
That basically is what this piece of pretty technical legislation is 
about. But the member raises I think an important question of 
not only my future but the future of documents and he will . . . 
maybe I could refer him to The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act which makes it pretty clear that any 
of these documents, electronic documents, will in fact be 
protected in the same way as if they were a piece of paper or on 
a piece of paper and that then they would be subject to the 
normal freedom of information protections. 
 
But the legislation itself is extremely technical as the . . . is a 
technical piece dealing with some specific issues, as the 
member will know. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I believe Bill No. 7 basically is a 
result of the Uniform Law Conference that took place and I 
think that’s a move that everyone in Canada recommends and is 
highly supportive of. 
 
Is this particular Bill identical to what’s in other provinces or 
have we made some changes in it to say that it suits the 
Saskatchewan situation better than what might be taking place 
in Manitoba or some other province, or is it identical? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member is quite right that this is 
another piece of legislation which emanates from the Uniform 
Law Conference and it is also based on the UN (United 
Nations) model legislation as well and ten — nine — nine other 
Canadian jurisdictions have introduced or are in the process of 
introducing essentially the same legislation. 
 
There may be some differences in terms of the way in which the 
provinces have set up their electronic filing of documents 
process just because it suits them in different ways; but 
essentially the legislation is the same, in particular with regards 
to part II, but essentially all provinces will be on . . . have been 
signatories to the Uniform Law Conference and are 
implementing legislation in essentially the same way. 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. There used to be a television 
program on some years ago that went through various odd laws, 
and different towns, communities, and jurisdictions and 
something that would guarantee the town had to have a drinking 
trough for the horses and all this sort of thing. But it probably 
took half a century for that piece of legislation to become 
antiquated. 
 
Now we are living in a time where things move a whole lot 
quicker, so there was a purpose for my preamble here, where 
things move a whole lot more quickly. 
 
So because this is a technical document dealing very much with 
technology and how information is electronically transferred 
and those sorts of things and the safeguards that are in place, 
what mechanism exists in Saskatchewan to ensure that as 
technological changes take place, safe guards are changed and 
altered to keep up-to-date, or are we just going to put this aside 
now and then wake up some 10 years later and find out that 
where technology is and where Bill No. 7 is at that time, they 
are totally out of synch. 
 
What mechanism is put in place to sort of make sure this stays 
up to date on a very immediate basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises a good point about 
things becoming obsolete. 
 
This particular piece of legislation, and the legislation 
introduced in other provinces in that context, does not seek to 
set specific guidelines and specific models to be followed or 
specific technologies to be utilized, but rather sets more general 
guidelines for that very purpose so that as much as possible 
we’re in the realm of general principles which can . . . and those 
general principles can be responded to in a range of different 
ways, with a range of different technologies. 
 
But I think the member also raises the important point about 
how do we keep on top of this. The officials meeting in the 
Uniform Law Conference process will continue to stay on top 
of these and other questions. 
 
And it’s pretty important that we maintain our pre-eminence in 
this area. We were, as the member knows, the first province in 
Canada to introduce legislation dealing with a number of these 
electronic commerce questions and we would need to stay at the 
forefront of that legislation, making sure that our citizens, in 
dealing with citizens from other provinces and provinces trying 
. . . citizens from other provinces and other countries doing 
business with our electronic businesses here are fully aware that 
they have all the range of protections they anticipate having. 
 
So it’s a general . . . it’s an application of general principles 
rather than specific technologies. And I certainly share the 
member’s view that it would be a mistake if we got too detailed 
here because likely those details would get out of date fairly 
quickly. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce any 
new officials he may have with him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I ask the 
Assembly to welcome, in addition to Darcy McGovern, Karen 
Pflanzner, who is on my right — Karen Pflanzner, with 
legislative services. I think it’s your first visit here so I’m sure 
Mr. Heppner will be . . . oh, I’m sorry, the member from 
Rosthern will be most appreciative of that and very welcoming 
and gracious as he always is. Behind Karen is Al Dwyer, who’s 
the registrar of consumer protection branch and he has been 
here before. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Bill No. 20, and I guess the questions that we 
have this evening on Bill No. 20 are more of a nature that get us 
outside of the particular province. My colleagues on this side of 
the House like to get much knowledge in a humorous vein by 
considering that I’m a Luddite. I wish to ensure the House that 
I’m anything but a Luddite and have actually done some 
business on eBay and a few other situations. 
 
So with that becoming a much larger part of our commerce, and 
I believe that electronic kind of purchasing is making up about 
8 per cent of purchases in Canada at this time, what safeguards 
are there in Bill 20 to ensure that when Saskatchewan citizens 
do some purchasing on the Internet on an international basis, is 
there any consumer protection in Bill 20 to ensure that there’s 
protection in those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, yes, there are protections 
for Luddites and in fact for all others. The piece of legislation 
will . . . it’s again derived from moves being taken across the 
country. This Bill, Bill 20, will require Internet sellers to 
disclose basic information to consumers to ensure that they can 
make informed decisions before they make Internet purchases, 
which is the kind of thing we anticipate in one-to-one 
transactions as well. 
 
It will also require an Internet seller to provide a copy of the 
contract containing that required information within 15 days 
after the contract has been entered into and will allow 
consumers to exercise cancellation rights in similar 
circumstances to other, for example, direct seller contracts and 
will also allow a consumer who makes a purchase using his or 
her credit card — which is, I think, a matter of some concern to 
consumers using the Internet — to obtain a refund from the 
credit card company if the seller, the Internet seller, fails to 
provide a refund after the consumer has exercised the right of 
cancellation. So it intersperses the credit card company as the 
most accessible person or organization to the consumer rather 
than the Internet seller who may be, you know, many, well 
many miles away, many countries away. 
 
There are also protections here for consumers where a credit 
card or credit card information is lost or stolen. And essentially 
this provides, then this piece of legislation provides the same 
kinds of protections available to . . . as to consumers outside of 
Saskatchewan, simply ensuring that, as the member points out, 

with more Internet or the potential for more Internet commerce, 
that our consumers and our businesses can take full advantage 
of buying and selling over the Internet. 
 
This is important for our businesses to be able to portray their 
business, the legal regime within which they work, as one 
which protects consumers’ interests so that consumers can be 
fully competent when they do make a purchase from someone 
here in Saskatchewan. And of course, the same applies for our 
consumers entering into Internet contracts with businesses from 
other countries. So this is primarily then a piece of legislation 
designed to protect consumers when they enter into contracts 
over the Internet. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Okay, thank you. Basically two parts to that 
answer. And the one part dealing with the credit card where if 
an item is returned and if the money isn’t refunded, then the 
credit card company is the one that’s basically held responsible 
to get that refund in place. I think we can see that that would be 
working because credit card companies obviously want access 
to the business opportunities in this province and so they 
definitely have a vested interest in being able to keep that 
market open. 
 
But the first part to your answer, I believe, worked around the 
concept that individuals advertising on the Internet were 
responsible to have a certain level of openness and explanatory 
detail about what’s happening. And I guess on that one I would 
like to have an explanation of what sorts of clout someone in 
one country would have — in this case Saskatchewan would 
have — to someone else in another country, another part of the 
world trying to create some commerce. 
 
Now we can see, as I mentioned earlier on, with the credit card 
situation they want this continued access to the province. We 
can’t deny access to an individual going on the Internet and 
advertising throughout the world, so how can we ensure that 
whatever that merchant or individual is saying on the Internet 
about the merchandise is actually valid and correct? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises important 
questions of enforcement in what is a worldwide, essentially in 
the proper sense of the word, chaotic, structure — it’s not 
owned by anybody and it’s not controlled by anyone. It is in 
that sense valuable in terms of the flow of information and 
certainly has significant impacts with regard to, for example, 
democratic rights in other countries. It’s no longer possible for 
somebody to hide anti-democratic actions because the Internet 
broadcasts those things around the world. 
 
But in the context of consumer transactions, it is . . . (inaudible) 
. . . because of its fluidity and lack of . . . and any lack of any 
kind of ownership and structure in a real sense. It is difficult to 
ensure that the kinds of remedies that are available to a 
consumer who can go to a record store and take a record back 
because it doesn’t work and get their money back, those kinds 
of protections are really not normally feasible. 
 
So we try to do the best we can in that regard, and the response 
which has been chosen is to, is to . . . is the charge-back remedy 
with regards to credit cards. So the consumer has a remedy 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

against his or her credit card company with the anticipation that 
the credit card companies will be more careful, if you want, 
scrutinize more adequately the kinds of Internet sellers they 
allow to use Visa, MasterCard, American Express, and so on. 
So there’d be some kind of a process of enforcement through 
that, through that route. 
 
It’s also the case that here in Canada, the Uniform Law 
Conference and the Consumer Measures Committee, which is 
the joint committee of federal, provincial, and territorial 
officials working on consumer affairs and actually also the 
OECD, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, at the international stage are working to continue 
to study across-border enforcement issues and to develop policy 
options for addressing those cross-border issues. So we have the 
credit card charge back as a remedy, and we are constantly 
looking and everybody is constantly looking at ways in which 
we could enforce these matters in other ways across borders. 
 
But the member identifies what I know he knows is a complex 
enforcement question, and it is one we will probably have to 
keep up to speed with as new initiatives take place. But it is 
being looked at in a number of forms internationally and 
nationally and, as I say, we have that credit card charge back fee 
. . . charge back remedy. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess we just 
saw something that would seem close to Christmas with a 
mouse running up the clock over there. 
 
The minister was referring to something that I’d like for him to 
elaborate on if he possibly could. I am aware of CDs (compact 
discs) and tapes and all those sorts of things. The minister is 
referring to if you buy a record at a store you can take that back. 
I wonder if a little later on he could elaborate what a record is. 
Like I’m aware of some of these other things but it seems it 
goes back a substantial way in time. 
 
One last question on Bill 20. Is there anything in here that 
provides more or less protection to a consumer when they lose a 
credit card? I think we’re always concerned about what happens 
when I lose a credit card, how much am I responsible for, what 
if I lose it in the US (United States) instead of in Canada. How 
is that addressed in Bill 20? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member also raises an interesting 
question and an important one too for consumers in the sense 
that if their credit cards have been lost and are used in an 
unauthorized way, what consequences flow from that, what 
protections do they have. If an unauthorized use of a credit card 
is made prior to the credit card issuer’s receipt of notice of the 
loss, i.e., before the credit card holder tells their bank or 
financial institution, then the credit card’s liability is limited to 
$50, or less if the agreement provides for something less. So a 
maximum of $50. And after the credit card holder has been 
notified, the credit card holder has no legal obligation for a debt 
incurred. 
 
And further, a credit card holder is not responsible for an 
unauthorized use of credit card information provided that the 
card issuer is notified within 30 days. So a fair amount of 
protection to the credit card owner in that case. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce, to my right, Tim Epp, who is Crown counsel in 
legislative services. This is Mr. Epp’s first attendance here to 
the legislature so he is of course as nervous as I am. I would ask 
everyone to welcome him here today. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And again, welcome to the 
minister’s official. We traditionally always give a new MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) a free ride the first time 
he does anything in the House. I’m not sure that we do that for 
the officials. But we’ll let the minister take it from there. 
 
We had a Bill in front of the House some time ago and it seems 
to have disappeared. That’s the Bill that dealt with the ability of 
collection agencies to operate and how they operated. That Bill 
just seems to have somewheres gone off into the dim recesses 
of wherever things goes in this building — maybe it’s up where 
all the graffiti is hidden, for those people that watched the news 
tonight. But anyways, it seems to have been gone. 
 
Bill 25 raises a question coming out of that other Bill. I believe 
that Bill has sort of been lost because of a lot of public reaction 
to it. And I’m wondering on Bill 25, specifically what groups 
were contacted in order to see whether this Bill was acceptable 
or what aspects of it needed to go off in a certain direction. And 
I guess I would probably ask for two or three right off the top. 
Were any car dealerships or car dealership organizations 
contacted? And I think this Bill deals to a large extent what 
happens in some furniture dealerships. Were furniture stores 
contacted? 
 
So who was basically contacted when this Bill was put 
together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks about the 
consultation process which has as normal been quite extensive. 
With the uniform law commission and the council of ministers 
. . . or the Consumer Measures Committee, there were 
widespread Canadian . . . Canadian-wide consultations with all 
aspects of industry, consumer groups, academic groups and so 
on. 
 
In Saskatchewan there has been consultation with a large 
number of industry, government, consumer groups, and this has 
been ongoing for some time. We’ve also had consultations with 
93 stakeholders between ’92 and ’94. Beginning in December 
of 2000, letters were sent to over 100 stakeholder interest 
groups inviting feedback. 
 
In February of this year, a revised draft of this Act was sent to 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

 

69 interested participants — and I don’t know how we identify 
whether they’re interested, but anyway they were interested — 
and a total of 126 groups and individuals received a further 
letter dealing with the results of these consultations. And at the 
same time, some 23 organizations with a particular interest in 
the manner in which farm lending and leasing was impacted by 
this Act were sent detailed information. 
 
And also the Broadcasters Association, a meeting was held with 
representatives of them in October of 2000 and one further 
meeting in November, and extensive consultations with Credit 
Union Central, Farm Credit Corporation, the Agricultural 
Producers of Saskatchewan, private hail insurers, the 
Department of Ag and Food, and Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. 
 
With regards to the member’s specific question about motor 
dealers, yes, the Saskatchewan Motor Dealers Association was 
consulted. And the member also asked about furniture stores 
and they were consulted too. I believe the member will be 
satisfied with the wide-ranging consultation that did take place 
in this case. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — We often see on television advertisements 
talking about zero per cent interest and no payments for 
numbers of years. You see that with numbers of different 
products. Does the minister see Bill 25 affecting the way some 
of that advertising’s done, and that when we watch our ads 
coming through in the next year as a result of Bill 25, will we 
see different wording that will be taking place in those sorts of 
ads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The expectation here, Mr. Chair, is 
that this Bill will be in force July 1, 2003. That will give time to 
those selling on credit and those granting credit to harmonize 
their disclosure practices with the legislation. That will give 
them enough time I think to get organized. 
 
And we will see, as a result, differences in what is in fact 
portrayed in advertising. It’s hard to believe that zero down and 
zero per cent financing in fact means that it costs you nothing to 
finance the particular transaction. It’s always going to be hidden 
or it’s always going to be somewhere. 
 
And so in order for consumers to be able to make an effective 
choice between a reduced price and financing it through their 
credit union or their bank versus financing it through the car 
dealer’s financing system at zero down and zero per cent over a 
period of time, there will be in the advertising statements which 
make this clear. And I think the member might have already 
seen this in newspaper advertising where when zero down, zero 
financing is advertised, there is a fairly extensive explanation of 
what that means. 
 
The purpose here is not to direct any seller or any financial 
institution towards a particular type of financing or cost of 
financing or anything of that sort — the market will work that 
out. But it is intended to ensure that consumers can effectively 
distinguish the difference between one characterization of 
interest costs and another so that they can make an effective 
consumer decision. 
 
As it is at the moment, it is plainly rather difficult for a 

consumer to compare zero down and zero per cent over five 
years with another characterization of how much it might cost 
them to buy a car at a lower rate. So there needs to be some 
more uniformity. 
 
(20:00) 
 
And it’s a good illustration I think of how, when the original 
legislation was introduced, it didn’t foresee the kind of 
characterization we see now — zero down/zero per cent. 
 
So as market practices change, the legislation needs to change 
as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Not that long ago if you wanted a 
credit card you sort of had to go through quite a number of 
hoops to sort of get one. Now they’re being mailed out 
willy-nilly to all sorts of people. In fact as they get lists of 
graduating classes in schools and the kids are being sent credit 
cards. The minister says that MLAs even get them, and I didn’t 
know they sent them to ministers but I guess they do that. 
 
Is there anything in Bill 25 that will affect the information that 
comes along with a credit card when these are mailed out? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, I’m asking leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
members for allowing this brief break. In the Speaker’s gallery 
are three friends of mine — Caroline MacMurchy, and with 
Caroline a couple of friends of hers as well. We have Victoria 
Klassen with REDA (regional economic development 
authority), and Sinead Wotherspoon. Sinead, it’s a treat to see 
you here at the Legislative Assembly as you watch us get 
through this Bill. 
 
I ask all my colleagues on both sides of the House to help 
welcome these three guests to our legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asked a couple of 
questions around unsolicited . . . or credit cards coming in the 
mail in an unsolicited way and what that provides. 
 
The member opposite probably . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
yes goes to willy-nilly and buys all his car parts but willy-nilly 
at that too . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I know I 
shouldn’t mention members by name or by attribute I guess for 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

that matter. 
 
A member can’t be . . . a member? An individual can’t be 
responsible for an unsolicited card if they don’t use it. If they 
use it, then they will be deemed to have agreed to the terms and 
conditions which have been set forth. 
 
If application forms for credit cards are sent out or are used in 
any particular way, they will in fact be governed by this piece 
of legislation and credit card organizations will have to make 
clear the terms and conditions of the contract, including interest 
costs. 
 
The case of unsolicited credit cards is dealt with by The 
Consumer Protection Act. 
 
But the member will probably know from the detail that is 
contained in credit card contracts that it is again not always 
clear on an annual basis what those costs will be. But the credit 
card application forms conclude how much it is going to cost 
each month, and so on. 
 
So those details are covered by this Act and will require the 
same kinds of disclosure as we’ve talked about with regards to 
other credit arrangements. The unsolicited credit card issue is 
dealt with under The Consumer Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I believe that concludes the questions we have on 
Bill No. 25. We would like to thank the minister for his time 
and for his assistant who did just a yeoman job of helping him 
out, which takes a lot of work, as we understand. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 57 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 49 — The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’d ask the minister to introduce any of 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right is 
Andrea Seale from legislative services. I think we’re all very 
familiar . . . well I shouldn’t put it that way I suppose. We all 
know Andrea Seale. She’s been here many times and I’d ask 
you to welcome her; and Al Dwyer has returned from being 
outside who is head of our consumer protection branch. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Really overall in this 
Bill we don’t have a whole lot of concern with it. There are a 
couple of sections that I do want to ask a couple of questions on 
and then we’ll move it on from there. 
 
But the first issue I was just interested in, because it was a Bill 
that we had put in as a private member’s Bill a year ago. And 
talking to a few people, they said that there was a committee 
struck to deal with this Bill. Could you as the minister give me 
just a brief outline of how the Bill came to, who was on the 

committee, that type of thing, some of the organizations that 
were on the committee that asked for this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the question of 
how did this Bill come to light. And certainly it was facilitated 
by the private member’s Bill from the opposition, which 
reflected essentially what has been taking place in Alberta. 
 
We did have a consultation process underway with charities 
dealing with basically . . . well, the charities legislation steering 
committee was underway at that time. The introduction of the 
private member’s Bill obviously moved that issue along. I 
won’t, I think, read out the long list of consultations, but it is 
very extensive. Some members of that consultation committee 
were in the gallery when the Bill was introduced. 
 
So the . . . I think it’s fair to say that the private member’s Bill 
played a role in moving this question along. It was something 
which was of interest to charities, and it is plainly also 
something of interest to consumers as well. We all want to 
make sure that our . . . that the donations we think we make, the 
charitable donations we think we make, go to first, a good 
purpose and secondly, the purpose for which we intended. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you 
explain to me, in section 4, the Bill allows the minister to 
appoint a registrar of charities where necessary, or one or more 
deputy registrars. Under whose request did that come? I guess 
maybe my question is, why couldn’t it have been dealt through 
the Department of Justice, why would you have put in the 
legislation that a registrar would need to be in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In actual fact, in response to the 
member’s question, the job will be carried on in the Department 
of Justice. In fact, Mr. Dwyer is the registrar of any number of 
pieces of legislation and processes. And I take it, unless 
something untoward happens, that he will be the registrar of this 
legislation, too. 
 
So the . . . In fact I might just say in that regard, that the 
consumer protection branch, really with modest expenditures, 
but a lot of work on the part of the officials there, does yeoman 
work in ensuring that these pieces of legislation are in force. 
 
Now to be . . . to also reflect the nature of the legislation, there 
is not here going to be a wholesale, or as the member from 
Rosthern might say, a willy-nilly investigation into charitable 
fundraising businesses and charities but certainly it is likely 
driven by complaints, which is the case for now much more of 
this legislation. 
 
So in fact it won’t require a whole person . . . well it will 
require a whole person but that whole person will be doing a 
whole lot of other things. It won’t require a separate person to 
do the charitable . . . to be the registrar under this legislation. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. So in other words it will be 
dealt with under the Department of Justice with the person that 
already deals with registrar issues in a number of different 
areas. Okay. 
 
The other issue that we were concerned with a little bit was 
section 22 dealing with solicitation of people that request no 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

 

solicitation, people that say they don’t want to be solicited for 
whatever reason. It says in here that they follow along with that; 
this Bill needs to follow along with that. 
 
How is that all going to work when, you know, a non-profit 
goes door to door and taps on a door where people have said I 
don’t want any solicitation, and how is that all going to be 
enforced, I guess, and kept track of for the local community 
groups that do so much door-to-door fundraising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member I think will know that 
this was raised with us by the Canadian Cancer Society. And 
the question is really how could a door-to-door canvass take 
place effectively if there were some people who you shouldn’t 
call on, but how would you know you shouldn’t call on them 
and how would it be effectively . . . how would it be effectively 
managed? 
 
What we will do here is we will . . . there will be a do not solicit 
list. But the regulatory power in the legislation will exempt 
those door-to-door canvassers so they will be . . . they won’t 
have to worry about any implications from canvassing someone 
who has said they don’t wish to be canvassed in that 
door-to-door canvass they have. 
 
And I think when you consider the Salvation Army, the Cancer 
Society, and a whole range of other charities who get volunteers 
to knock on doors, which is not necessarily the easiest thing to 
do in the first place, it’s only . . . I think it was a good issue that 
was raised by the Canadian Cancer Society. We think this will 
deal with it effectively, and I think they will see it as effective 
too. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there going to 
be any sort of — and I don’t know the process — are you going 
to notify all the fundraising groups that this legislation is now in 
place, that perhaps weren’t on the organizing committee? So 
that they are aware that there is some legislation in place so that 
if a fundraiser comes into the area and starts fundraising under a 
bogus name, that there is an avenue now that they can go and 
complain to, that there is legislation in place that they can report 
these fundraisers, fundraising organizations that don’t have any 
credibility in our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Anyone who . . . well, first of all, let 
me say that the consultation here has been very broad and so 
charities themselves, and charitable fundraising businesses, will 
be all too familiar with this legislation. But of course, we’ll 
notify them when it is in place that in fact it does apply to their 
activities. 
 
In terms of an individual who feels aggrieved by some practice 
on the doorstep or over the telephone, I suppose, they will be 
able to contact the registrar in the Department of Justice. 
 
And the member actually raises an interesting question. It might 
be wise — it seems to me it would be wise — to ensure that 
there is the widest disclosure of this legislation and this ability 
to the public at large. Even those of us who perhaps think we 
know a lot about these things, I imagine could be well served by 
being reminded of our remedies. And that could be done in a 

number of ways. I think the member raises a useful point here. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess that’s 
really all the questions I had. 
 
I am very glad to see this legislation come into force because I 
know — as I mentioned, I believe, in the response to the second 
reading speech — a number of receptions that I had been to 
through fundraising, that were put on by fundraising 
organizations, were really quite concerned that they were losing 
some dollars out of the province that really did not need to be 
in. And you know, I guess from my perspective, I just was 
surprised that there would be people out there doing that. But I 
guess when it comes to dollars and cents, people will do almost 
anything and go under whatever assumed name is possible. 
 
So congratulations and thank you for the legislation, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The Chair would like to ask leave of the 
committee for consent to deal with this Bill in parts because of 
the length of the Bill, there’s some 50 clauses. Do I have 
agreement that we deal with this in parts? Agreed. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 50 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Ethanol Fuel Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 
to, to my right, introduce Larry Spannier, who’s the deputy 
minister of Industry and Resources. Coming along shortly will 
be Michael Fougere, director of strategic investment attraction, 
and Dave Kutcher, the senior project leader for ethanol 
development. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There’s a number of 
questions that we would like to ask the minister simply because 
everything in the Bill is in regulation, as the member from 
Cypress Hills pointed out the last time that he spoke to this Bill. 
That there’s very little in the Bill itself; it’s all in regulations. So 
that leaves a lot of questions unanswered. 
 
The first question that I would like to ask him is: we’re all well 
aware . . . it’s quite public of the business deal that’s been made 
between CIC and Broe industries. So the question that I’m 
being asked by other communities is why Broe industries, a 
company that has no experience in ethanol, was chosen so 
quickly by CIC for a partnership agreement? They’re basically 
saying is it because they had an exceptional business plan in 
place? Were they farther ahead in feasibility studies? What was 
the reason that CIC set up a partnership agreement so quickly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I must tell the 
member opposite that CIC has reached no agreement with the 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

Broe group of companies or anyone else. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. When 
there was an announcement of four particular communities that 
were chosen to have 80-million-litre ethanol plants being built 
in their communities, I believe they came to Regina here to 
make the public announcement. 
 
Is he now saying tonight that these communities will not be 
receiving capital investment from CIC, that there is no 
agreement, and therefore perhaps they made their 
announcement a little early? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, Mr. Chairman, the agreement, 
as I understood the press release, was a memorandum of 
understanding between a number of communities in 
Saskatchewan and the Broe group of companies to look towards 
the development of ethanol in the province. CIC was not 
involved in that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. So there is absolutely 
no contract signed. There’s no letter of intent between Broe and 
CIC. There is no commitment from them to these four 
communities for ethanol plants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I can only tell you that the 
document that you would have seen as it relates to the four 
communities and Broe was a memorandum of understanding 
signed by that company and the communities from 
Saskatchewan to pursue ethanol development. I can tell you that 
there has been no recommendation to the board of directors of 
Crown Investments Corporation recommending an agreement 
with Broe or any other company as it relates to ethanol 
development. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So the next question I would like to ask the 
minister . . . since I had the opportunity to speak to Frank Hart 
or ask him questions in the CIC committee, Frank Hart 
insinuated at that meeting — I believe it was . . . I don’t have 
the date right offhand but I can get that to him — that Broe 
industries was only interested in such an investment in the 
province if indeed CIC did partner with them. 
 
So has Broe changed their mind? They’re not asking for a CIC 
commitment any longer or is that just a given deal even though 
technically we haven’t signed anything? However if CIC does 
not partner with them, are they still going to remain committed 
to the four communities and committed to the capital 
investment that they’ve promised? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I can only tell the 
member opposite that I met with Mr. Broe a few weeks ago . . . 
a couple of weeks ago, and he indicated to me that although we 
would not support an exclusive arrangement with the Broe 
group of companies, that he was still interested in pursuing 
ethanol development in this province. 
 
I indicated to him that it was our desire to see a component of 
local Saskatchewan business people with the ability to invest in 
ethanol development, if they so choose, which the Broe group 
have agreed to. They have also indicated to us that they would 
want to see Crown Investments Corporation with an equity 
position so that they could be guaranteed in their minds and 

guaranteed to their financiers that in fact the rules as it relates to 
ethanol and the support for ethanol wouldn’t change in 
Saskatchewan in the near future. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Does the minister not even himself see the 
. . . how ridiculous that particular opinion is? The rules for 
ethanol have changed in the last 10 years under his government 
once or twice already. The rules for a number of things have 
changed under this government. So it’s rather strange that a 
company would believe that a government would offer stability. 
 
However the concern that I am hearing in other communities 
that were interested in perhaps investing in an ethanol industry 
in their communities, the major concern comes in to whether or 
not there will be any sort of exclusive element included in a 
deal that may be signed between CIC and Broe industries in the 
future. And so is Broe industries asking for an exclusive 
manufacturing rights within the province for any period of 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, no. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Is Broe industries asking for exclusive rights 
to a partnering position with CIC for capital investment for 
ethanol production in our province for any period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, no. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Is Broe asking for exclusive rights to the 
domestic sales within our province for any period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, no. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Is the minister aware that again at the 
committee meeting that I attended, that Mr. Frank Hart said that 
Broe is indeed asking for some exclusive rights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I am aware that 
Broe was asking for exclusive rights. It’s been indicated to him 
that the government of Saskatchewan isn’t interested in that 
type of arrangement. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So in fact for the last three questions, we’ll 
just . . . going to retract. Which one are . . . what type of 
exclusives rights are they asking for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, they’re asking for 
no exclusive rights. They’re only asking for a business 
arrangement to come and do ethanol development in the 
province, working with some of the communities that the 
member is aware of. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So again I remind the minister that Frank 
Hart said that they wanted some exclusive element to the deal. 
What part of that deal is exclusive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No part. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — If a community raises the capital necessary 
and wish to build an ethanol plant in Saskatchewan, will they 
have the right to do so in our province? Will they have to apply 
for a licence or an operating permit or any other type of 
approval from this government in order to build an ethanol 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

 

plant in their community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — They would have to apply, as any 
other business would, for the appropriate licences to do 
business here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Will those communities that apply to have 
an ethanol plant in their communities, will they have access to 
the domestic sales within the province as equally as well as the 
Broe deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — The arrangements between the 
producers — or potential producers — of ethanol will be on a 
fair basis and fair access to the refineries who ultimately will 
drive the decision. It’ll be price-sensitive and it’ll be based on 
what kind of an arrangement the producers of ethanol will be 
able to reach with their two refineries with Husky and Co-op. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — What type of arrangements is the minister 
trying to negotiate with Husky and Co-op? Will either one of 
those be the sole or the exclusive refinery that will have the 
rights to blending the ethanol-blended fuel? 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — No, I can say to the member 
opposite that Husky already blends ethanol here in our 
province. Co-op is a retailer of I think the figure is around 80 
per cent of Saskatchewan’s production. So I would assume that 
it will be a business decision made by both refineries in terms 
of how much ethanol they buy and what market share in the 
province they have. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The four plants that have been announced in 
the four chosen communities, the minister has said a number of 
times that the producers can buy in, that this is not going to 
exclude the producers. So if indeed the deal that is being 
negotiated and not signed to date does include a partnership 
between Broe and CIC, how will the local producers buy in? 
Will CIC turn their equity into share positions or how will they 
handle the local producers being able to buy in to the plant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know 
much of the work is being done in the local communities who 
are putting together interest and expressions of interest from 
different communities whether it be on the livestock side or 
whether it be investment straight into the ethanol or a 
combination of both. And I would think each community may 
in fact make a business arrangement that will suit and benefit 
their communities. 
 
I can only say to you that local investors will have the 
opportunity to invest in ethanol production and to invest in the 
livestock that will be supported by the ethanol production here 
in the province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — If one of the four communities that has 
made the announcement to build a plant does find a financial 
package through producers, probably partnering with another 
company other than Broe, will they be able to enter into those 
type of arrangements without any difficulty from Broe 
industries or the government? 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, absolutely. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question 
dealing with . . . I’ve had a couple of groups in my area that 
have been talking about ethanol. I mean everybody’s been 
talking about ethanol the last year or two. And they’re just 
starting to put together their plants and they’re also looking to 
partner up, and one of the things that they’ve mentioned is CIC. 
Would they be free to . . . would CIC be free to invest with 
them, partner up with them, or are they only exclusively to 
partner up with Broe if the deal with Broe does get signed and 
go through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I’ve 
said this before and I’ll repeat it for the benefit of the members 
opposite that if Broe, if the Broe group of companies signed an 
agreement with Crown Investments Corporation based on good 
business sense, it will be brought to the board, and the board 
would then make a decision as to whether they approved it or 
whether they didn’t. 
 
If Commercial Alcohols, as an example, would come to CIC, 
and they’ve met just as recently as last week with a business 
arrangement and it was approved by the board, then that would 
be an agreement as well. If other companies who are proponents 
of ethanol development would choose to see Crown 
Investments Corporation as an investor, it would be made based 
on a business case. 
 
There is no exclusive arrangement. And I don’t know how 
many times I can suggest this to the members opposite, it just 
doesn’t seem to stick. There is no exclusivity. There have been 
no agreements reached with any company, but Crown 
Investments Corporation would be open to look at a business 
case that made sense for it as a corporation and the people of 
Saskatchewan through it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I want to thank the Minister and his officials 
and there will be no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 44 — The Animal Products Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 50 — The Department of Agriculture 
and Food Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 51 — The Farm Financial Stability 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Electronic Information 
and Documents Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 20 — The Consumer Protection 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 49 — The Charitable Fund-raising Businesses Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Ethanol Fuel Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 58 — The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s indeed a privilege and an honour to get involved in 
the second readings of a number of Bills this evening, being 
that we have some time that we can spend on a number of these 
Bills. 
 
Bill No. 58, The Income Tax Act as proposed by the Minister of 
Finance, restates some of the things that the minister announced 
that people of Saskatchewan were looking forward to I think as 
much as two years ago and puts in place the various changes 
that were announced that people were looking forward to. 
 
As we’ve stated before, tax cuts to improve the position of the 
province, to improve the economic position, to encourage 
growth is what is necessary in this province. And we as an 
opposition party have been very adamant in terms of developing 
a strategy about how we would grow this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The growth of Saskatchewan I think is critical. We have 
maintained a population of nearly 1 million for many, many 
decades, and we’re now at a position of course where we need 
to ensure that people who are very well-trained, who are 
well-educated in a good education system that we have in this 
province, have the ability to have a job and to stay here. 
 
And as a result, the changes that the minister puts forward 
regarding the personal income tax levels that will be assessed 
are, in our opinion, a good step forward. But you know, Mr. 
Minister, there is . . . or Mr. Speaker, there is a negative side to 
this because everything is relevant in comparison to all of the 
provinces. And we have to only take a look at the guidebook 
that shows the 2002 tax rates that are going to come into effect 
in all provinces, Mr. Speaker, you know. 
 
And the Minister of Social Services has had an opinion on a lot 
of things, Mr. Speaker, lately. But it’s interesting to note that he 
suddenly wants to become involved in the debate on taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tax rates that are charged by our neighbouring 
provinces are very, very critical to the growth of Saskatchewan 
because as young people look at their incomes for starting 
positions, they took a look at what of course is going to be that 
take-home pay — the amount of money that’s left in their 
pockets. And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at our neighbouring 
province to the west, we look at Alberta, and Alberta of course 
is on a flat tax of 10 per cent. 
 
So when we look at Saskatchewan and we look at our rates of 
11.25 and 13.25 and 15 and a half per cent for the three 
categories, we know that of course those are not in the same . . . 
they’re not in the same ballpark, Mr. Speaker, as Alberta’s. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the other thing we also have to look at 
is the province to the east of us — Manitoba. And Manitoba’s 
beginning rate for taxation for people in the first income 
bracket, which is up to $30,544 in Manitoba, is 10.9 per cent — 
it is better than the Saskatchewan rate. 
 
So while we’ve moved forward — and we want to again 
commend the minister for taking that initiative two years ago — 
we believe that the lower income tax bracket is where this 
province has missed the mark. 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has missed the mark because we constantly keep 
talking about minimum wage and the fact that we need to 
address the concerns of lower income-earning people. 
 
There isn’t a great deal of joy to someone who is on minimum 
wage, and probably keeping two or three part-time jobs to 
maintain a salary that’s going to be able to help pay all the bills, 
when in the end they end up paying income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tax rates are part of the problem. But the other 
problem, of course, is where do the exemptions start for an 
individual. And in Saskatchewan we’re now at a point where 
the exemption rate for an individual is at $8,000. That is far 
lower than our neighbouring provinces, and I use Alberta as the 
example, which is $12,000. 
 
So when we’re talking about a family of two or maybe even 
with three or four people in the family, with two children, the 
amount of money that is taxable in Saskatchewan, if we look at 
two adults, we’re talking about an exemption of $16,000. In 
Alberta, that exemption is $24,000. So for two people earning 
the first $16,000 in Saskatchewan, they wouldn’t pay tax. In 
Alberta, it will be 24,000. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is a big difference. And that is what 
people look at when they look at job opportunities and 
take-home pay for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tax rates that are proposed in this Bill, as the 
minister has indicated in his first reading, are also housekeeping 
in nature in that the income tax is defined, the taxable income 
that is earned in Canada is defined so that we’re on the same 
type of information that is provided by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Minister — Mr. Speaker — sorry, Mr. Speaker, the 
disability tax credit that has been put in place has been 
something that has been looked forward to by many individuals 
who of course unfortunate that they do have a disability, but 
this will allow a tax credit to come into play where it will allow 
for them to pay less tax and thus be able to meet some of their 
needs. 
 
Mr. Minister, the tax credits that have been implemented across 
the board, the calculations that are indicated in the Bill, are ones 
that the taxpayers are looking forward to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did have a couple of letters come in when this 
Bill was introduced and one of the concerns was while there 
were people were happy of course that the tax rates were 
declining both provincially and federally, one of the changes 
that occurred that I think surprised a lot of people when they 
started to calculate their 2001 tax returns was that there used to 
be something called a Saskatchewan tax credit reduction — a 
$200 tax credit reduction. 
 
And that was of course based on . . . you’d qualify for a portion 
. . . all or a portion of that amount based on your income. Many 
people who did their calculations as soon as they found out that 
that $200 tax credit wasn’t there, they found out that indeed 
their taxes had not dropped significantly and in some cases 
we’ve had reports that people in the very low tax brackets — 
low income earners — that the taxes, the income tax payable in 
fact increased. 

So while the minister has been saying that everyone is 
benefiting from income tax cuts, there are a group of people out 
there in that low tax bracket who, as a result of the loss of the 
Saskatchewan tax credit, have ended up paying more taxes for 
this year. And I’m sure that those concerns have been sent to 
the Minister of Finance’s office and that he’s responded 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have a few questions that we would like to 
ask the minister regarding specific sections and the explanation 
of words and definitions that he has used in Bill No. 58, but I 
think that I see no problem in handling them at the committee 
level. So we would allow the Bill to move on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 66 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 66 — The 
Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a 
few short comments on Bill No. 66. In our consultation with 
various peoples throughout the province we wanted to get an 
explanation from members who are involved in the municipal 
employees’ pension funds. And their comments have been that 
on the whole it’s relatively a housekeeping Bill in that it allows 
for some of the changes to be made that they have been asking 
for, for a number of times. 
 
There was some discrepancy about the collection or the 
receiving of two pensions. If a worker was hurt and receiving 
pension benefits from WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) 
and their municipal pension as well — and these are, of course, 
are municipal employees — so the amendments in Bill No. 66, I 
think try to ensure that those kinds of inconsistencies are taken 
care of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the creation of the category called the designated 
member very clearly helps the police officers and firefighters 
who have attained a retirement age at 60, of course, rather than 
65. And the contribution level that these people have made to 
their pension plans is higher than it would be for others. And 
now the Bill generates a change to the municipal employees’ 
pension fund that will allow those kinds of situations, both in 
the general sense and in the designated sense, to be combined 
into one benefit to avoid of course, separate retirement dates. So 
that’s a good situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal secretaries have been in . . . the 
concerns about the minimum monthly pension for municipal 
secretaries was raised by secretaries a number of years, and this 
Bill proposes to eliminate that minimum standard and thus 
allow, of course, members to . . . who would otherwise qualify 
for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those few brief comments, I think that the 
income tax . . . or the municipal employees’ amendment Act 
deals with some very necessary things to ensure that the 
workers, the municipal workers, who are injured on the job, the 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard June 17, 2002 

 

firefighters, police officers are dealt with appropriately and that 
so no inconsistencies occur. And this Act, at this time, seems to 
have met some of those requests. 
 
So we would also deal with this Act in committee as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 35 — The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had a number of discussions in this Legislative 
Assembly, that is specifically myself and the Minister of 
Finance, regarding the Fiscal Stabilization Fund during 
estimates. And we’ve had the chance to hear the minister’s 
explanation for what the Fiscal Stabilization Fund really is or is 
not as the case may be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a couple of points about a press 
release that was done by the Minister of Finance dated March 
29, 2000 — that’s over two years ago, Mr. Speaker — when the 
government was providing information about why the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund was going to be set up and the kinds of 
things that it would avoid happening in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the entire picture for creating the Fiscal 
Stabilization came from the fact that the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Fund Authority had over the years maintained, for 
purposes of bookkeeping, the dividends that it had maintained 
within its fiscal structure. Mr. Speaker, those were just that, 
they were a paper entry about the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority’s dividends or monies that had been 
maintained in a dividend fund. The government, while looking 
at the entire economic picture of the province — and I know 
that the auditor has stated many times that Saskatchewan should 
be like seven other provinces already in Canada that work from 
summary financial statements, not at the end of a year or year 
and a half, but right at the very beginning when a budget is 
being put together — it is necessary to look at the entire 
economic picture of the province through summary financial 
statements, which would mean that the Crown Corporations and 
all of the things, plus the various departments in the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
We would have the economic revenue picture, we would have 
an understanding of what the expenditures would look like, and 
thus there would be in this House a debate about the goals, the 
objectives, and whether or not those kinds of things could be 
attained. What it would prevent then, Mr. Speaker, would be 
this very Bill that we see before us. 
 
A Fiscal Stabilization Fund that is not on deposit — there is no 
fund on deposit, the minister has said that — it is a line of credit 
that exists to be able to allow the government to indeed borrow 
more money. And, Mr. Speaker, it was very evident last fall 
when the Finance minister related through something that is 
called the mid-term financial report of the province. He related 

that the debt of the province was going to rise because there 
was a need to access more money from the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. People found that very surprising, Mr. Speaker, because 
if there’s a fund of money and you’re taking from that fund, 
why would the debt of the province go up? Well it’s clear that 
every time the government says it’s using the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund what it really means is that it’s going to 
borrow more money to be able to offset that debt. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the goal that was established on March 29, 
2000, at a time when the fund was going to be maintained at 
about 7 per cent of the revenue of the province, now we’re 
seeing that of course those projections are gone because the use 
of the money by the government, the use of the line of credit by 
the government, has exhausted that very, very quickly, that 
$775 million line of credit that was established. This 
government last year fell short by over $400 million on 
balancing the budget — so-called balancing — and as a result 
had to borrow that $400 plus million. This year they’re going to 
be borrowing in excess of $200 million. And next year the 
projection from the minister’s comments in the budget is that 
the remaining balance of the fiscal stabilization line of credit is 
going to be used up. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, whereas this document that was produced by 
the government on March 29, 2000, that stated that the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund at the end of 2003-2004 would still contain 
about $290 million, which was going to be estimated to be at 
about 5 per cent of the revenues of the province, that plan is out 
the window because now the government has said that we will 
use that entire line of credit up by the time that we get to the 
end of 2003-2004 fiscal year. 
 
So as a result The Fiscal Stabilization Fund Amendment Act 
has to be introduced into this House to be able to create the 
situation where indeed the government has the flexibility of 
using up all of the line of credit this year or using up 
three-quarters of it this year and allowing the balance to be used 
up next year. 
 
If the minister’s projections are accurate in his document 
released back in March — the budget of this year — he is 
stating that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund line of credit at the end 
of next year will be zero. So while there was joy that we were 
supposedly going to set aside a fund of 775 million, indeed 
there was no $775 million bank account. It’s interesting to 
compare the Heritage Fund of Alberta which now sits at 12.1 
billion actual dollars that are invested, that are managed by 
professional finance people that are trained in those areas. And 
as a result, they do have over $700 million worth of revenue 
that was transferred to the General Revenue Fund. That’s from 
interest earned on that kind of a bank account. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have such a fund. The Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund does not produce any interest, as far as a 
revenue. What it does now state, or the government now is 
proposing to do, is to allow the flexibility in their own plans 
that they created just a short two years ago, that said that the 
fiscal stabilization line of credit would be maintained at 5 per 
cent. And now the government is saying that their plans are no 
longer valid, that indeed this government, under the leadership 
of the new Premier, has to justify exhausting that entire line of 
credit to come up with a so-called balanced budget, even though 



June 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

 

we know that the debt of this province is going up. It’s rising 
dramatically from 11.1 billion to be estimated at 11.4 billion. 
And as a result, we will be further and further into debt. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a number of questions for the 
minister during Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 36 — The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2002 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 36, The Corporation Capital Tax, has introduced one very 
small change that I think will help some businesses in that the 
value of a small business before taxation kicks into play here 
will be increased from $10 million to a $15 million maximum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a positive step forward. And that will not 
bring us into line with other provinces, but it will help the 
corporations that are developing in Saskatchewan, the few that 
there may be, to indeed hold back some of their taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the assessments done on Saskatchewan is 
called Public Policy Sources No. 57. And I want to read a 
section from this document about corporate capital tax, Mr. 
Speaker. This is on page 11 of this document from the Fraser 
Institute and it says this. It says: 
 

Saskatchewan is the largest user in the country of corporate 
capital taxes, often called Canada’s worst tax. The province 
uses the corporate capital tax more than any other province. 
This is measured by corporate capital tax as a percentage of 
own source revenue, GDP, and corporate income tax. In 
fact, Saskatchewan is the only province to regularly collect 
more corporate capital taxes than it does corporate income 
taxes. 

 
I’ll just stop at that point, Mr. Speaker. It’s stating that 
Saskatchewan collects more corporate capital tax than it does 
corporate income tax. And I think, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve 
listened to people who have . . . who are outside of 
Saskatchewan do an assessment of Saskatchewan and say, why 
aren’t we booming, why aren’t we moving at the same kind of 
level as our neighbouring provinces or some states, they have 
pointed to this corporate capital tax as a deterrent for why 
corporations are not growing and expanding rapidly in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Corporate capital tax is very negative; it holds back 
development. And when you look at the amount of revenue that 
is obtained from corporate income tax — which is what you’d 
want, of course, because you’d want to have corporations 
making money and paying income tax — they indeed pay more 
capital tax than they do income tax. 
 
This article goes on to say, and I quote again: 
 

Given the tremendous disincentive corporate capital taxes 
create against capital formation, coupled with their rarity 
outside of Canada, along with Saskatchewan’s clear 
difficulties in attracting investment and business 
development, it seems patently obvious that the province 
should stop its high use of this type of taxation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, an outside analysis of Saskatchewan’s corporate 
capital tax position relative to other provinces, relative to other 
parts of the world that says that Saskatchewan is the highest 
user of the corporate capital tax and probably it creates the most 
negative effect on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we understand of course that you can’t 
move from a full tax to a zero tax in one movement, there has to 
be a move by this government to address why we’re not having 
more corporate income tax being paid. Why are there not more 
corporate . . . corporations locating in Saskatchewan, paying 
income tax that indeed would be at a higher level than the 
corporate capital tax? 
 
We’ve heard from this type of report that this is a tax that is 
negative and it holds back the growth of the province. So if 
we’re going to be looking at Saskatchewan from the position of 
growing Saskatchewan, from trying to attract, you know, 
100,000 people over the next 10 years and growing it, this is a 
tax that has been pointed at as being one that Saskatchewan 
makes the most use of it, but yet it’s being looked at as being 
the most negative tax in all of Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a concern for many people. 
Many businesses and corporations in Saskatchewan that are 
looking at other provinces are looking at the application of the 
corporate capital tax in a neighbouring province. If you can 
locate in Alberta and save huge amounts of tax dollars, that’s 
the kind of thing that businesses will do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is a situation here where the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) have not looked at fairness across the 
province for a decade. And now we’ve made a small move 
forward to try to address some of the concerns by changing the 
value from 10 million to 15 million, as I said in my remarks at 
the very beginning, which would be a positive kind of step. 
 
But there is a long way to go, Mr. Speaker, in terms of making 
Saskatchewan more attractive, in making it more on the same 
level playing field as other provinces so that indeed 
corporations would have a difficult time leaving Saskatchewan, 
or in fact it would be in a position where they might be 
encouraged to come to Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those few comments, we will allow the 
Bill to move to committee where we will address each of these 
sections in turn. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:08. 
 


