















































Hansard: June 13, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2027 
 June 13, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from constituents of mine who would 
like to see their ambulance service stay in the community. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report, 
and affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of people who are concerned about 
the high cost of prescription drugs: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for the prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from 
Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the 
shortcomings of the tobacco legislation. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Saskatoon. I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to present on behalf of constituents concerned about 
overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 

that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bredenbury, Saltcoats, Churchbridge, Pierceland, and the city 
of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the deplorable condition of Highway 
58. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
58 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from 
the community of Chaplin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens who are concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Oungre. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to Davidson 
and Craig health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at its current level of service at 
a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctorial services available as well as lab services, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to the 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston and Hanley. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received. 
 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway No. 58; and 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

Addendums to previously tabled petitions of this session 
being sessional paper no. 7, 18, 23, 24, 32, 59, 157, and 
164. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 66 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Premier: how much was the final cost of the report 
conducted for the government into allegations of 
harassment against the current Minister of Environment? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 66 
ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: will the minister 
please provide which communities that have water and 
sewer plants that the provincial government runs and 
operates? 

 
And also while I’m on my feet I have another question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: what are the rates the 
government charges to the communities that have water 
and sewer treatment plants that the government runs and 
operates? 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 66 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: in 1999-2000 how much 
did the government pay out under the farm land education 
tax rebate program; how many applications were received 
under this program in that year; and how many were 
approved; and how many were rejected because they were 
submitted after the deadline? 
 

And I repeat, Mr. Speaker: 
 

How many were rejected because they were submitted after 
the deadline? 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 66 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how many companies in 
Saskatchewan paid corporate capital tax during the year for 
which the most recent statistics are available? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in your gallery 
I have 17 students from the school of — in the east gallery as 
the member from Kelvington pointed out; I’m sorry about that 
— 17 students from the town of Kenaston, grade 7 students, 
who have come to view the proceedings here today and I think 
they will find it very interesting. 
 

With them is their teacher, Melanie Kerpan, and with her is her 
husband, Allan Kerpan, who is a former MP (Member of 
Parliament) for Saskatoon-Blackstrap. So I think he could 
probably answer some of the questions that the kids will be 
asking as the proceedings are going on. And also with them as 
chaperones is Toni Tweet and Phil Johnson. 
 
I will be meeting with them after question period to answer any 
questions they may have here. And with that I would like to 
welcome them here and ask the members to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted and 
honoured to introduce to you and through you to the members 
of this House, the Saskatoon Children’s Choir sitting in your 
gallery. There is 43 young people in this choir and I’ll introduce 
their artistic director, Phoebe Voigts; Bonnie Nicholson, the 
accompanist; and seven chaperones; and Connie Snider, their 
manager. 
 
Many of us heard their beautiful singing during the lunch break 
and it was truly harmonious. I’m not sure whether we’ll be 
quite striking the same notes inside here. 
 
But I do want to draw attention to this very special group and 
what their project is — Youth Against War. And they’ve been 
collecting signatures on a petition to ban land mines 
internationally. And in the summer they’re going to be touring 
France and Spain again on this project. And this particular 
weekend they’re off to the International Peace Gardens in North 
Dakota, bringing a message of peace. 
 
And so I ask all of us to welcome them enthusiastically and 
send them off from our province with the best of wishes. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld in welcoming 
the Saskatoon Children’s Choir here to the Assembly today. 
And I had the opportunity also to listen to some of your music. 
It was just outstanding. It was just great. 
 
And if I might continue, Mr. Speaker, your project of youth 
against war, I totally support that. And being a person that spent 
many years in the military, I also did not want to see war. And 
that’s why I’m a very strong . . . strongly committed to a strong 
deterrent such as a strong defence. Because I also am against 
war. 
 
So I also would like to join in welcoming the group to the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kowalsky: — Members, I just want to take a 
moment to welcome the father of the choir director, father of 
Bonnie Nicholson, who is a constituent of mine and a former 
colleague of mine, a teaching colleague from Prince Albert, a 
man who was a principal for many years in Prince Albert, is 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

 

now retired, and is able to partake in events like this — visits to 
the legislature. And the person I’m talking about it sitting 
beside Bonnie and that’s Boris Koshlay. Would you please 
welcome him to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure today to welcome students from the grade 5 class from 
St. Olivier School in Radville. And, Mr. Speaker, the students 
are: Christian, Sara, Stephanie, Kenton, Tayla, Dallas, Kale, 
Eric, Christopher, Justin, Dierdre, Leena, Jennifer, Jessa, 
Taylor, and Jessie. And last but certainly not least we have 
Brenna Bourassa. And Brenna, if you’d give a wave. Brenna is 
the granddaughter of Sherry Webster, who is the CA 
(constituency assistant) for Wayne Elhard from Cypress Hills. 
 
So we’d like to welcome you all. 
 
We’d like to also welcome your teacher Kathy Magnien, your 
chaperones Bev Koszma, Denis Bert, Lorne Nimegeers and 
Bruce Pitrie. And I look forward to meeting with you after 
question period and I hope you enjoy your stay here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Leads Investment Pack 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday Paul Martin — Saskatchewan’s Paul Martin, the one 
worth listening to — said the following: 
 

If we are going to find new investment capital, it means we 
are probably going to have to develop those sources right 
here at home. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Martin goes on to say — and I’m happy 
to relay this to the Assembly — that, indeed, Saskatchewan is 
developing those investment sources, and furthermore, that 
Saskatchewan has turned out to be the “Western Canadian Star” 
in the minds of venture capital investors in the first quarter of 
this year. 
 
New figures released by the firm of Macdonald & Associates 
Limited reveal that venture capital firms pumped $8 million 
into local enterprises, which is roughly eight times higher than 
last year, and that the number of firms receiving equity capital 
went from two to twelve. This rise in venture capital 
development coincides with the arrival of a couple of new 
Saskatchewan-based, privately managed funds. 
 
Among these new players is Crown Capital Partners, a 
Regina-based privately managed fund, and Prairie Ventures, a 
labour sponsored pool with investors from credit unions and 
private investors. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, our good news does not depend on the poor 
fortune of others, but I must point out to the opposition that 
during this same period when Saskatchewan investments 
increased by sixfold, the promised land of Alberta saw its 
investment drop by half, and those only went to four 

companies. 
 
As we’re fond of saying, Mr. Speaker — more good news for 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
leave to revert back to introductions, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I would ask leave on behalf of the 
member to revert to introductions. I think I missed him during 
the introduction period. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to draw your attention to the east gallery and introduce 
to you and through you to all members of the House, someone I 
think that most of us know very, very well, Margo Boyko. 
Margo has been employed as a security guard here in the 
building for over two years. Today she has with her, her son, 
Brett. 
 
Brett on March 16 of this year was diagnosed with acute 
lymphatic leukemia. After many months of chemo treatments, 
Brett today received some wonderful news, Mr. Speaker. As of 
today he is considered to be in solid remission. 
 
Margo would like to thank all people who give blood 
transfusions and give blood because Brett’s recovery would not 
have been possible without the many blood transfusions that he 
required. 
 
So I would ask everyone to welcome Margo and her courageous 
son Brett to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

4-H Annual Achievement Days 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
weekend was a busy weekend for a number of 4-H clubs in the 
Moosomin constituency. Clubs in Whitewood, Kennedy, 
Fairmede, Kipling, Wawota, and Gerald held their annual 
achievement days. And then on Saturday, June 8, they gathered 
in Whitewood for the Whitewood regional 4-H show and sale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know what 4-H does for young people in 
this province. And I’m sure maybe many members had the 
privilege at one time rather of being a 4-H member. Certainly I 
did, and truly enjoyed that experience. It certainly is a learning 
experience, an experience that anyone that’s involved in the 4-H 
movement over the years has learned to really appreciate and 
enjoy. 
 
The motto of the 4-H movement is Learn to do by Doing. And 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

I’m sure that each and every one of the 4-H members this 
weekend as they had their achievement days and as they 
participated in the regional show and sale were very proud as 
they displayed their livestock and the calves that they have 
worked on over the winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 4-H, what it does is it creates character and 
responsibility for our young people, helping them to become 
honest, hard-working citizens in their future lives. 
 
So at this time, I would like to congratulate the 4-H movement 
and specifically the clubs of Whitewood, Kennedy, Fairmede, 
Kipling, Wawota, and Gerald for their hard work, and wish the 
4-H members well in their future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wheelchair Rugby Team Wins World Championship 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, even though I’m not exactly 
sure how you do a rugby scrum in a wheelchair, I’m proud to 
report that last week in Gothenburg, Sweden, the Canadian 
Wheelchair Rugby team beat the defending world and 
Paralympic Olympian champion USA (United States of 
America) team to become the world champions in wheelchair 
rugby. 
 
Here’s something else worth mentioning, Mr. Speaker. On a 
team of 12 players, three are from Saskatchewan. That means 
that we, with 3 per cent of the Canadian population, provided 
25 per cent of a world-class organization. And that’s about par 
for the course. 
 
The Saskatchewan team members are Mike Bacon and Allan 
Semeniuk of Saskatoon and Daryl Stubel of Regina. And during 
National Public Service Week, I am proud to announce that 
Daryl is the executive co-ordinator of the office of disability 
issues in our Social Services department — an obvious case of 
leading by example. 
 
The world championships are held every four years in tandem 
with the Paralympic Games, so top level competition occurs 
every two years. Canada entered this contest seeded fourth. This 
was the first time ever that the US team had lost an international 
game — maybe because it was played on a level playing field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada and Saskatchewan’s athletes made an 
excellent showing at the Winter Olympics in Sydney. The 
Canadian National Wheelchair Rugby team showed our colours 
very well on the other side of the world. And I know all 
members will join me in congratulating them. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Hurricanes Win Gold 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Humboldt Hurricanes are the gold medallists in the under 16 
boys soccer. 
 
The Humboldt Hurricanes showed their stuff and were 

unbeatable at the Festival of Soccer held recently in Saskatoon. 
The team, coached by Terry Schatz of Humboldt, defeated the 
One Arrow First Nation, SUSC (Saskatoon United Soccer Club) 
Saskatoon, and Lakewood Saskatoon, to take first place in their 
pool. 
 
The Hurricanes went on to meet the One Arrow First Nation for 
the second time in the final game. In a roughly contested match 
the Humboldt Hurricanes came out victorious, defeating One 
Arrow First Nation 2-0 to win the gold medal. 
 
Congratulations to coach Terry Schatz and the Humboldt 
Hurricanes on a great victory. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Keith Martell Honoured by the 
Report on Business Magazine 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Meadow 
Lake constituency may be a bit removed from the population 
centre of our province. 
 
It’s even further removed from the corner of Bay and King 
Street in Toronto. But that’s okay, Mr. Speaker, because 
Meadow Lake people make an impression on our nation that 
more than compensates for our locale. 
 
Another case in point is Keith Martell, formerly of Meadow 
Lake, currently in Saskatoon, and for the past five years, 
president of the First Nations Bank of Canada, headquartered in 
Saskatoon. 
 
This financial institution opened with the mission of providing a 
unified economic body strong enough to support aboriginal 
nation building. Its ownership is spread among 74 
Saskatchewan First Nations bands, the TD (Toronto Dominion) 
Bank, and several other native organizations. 
 
And just recently, Mr. Speaker, Keith Martell was named by the 
Report on Business magazine as one of the, quote: “Top Forty 
Under Forty” achievers in Canada, one of the best and brightest. 
This seventh annual selection shows, the magazine says, “that 
talent and effort stand out, whatever the circumstances.” 
 
The honourees were selected by a panel of 23 business and 
community leaders assembled by the Caldwell Partners 
International, and were selected, Mr. Speaker, from a 
preliminary list of 1,200 candidates. 
 
They were rated for vision and leadership, innovation and 
achievement, community involvement, and impact. 
 
I would say that Keith Martell is a . . . is in, I should say, pretty 
good company or rather, Mr. Speaker, that the other 39 should 
be honoured to share this honour with one of Meadow Lake’s 
many excellent citizens. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

 

Skating Coach Recognized 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m honoured 
to rise to recognize an individual who has spent the past 13 
years promoting a healthy lifestyle through skating. 
 
Recently Maureen Kohl of Spalding was the only coach within 
Saskatchewan recognized by Skate Canada - Saskatchewan as 
the coach of a skater who competed at the national competition. 
Maureen coached Saskatchewan juvenile male champion 
Brandon Prete of Kinistino, who competed in St. John’s, 
Newfoundland’s competition. 
 
Maureen began her skating career within the Star City Figure 
Skating Club and moved to Melfort. She’s been actively 
involved in coaching since her high school graduation in 1988, 
obtaining a level 3 coaching certificate. 
 
Besides coaching in Naicam, Maureen is also a Skate 
Canada/Skate Saskatchewan coach, and she coaches power 
skating in Naicam, St. Brieux, and Melfort. 
 
She’s a clinic conductor of power skating for the province and 
sits on three provincial skating boards. She is also a 
representative of the coaches in the Melfort district to the 
provincial board. 
 
Maureen’s goal is to pass on some of what she was given by her 
coaches during her own development. She sees the chance to 
coach a sport as a chance to pass on life’s lessons to a young 
person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating Maureen on her success as a coach, and thank 
her for her dedication to skaters within this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Housing Starts Boom in Regina and Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me that 
when members opposite predict a drought, we get rain. When 
they predict poor job growth, 11,000 people swell the 
workforce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the members opposite should 
check to see if the batteries in their crystal ball are working 
because good news is on the loose in Saskatchewan. 
 
Housing starts, a true unbiased indictor of economic growth, are 
booming. In Regina there was an upsurge of housing starts by 
80 per cent due to increased single-family home construction. 
The key words there, Mr. Speaker, are the verb increased and 
the nouns family and home. 
 
For the year to date, 226 units were started, and of those 60 
were multiple-unit starts. Not to be outdone, Saskatoon had 
another strong month with 124 starts in May. Paul Caton, senior 
market analyst for the Canadian Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation, said the recovery is mainly due to employment 
gains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it comes full circle and right back to those 11,000 

jobs created recently. And that makes sense since employees 
and families need a place to live. 
 
The headline says: Housing starts soar. That’s the opposite 
direction to the opposition’s fortunes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome the Premier back from his visit to Ottawa to visit the 
Prime Minister in an attempt to convince the federal 
government that a $1.3 billion trade injury support package, 
fully funded by the Chrétien government, was needed for farm 
families. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we all know how that meeting 
turned out. The national media is reporting that the Prime 
Minister considers this whole matter a bit of a joke, suggesting 
that his . . . to his caucus that Lyle Vanclief will flip a coin to 
determine the amount of the aid package. 
 
The national media are also reporting that this package may 
only amount to $600 million this year — far, far short of the 
$1.3 billion that was requested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has once again come home 
empty-handed with the Prime Minister mocking the farm aid 
issue behind his back. My question: does the Premier have any 
idea how much the pending farm aid package will be worth and 
when it will be announced? Did the Premier receive any 
answers at all from the Prime Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I did hear from the Prime 
Minister that the matter of a funding program for Canadian 
farmers is at the cabinet table, federal cabinet table. 
 
It was the appropriate time, if I may say, to be there bringing 
the message from this legislature, from Saskatchewan people, 
and from Western Canadians. It was the right time to be there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me just make this 
observation. In January of this year the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, Mr. Vanclief, at that time was saying, in response 
to questions being asked by the Minister of Agriculture from 
Saskatchewan about aid for Canadian producers — the 
Saskatchewan producers — the Minister of Agriculture at that 
time was saying, there’s no more money; we’re going to work 
within existing programs and that’s it. 
 
Well it is of some benefit, I think, that we see headlines in the 
national press today talking about a program for Canadian 
farmers with new money. Yesterday the Prime Minister did not 
divulge to me any specific numbers, but the good news is we 
have made progress from January. 
 



2032 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week the Premier 
said he was insulted that the federal government was talking 
about the farm aid package through the media. 
 
Well from what we understand, yesterday the Premier got a 
message loud and clear that the Prime Minister is of only one 
opinion, and that is that any farm aid package will only be 
offered on a cost-shared basis. Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, 
we will not see the proper offset of damage caused by the US 
(United States) farm Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, the emergency trip was the 
Premier’s last ace in his hand and he played it too late. 
 
Even with all the support of Western provincial governments, 
premiers, leaders of the opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope the 
Premier listens closely because even with all the support of the 
Western premiers, leaders of the opposition, farm groups, 
support right across the Prairies, the Premier has thus far failed 
to secure the $1.3 billion in federally funded injury support that 
has been desperately needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question that all farm families in 
Saskatchewan want me to ask the Premier is this: what does the 
Premier plan to do now to try to drive home the important point 
to the federal government, that $1.3 billion is needed from 
them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I took the opportunity to 
meet with some farmers, Saskatchewan farmers, this very 
morning in Southey, Saskatchewan, who reported to me their 
pleasure that I had taken the opportunity to take this message to 
Ottawa and their support for the position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — What we intend to do is to maintain the 
solid position that has come from this legislature, from the 
agriculture producers of Saskatchewan, and the groups, and the 
Western premiers, and hold firm to that position. 
 
The Prime Minister assured me that decisions have not been 
made; that they are at the cabinet table, And we will continue to 
press the point in every way possible that we can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Release of Report on Harassment Allegations 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Premier. 
 
The other day the Premier released a sanitized, one-page 
summary of the investigation of harassment allegations against 
the Environment ministry. However that summary left out the 

most important finding — whether or not the minister was 
guilty of harassment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: did the independent consultant find 
the minister guilty of workplace harassment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I take great objection to the 
member’s comments suggesting that Ms. MacKenzie has 
provided, in his words, a sanitized report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report that I made public is signed by Ms. 
MacKenzie; provided to me, Mr. Speaker, on our request of the 
work that she had done. Now is the member standing in this 
House today, somehow questioning the credibility of Ms. 
MacKenzie? If he is, he’d better say so. 
 
Now listen, Mr. Speaker, and members, I will read again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I will read again what Ms. MacKenzie 
reports to me and to this legislature and to the public of 
Saskatchewan: 
 

The Complainant was justified in expressing her concern 
. . . The Respondent admitted touching the Complainant’s 
face and has apologized . . . 

 
Now note these words, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The investigation of the incident resulted in a finding that 
the touch, although physical, was not of a sexual or violent 
nature, but one intended to be given in a friendly and 
affectionate manner. 

 
That is the report to me. Based on that report, my conclusion is 
there is no harassment here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Deputy Premier indicated that 
cabinet ministers do not have to follow any rules. He expressly 
ruled out them having to follow the guidelines in the . . . 
provided by . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order. Order. Order, please. The member may start over 
if he wishes. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Deputy Premier was very clear. He indicated that 
cabinet ministers do not have to follow any rules. He expressly 
ruled out the fact that they have to follow Public Service 
Commission guidelines or rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is quite simple: what 
policy framework, what benchmarks, what guidelines were 
followed in order that he could arrive at the conclusion that 
there was no harassment? 
 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2033 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member comes into this 
House, he tries to twist the words of Marilyn MacKenzie. He 
describes her words, her report as something sanitized, in his 
words. He twists the words; he then follows up by trying to 
twist the comments of the Deputy Premier yesterday. 
 
The clear fact of the matter is that in regards to ministers of the 
Crown, no protocols to date have existed. Ms. MacKenzie has 
observed on this; she has recommended that protocol be put in 
place. I have accepted that recommendation and such protocols 
have been . . . will be put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may say to members of the opposition, it is my 
recommendation that for all elected members, such protocols 
should exist. Does the opposition caucus have protocols in this 
circumstance? It is a learning that I think we have all had in this 
situation, this unfortunate situation. Ms. MacKenzie has 
recommended a protocol be established, and we will work 
towards doing just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Resources for Law Enforcement 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Government Relations. 
Saskatchewan communities are sending 400 police officers to 
assist with security at the G-8 Summit in Kananaskis at the end 
of June. On Monday, the Saskatchewan Party warned that 
communities would be left to pay part of the G-8 security bill, 
but the Minister of Health told the legislature that all costs 
related to the provision of security at the G-8 Summit would be 
covered by the federal government. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, we find out that once again the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) has provided information to the 
legislature that was not true. According to SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), communities 
will have to pay the overtime costs of bringing in officers to 
cover off shifts left empty by the 400 police officers that will be 
taken away at the G-8 Summit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP once again provide information 
to the legislature that was simply not true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it is not in fact from the government side that this 
misinformation is being spread. And I think the member should 
be careful to bear in mind that people are worried about their 
safety and security across this province and they’re . . . they 
want to be assured that there are . . . there’s adequate policing 
for their communities. 
 
And I can assure the member and I have it on . . . in writing 
from Assistant Commissioner Boucher, the commanding officer 
of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), that all costs 
associated with the redeployment will be borne by the federal 
government while people are away from Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the minister 
maybe should take a look at the news release put out by SUMA 
because, for their information, that’s not at all what’s going to 
happen out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan communities are just the latest 
victim of the NDP government that says one thing and then 
does another. On Monday, the Minister of Health told the 
legislature that none of the security costs for the G-8 Summit 
would be downloaded onto the municipalities. But this 
morning, as I said, SUMA issued a press release in which they 
clearly state communities will be forced to pick up a significant 
overtime cost because 400 police officers will be going to the 
G-8 Summit. 
 
Swift Current Councillor Allan Bridal says his city will be on 
the hook for thousands of dollars in overtime cost because 
they’re losing seven police officers during the busiest weekend 
of the summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SUMA has a question for the NDP government. 
Where does the city of Swift Current and every other 
community send the bill for extra policing costs in 
Saskatchewan when these police officers are away at the G-8 
Summit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The news release from SUMA points 
out that there are some concerns about who will pay. That is 
SUMA’s view. And then they go on to make all sorts of 
suppositions about who will pay. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that Saskatchewan has a 
responsibility to help — and I don’t suppose the member will 
disagree with this — help with the security operations at 
Kananaskis. 
 
The last time Saskatchewan police officers were called upon to 
do this kind of work, actually the time before that, but Quebec 
City, there were no extra costs. Calgary for the Winter 
Olympics, in fact, not only were there no additional costs, the 
province received a significant credit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP has made a habit of saying one thing and 
doing another. They make election promises like hiring 200 
new police officers and then break those promises. The NDP 
provides information to the legislature, like the minister’s 
statement, that no community will pay . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And then the 
NDP provides information to the legislature, like the minister’s 
statement, that no community will get a bill for G-8 security, 
and then a few days later the truth comes out and the NDP is 
once again forced to change its story. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here’s a chance for the NDP to actually back 
up just once what they’re saying. Will that minister, Mr. 



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

Speaker, promise the communities in this province that if the 
federal government isn’t picking up the tab, that this 
government will pick up the tab and not leave communities 
hanging out to dry once again under this NDP government rule? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I don’t think this government needs a 
lecture from that member about police services in this province. 
There has never been the number of police officers we have at 
the present time in this province. There has never been the 
expenditures ever on policing and security and safety in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — And let me just say, Mr. Speaker, as I 
mentioned, that the Commissioner of the RCMP tells me that all 
costs will be borne by the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister still did not answer the question I asked. 
Should the federal government back out of funding for the G-8 
Summit, policemen going to the G-8 Summit, will he promise 
that this government will pick up the tab? Will he not leave the 
communities . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if pigs could fly I 
suppose we’d do a whole bunch of things. But the fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, the federal government has committed 
itself to covering these costs. I don’t know why the member 
won’t accept that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality Concerns at Last Mountain Lake 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of Environment. 
 
Dealing with Last Mountain Lake again, apparently there is 
walleye washing up dead on the lake again. Dealing with the 
fishing derbies that have been going on, it’s quite a concern 
there, and I was wondering if they did some more investigating 
and if the results from the last fish that were up there a month 
ago, if any of them test results have come back and what they 
are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Indeed there were, I believe, three additional walleye that were 
found on the banks of the Last Mountain Lake. I may be in 
error on the number, but I do know that what my staff have 
determined is that the dead walleye are likely due to stress from 
the spring spawning season. As we all know, this has been an 
extremely difficult spring with low water levels and we’ve seen 
problems with all sorts of animals. And these fish also have had 
problems. 

Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again for Madam 
Minister of the Environment. There was a letter sent to the 
Madam Minister, and this is just . . . I’ll just read a little piece 
of it: 
 

We are requesting the Minister of Environment show the 
leadership that is expected of . . . (their) position by a 
creating the Last Mountain Lake Stewardship Committee 
that is so very needed. Our community would jump at the 
chance to have . . . (to be represented) on such a committee. 

 
My question to Madam Minister is: have you formed this 
committee? There is a huge concern out there. Have you talked 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Please redirect your questions through the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I apologize for that. My question through the 
Chair to Madam Minister is, has she been in contact with the 
mayors, with the council people along there? Are they forming 
this committee to monitor the lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
opposite no doubt knows, on May 21 Larry Spencer, the 
Member of Parliament for the area, sent a letter to the acting 
minister of the Environment, with a copy to department staff, 
asking to have representatives at a meeting at Regina Beach on 
May 27. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the acting minister of the Environment, the current 
Minister of Northern Affairs, did attend that meeting. It was a 
full and frank discussion, I understand, of the issues and the 
concerns. And we are certainly considering very positively what 
kinds of measures we can implement so that the people of Last 
Mountain Lake understand that their water is safe for 
recreational purposes, that their water is safe for the fish, and 
that they can continue to enjoy that beautiful lake as they have 
in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under 
the old manual land titles system that served this province for 
100 years, the government had a cash cow that was returning 
revenue of about $20 million. Then they said they were going to 
automate it and they said the cost of automating it would be 20 
million. Then some civil servants decided that they should fly 
around the world and market it and the cost rose from 20 
million to 80 million. 
 
Now that the head of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), the head of this government, has officially 
acknowledged that there will be no foreign sales, that the cost 
of the land titles system is going to have to be totally borne by 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

 

the users of the land titles system — we haven’t marketed it 
anywhere, we’re not going to market it anywhere — my 
question for the Minister of Justice is: what is going to happen 
to land titles fees? Are they going to skyrocket to cover the $60 
million shortfall that . . . (inaudible) . . . covered? Or is it going 
to fall into the deficit of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, even the member from Swift Current knows the 
answer to this question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — And, Mr. Speaker, even he knows 
well enough not to ask it. But the member from North 
Battleford had to, had to ask it, Mr. Speaker, and carry on some 
of the misrepresentations that in fact the member from Swift 
Current had carried on, about the costs of this system. 
 
But I’ll give the answer to the member that the member from 
Swift Current always really likes, Mr. Speaker. And that is, Mr. 
Speaker, the system works — people know the system works, 
Mr. Speaker. The costs have been significantly less. And 
Microsoft, Bill Gates — Mr. Speaker, this is why the member 
from Swift Current likes it — Bill Gates likes the system so 
much he says that now, now ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) are industry leaders in land 
information systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Isn’t that good enough for the member from North Battleford? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, no matter what the Minister of 
Justice says, the initial budget for automating land titles was 20 
million. It’s now increased to 80 million. 
 
Now Fraser Nicholson’s gallivanting around the globe was 
going to rack up sales that would cover that 80 million and 
make a bundle of money for Saskatchewan. Now Frank Hart 
says there won’t be any international sales so that 80 million 
has to come out of Saskatchewan. We all know that information 
technology has about a two- to three-year lifespan. Then it’s 
going to be . . . have to be upgraded. 
 
(14:15) 
 
So now Fraser Nicholson is gone and so is his dream of 
marketing the latest version of GigaText around the world. Now 
that the plan to sell this technology around the globe is gone 
and there’s no more foreign trips, what is the provision for the 
cost of future upgrades? We’re going to need them in two or 
three years. What is the provision in the budget for that? How 
much is it going to cost? Who’s going to have to pick it up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
if I may use the member from Swift Current again, even he 
knows that the $80 million figure, Mr. Speaker, is incorrect. 
The figure is $60 million, slightly over, Mr. Speaker, which was 
what was budgeted. And, Mr. Speaker, the member from North 
Battleford — indeed all members opposite — will know that 
the Provincial Auditor, the corporation’s own auditors, see the 
level of variance between spending as very minor, Mr. Speaker, 

in comparison to similar technologies. This system is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. I’m finding it impossible to hear the answer. I would ask 
the minister to proceed once again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll save the member the 
opportunity to hear it again. But the system is at budget, Mr. 
Speaker. All auditors have said that is the case. The system is 
working, Mr. Speaker. And the vice-president of the 
corporation, Mr. Speaker, did not say, did not say that efforts to 
sell this system overseas are not ongoing. In fact, completely 
the opposite. He said that they are, that there’s significant 
opportunities for this technology, Mr. Speaker, and every effort 
will be made to ensure that there are full returns to the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is: where do 
these returns come from now that the plan to market around the 
globe has been thrown on the potato pile? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Janice MacKinnon questioned why we were 
expanding this system with no business plan — and of course 
we know what happened to her. You don’t ask questions over 
there. 
 
The minister argues that was only 60 million, so apparently 
that’s all right. It’s not 80 million they’ve lost, it’s only 60 
million. So that’s just fine. That’s not a problem with him. But 
he is forgetting the figure of 20 million that the old system used 
to net as revenue to the government. That’s now gone. Instead 
of a revenue stream we’ve got a cost. 
 
And I ask him, now that the plans to fly to Britain are gone, 
now that we know Britain’s on a different land titles system 
than we’re on, they’re not going to buy it, who picks up the 80 
million? Where’s that going to be covered? That still hasn’t 
been answered. He says Bill Gates is interested, and is he going 
to give us the 80 mil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member will know, Mr. Speaker, that there is a marketing 
arrangement with EDS (Electronic Data Systems), another one 
of the very large computer companies in the world, to help 
market this project. They see it as a marketable project, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why they’re involved. 
 
We see it as a marketable project, Mr. Speaker. Experts across 
North America see it as a viable project, Mr. Speaker. This will 
be sold across the world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, last week when the minister was . . . when 
the member from Swift Current was railing against the system, 
we had, Mr. Speaker, in the gallery, government officials from 
Ukraine to come to look at this very system to use it there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 77 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2)/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi 
de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des 

jeux de hasard 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 77, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 (No. 2) 
be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, it’s my 
duty to at this time advise you that I’m tabling the annual report 
on operations for the year ended March 31, 2002, submitted 
from the Office of the Provincial Auditor. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand on behalf of the 
government to convert questions no. 314 and 315 to debates 
returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — 314 and 315 converted to . . . converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 316 and 317. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 316 and 317 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to address The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 
2002 and will formally move second reading of the legislation 
at the end of my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes just to outline the 
background of this legislation, a few details on what it does, and 
explain how it benefits Saskatchewan. 
 
Members will know that The Labour Standards Act has always 
had exemptions for those who are, in the Act’s words, 
employed primarily in farming, ranching, or market gardening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in agriculture the workplace is also the home. It is 
a business where children, grandparents, and relations regularly 
pitch in and help during peak times like seeding and harvest. 
Agriculture in Saskatchewan has traditionally been an 
endeavour where the workload has varied wildly depending on 

the climate and the change of seasons. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
briefly explains why those who originally crafted The Labour 
Standards Act exempted workers employed in farming. 
 
But the face of agriculture in this province has changed, Mr. 
Speaker. One change has been the growth in large commercial 
hog operations. The growth of this sector is a significant 
success but it has also resulted in a different approach, an 
industrial approach, to intensive livestock operations. 
 
This industrial approach differs from the traditional farming 
operation in a number of ways. The large hog barns employ 
highly specialized, well-trained staff with specific 
responsibilities and they are no longer dependent on the climate 
and the change of seasons. These large commercial barns are 
producing hogs entirely indoors where control of the 
environment and the production cycles are important tools. 
 
While intensive operations have significant economic benefits 
for Saskatchewan, not everyone is part of a traditional farming 
operation. Nor should they be treated as such. 
 
Commercial hog barns are a specialized industry that has grown 
rapidly in rural Saskatchewan in the last 10 years. Today’s 
commercial hog production facilities are not the same as 
traditional farms. 
 
Last fall we announced our intention to consult with hog barn 
employers and employees about the most appropriate way to 
amend The Labour Standards Act to extend coverage to 
commercial hog operations. 
 
This legislation is about fairness. Mr. Speaker, when businesses 
in Saskatchewan hire employees, those employees are covered 
by The Labour Standards Act. This is true for mining 
companies. This is true for mills. This is true for forestry 
companies, for manufacturers, and retailers right down to the 
neighbourhood corner store and gas bar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regulations accompanying this Act define 
commercial hog production facilities as undertakings engaged 
in the production of pigs, hogs, or swine and employing the 
equivalent of six or more full-time employees. Traditional 
farming operations are not affected. 
 
In addition, in the case of mixed-farming operations, only those 
employees directly involved in the hog operation will be 
considered in determining the number of full-time equivalent 
employees. And it will not apply when only members of the 
employer’s immediate family are employed. 
 
The changes will come into effect on September 1, 2002. This 
will give labour standards officers an opportunity to meet face 
to face with the affected operators to explain the implications to 
them. It will also allow these operators the time to implement 
any adjustments that may be necessary. 
 
The application of labour standards legislation to commercial 
hog operations is good for Saskatchewan’s economy. It ensures 
a level playing field for employers and is a valuable tool in 
attracting and retaining skilled workers, especially in a 
specialized industry like commercial hog production. 
 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

 

Skilled workers are reluctant to work without minimal labour 
standards protections and it’s unreasonable to expect them to. 
This amendment to The Labour Standards Act will better enable 
commercial hog production facilities to attract the skilled labour 
that they require and thus enhance investment opportunities in 
this industry. 
 
Let me hasten to add that through consultations I know that 
most commercial hog operations in the province meet or exceed 
provincial labour standards. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, a 
spokesperson for Saskatchewan Pork says this legislation isn’t 
necessary because commercial hog production facilities are 
already paying top-notch wages and benefits. 
 
This Bill will have no significant impact on any commercial 
hog production facility already meeting or exceeding provincial 
labour standards. The only impact of this Bill will be in 
commercial hog barns that do not meet labour . . . or provincial 
labour standards. This Bill levels the playing field in the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve also heard critics of the legislation complain 
that there are . . . were no consultations with the industry before 
we introduced this legislation. There have been consultations 
and I’ve been in meetings with industry representatives. 
 
I would remind all members that earlier this year, Mr. Tom 
Halpenny carried out consultations on this change to The 
Labour Standards Act. That consultation process was 
undertaken to ensure the views of those directly affected — 
employers and employees working in commercial hog barns — 
were taken into account in determining how the changes to the 
Act will be implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Halpenny’s consultations in January and 
February with industry players were not the only consultations 
undertaken. Further meetings were held in late April and early 
May and the Department of Labour has received input from 
stakeholders since then. And that doesn’t include meetings with 
Sask Pork that I attended along with the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, critics have also argued that this legislation will 
place the industry at a competitive disadvantage. However, 
Alberta’s hog industry is already subject to most of that 
province’s labour standards legislation. And if, as the industry 
tells us, commercial hog barns already meet or exceed the 
minimum standards, this legislation will have no negative 
impact on our competitiveness. 
 
Labour standards are a fact of life in more than 30,000 
provincial workplaces and there has been no logical arguments 
advanced for not adding commercial hog production facilities to 
that number. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the amendment to The Labour 
Standards Act we are proposing is straightforward. It provides 
coverage under the Act for workers in commercial hog 
operations, it only applies to commercial hog facilities 
employing the equivalent of six full-time workers, and it does 
not affect traditional farming operations. 
 
There are a number of good reasons for passing this Bill. First, 

it levels the playing field for the industry by requiring 
commercial hog operations to meet the basic employment 
standards required by provincial legislation. It also levels the 
playing field for working people by giving those rural residents 
working in commercial hog production facilities the same 
minimum standards and protections in law that other workers in 
the province already enjoy. 
 
This legislation is good for the province. It will also help to 
attract and retain skilled workers, especially in a specialized 
industry like the commercial hog production. Saskatchewan’s 
future will best be served by developing a quality labour force 
whose knowledge, skills, and motivation are what attracts 
employers to the province. The legislation before us will help 
do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are indeed very good reasons for passing this 
legislation. And I invite all members to support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 70, The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
whenever a Bill is brought forward from the government side of 
the House, the opposition has a number of responsibilities to the 
province when they look through the Bill. 
 
And two particular responsibilities that I feel that we have, as 
an opposition, is to examine how the piece of legislation will be 
to the benefit of Saskatchewan and to consult with the people 
that it’s intended to benefit. 
 
And secondly, we need to examine how the Bill will negatively 
affect our province and the growth of our province and the 
sector or the individuals that the piece of legislation will indeed 
negatively affect. 
 
And this Bill, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, has been difficult for 
the most part to understand why it’s even on the floor of the 
Assembly at this point in time. The reason why I say that is, 
throughout our consultation process, we kept on hearing that 
question of why. 
 
There’s so many questions that surround this Bill. Why was six 
employees chosen? What study would back that six employees 
is where we need to have The Labour Standards Act, but five is 
not? Why the hog industry? Quite frankly, we have other 
intensive livestock operations and other types of animals. Why 
the hog industry? Will it stop only at the hog industry? Are we 
looking at putting all of agriculture under a Labour Standards 
Act in due time? How many direct hog barn employees actually 
have lobbied the government for these changes? 
 
Because in my particular case, Mr. Speaker, I live quite . . . 
where I live or where I’m located is surrounded by a number of 
intensive hog barns. Probably the most near and dear friend that 
I could ever hope to have is a hog barn worker and I asked her 
about this particular piece of legislation and she said that it 
doesn’t really affect her. She didn’t care one way or another, 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

quite frankly. She was being very well paid and she has an 
extremely important benefit package that’s offered to her 
through the barn she works in. 
 
And considering that many, many of my neighbours are hog 
barn workers, they value their jobs because it allows . . . quite 
often, it allows their husband to remain on the farm; quite often, 
it’s the women that are working in the hog barns. There’s a 
number of skilled employees in the hog barns that enjoy living 
in rural Saskatchewan and appreciate the fact that there’s a job 
locally that does pay well. 
 
The hog barns in my area are not demanding a number of 
overtime hours, and my understanding is when they do they will 
pay for that service by their employees. I know my neighbour is 
paid if she’s on call. She knows her schedule well in advance. 
 
So I question, you know, who has lobbied the government to 
make this change. Because quite frankly, I’m not hearing it in 
my area. 
 
How does it affect . . . how will this Bill affect the mixed farms 
or the family farms? And, you know, and that is . . . opens up 
another whole question of how do we define a family farm. I 
know the minister has said that the piece of legislation won’t 
affect the family farm. However, we have . . . it’s pretty hard to 
define a family farm, and that’s a very, very broad term. There 
is a family farm, as a matter of fact, also in my area that owns 
an intensive hog barn. 
 
A very important question that it raises is, you know, has there 
been any thought to a regular set of labour standards that’s more 
tailored to the hog industry? Has that been considered by the 
government? I know that the hog industry itself is quite 
receptive to that idea. They would like to see something more 
tailored to their needs rather than the standard Labour Standards 
Act that applies to the shoe store worker or the worker in the 
neighbourhood grocery store. They’re saying that let’s have 
something that’s tailored to the hog industry. 
 
This is a whole new area that we’re looking at within our 
province — agriculture businesses have . . . or agriculture 
sectors have been eliminated from the mandatory Labour 
Standards Act in the past so we’re kind of setting ground here. 
So perhaps we should look at tailoring it to meet the needs of 
the hog barns. 
 
How will it affect the industry’s ability to attract outside 
investment, Mr. Speaker? We hear time and time again, not just 
in the hog industry, but in many industries that we need to stay 
competitive with our neighbouring provinces. All provinces are 
competing, quite frankly, to attract investment dollars to 
different industries. 
 
So therefore we in Saskatchewan must be quite diligent in being 
competitive. We have to compete with the best. And we have to 
set forward a friendly environment that encourages businesses 
and investment dollars to come into our province. The hog 
industry is no different, Mr. Speaker. They are also trying to 
attract investment dollars. 
 
So if we now seem more regulated and there’s more red tape 
and more complications in coming to Saskatchewan, guess 

what, Mr. Speaker? History has shown that those investment 
dollars simply won’t come. So we’re quite concerned. 
 
And that’s another question. Will the operations, Mr. Speaker, 
at the edge of being regulated now simply decide that they’re 
not going to expand? And when I say that, I mean a hog barn 
that is employing five employees. Will they feel that there is . . . 
you know that they just will not expand at this point in time? Or 
will they do so in another way by setting up a different 
company or whatever. It’s a very, very, very difficult thing to 
standardize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will the barns that have proven to be good paying local job 
opportunities — and I described already how that’s so 
important in the area that I live — will they now hire part-time 
employees? Will the employees that are presently in the barns, 
or those in the future that will be hired into the hog barns, will 
they now have a difficult time getting a full-time job? And they 
probably need a full-time job to meet their financial needs. 
 
And will the barns instead go to part-time employees — and 
they’ll have a few more but they’ll all be part-time? And that 
will, instead of helping the employees, in my mind, that would 
be a hindrance. 
 
The minister spoke a number of times that this will just affect 
commercial hog barns. And again, I guess that falls in how do 
we define a commercial hog barn. I didn’t hear a definition of 
that in her description of the Bill and why we have the Bill. 
 
And the other question — and there’s many, many more, but 
ones that I can think of at the moment — I guess another 
question that came to mind when the minister was speaking is 
that if there is a couple who own a hog barn and their two sons 
farm with them along . . . and one of their sons’ wives is 
involved in the farming operation, that would be five people 
involved in that particular farming operation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if they hire one employee, they only need to hire one, is that 
one employee then automatically under The Labour Standards 
Act? 
 
So therefore I think that would be a deterrent for that particular 
farming family to even hire one employee. And we know from 
the statistics, Mr. Speaker, there’s fewer and fewer farms that 
are hiring people to help due to the prices to a large extent — 
they can’t afford to do so. 
 
But we’ve seen a decline in agriculture employment. I think it’s 
serious and needs to be addressed. Would this be yet another 
deterrent that’s going to affect the decline in agriculture 
employment in Saskatchewan? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the more and more that I talk to 
people, and that definitely includes hog barn workers in my 
area, because there are so many, I still . . . the question’s why? 
Like why is this being done? 
 
And the reason why seems to have nothing to do with good 
governance, Mr. Speaker. And it seems to do . . . have 
absolutely everything to do with political expedience. It was a 
promise that was made by this Premier during the leadership 
race of the NDP Party, and there seemed to be no thought of the 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

 

consequences, no consultation with the industry, and there was 
just nothing meaningful made whatsoever about who it will 
directly affect. 
 
And it’s going to directly affect the hog industry, it’s going to 
directly affect the workers in the hog industry, and as I 
mentioned earlier, they may not be all positive. 
 
This Bill has . . . it’s a short Bill, but I believe it’s got serious 
ramifications for our province. And it’s interesting that this 
particular government they commissioned an ACRE (Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy) Committee to do a study on 
what we could do to help revitalize rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I commend the ACRE Committee; they did a lot of work. There 
was . . . the commendable members on that committee. And 
they formed subcommittees and these subcommittees studied 
different areas and what could be done, what could be changed, 
what could be added to help revitalize rural Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan as a whole. I mean if the rural area is doing well 
economically, of course it’s going to affect the province as a 
whole. 
 
And one of the subcommittees that they formed was one that 
was going to deal with labour issues. And when the ACRE 
Committee made their formal presentation to this Assembly we 
were told, at that point in time, that the ACRE Committee had 
not completed their study on labour issues. They’re going to 
continue with that and they would be presenting a report in the 
future. 
 
And my understanding is that the government should be waiting 
for that process to take place. Why are we making this decision 
when we have, ourselves, commissioned a very important 
committee? We’ve all recognized on both sides of the House 
that these are things that need to be considered quite seriously, 
recommendations by the ACRE Committee, and yet the labour 
area where they’re studying has not been presented yet. 
 
So I feel that the government’s failing to live up to the promise 
of looking at their own report or their own studies. 
 
And the consultation process is probably the most serious 
concern that I have with this Bill because it basically has not 
taken place, Mr. Speaker. In a media release by Sask Pork, 
dated May 14, Joan Steckhan who is the director of industry 
development for Sask Pork said, and I quote: 
 

“Unfortunately, on May 1 after only one meeting, the 
Minister’s consultant cancelled the consultation process 
mentioned by Minister Serby. He told our representatives 
that there would be no further meetings,” Steckhan said. 
“From the point of view of producers, there is no 
consultation taking place.” 
 
“Our industry has repeatedly asked the Minister of 
Agriculture for meaningful consultation on this issue,” 
Steckhan stated. “If the Minister of Agriculture could get a 
real consultation process started, producers would be very 
happy.” 

 
And as I mentioned earlier, I don’t believe the hog producers or 
the hog industry as a whole, and I know the members on this 

side of the House don’t feel that we absolutely can have no 
regulation or standards. But we think that there should be a 
consultation process that’s put in place and that we should look 
at tailored regulations. 
 
And we’ve got to look at what we’re competing with. And quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, we’re competing with Manitoba and 
Alberta. And we need to attract investment dollars. So we have 
to use our heads about this. We cannot implement something 
that’s going to be viewed as another reason why we shouldn’t 
invest in Saskatchewan. 
 
The consultation process, Mr. Speaker, has, as I understand it 
—and I mean I’m sure if I’m wrong, at some point in time in 
the debate I’ll be corrected — but as I mentioned earlier it 
became a promise by our Premier during his NDP leadership 
campaign. And it wasn’t a promise, Mr. Speaker, to the hog 
industry. And quite frankly it wasn’t really a promise to the hog 
workers. It was a promise to unions. 
 
And that became more than obvious when in November, the 
Minister of Labour announced that the hog industry would be 
brought under The Labour Standards Act. And you know where 
she announced that, Mr. Speaker? It wasn’t at a hog 
symposium. It wasn’t at a hog workshop or a convention. She 
announced it at the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
conference. That’s where the announcement was made, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the type of consultation process and fairness 
that we’re talking about here. And that’s why we question the 
actual intent of this Bill. 
 
The pork industry, do you want to know when they found out 
about it, Mr. Speaker? Well, guess what. They found out about 
it the next day and they heard it on the news. 
 
And it’s kind of humorous when we have a Premier today who 
is extremely upset because he found out a decision that the 
federal government made and he found out about it through the 
media, and he said that’s no way to run a country. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is no way to run a province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Betty Anne Stevenson, who works for Sask 
Pork, immediately sent a letter to the Minister of Labour 
requesting a meeting because she had obviously heard the news. 
In December of 2001 Sask Pork finally received a reply from 
the Minister of Labour and . . . it wasn’t until December 17 
actually when they finally got a reply from the Minister of 
Labour. This is the minister who said that she’s consulted with 
the industry. And the other rather astounding thing is in the 
letter, and I quote, the Minister said: 
 

I recognize and appreciate that most commercial barns 
already meet the minimum labour standards provisions. 
Furthermore, I concur with Sask Pork’s position that there 
is an opportunity to learn from those hog operations that 
not only meet labour standards provisions outlined in the 
provincial legislation but they also exceed them. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it took . . . again took some time. We still haven’t 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

. . . keeping in mind we still haven’t started a consultation 
process. This is the legislation the minister is saying is going to 
happen during this session and has but lists keep on going down 
the timeline of the consultation process. 
 
In January of this year the government agreed to a consultation 
process but it would not be to negotiate what and if but rather 
who and how. So the result is already predetermined. So let’s 
just make it happen and humour everybody in the hog industry 
by pretending that we’re going to actually consult with them. 
 
On March 7 was the first meeting that the hog industry had with 
both the Minister of Labour and the Minister of Agriculture, 
keeping in mind that this session also begins in March — 
March 7 was the first meeting. 
 
March 13 was the second meeting with the two ministers and at 
that point in time the government apparently presented some 
options — not on whether or not this should work. This was 
options of how they could make it work. It wasn’t whether we 
need it or didn’t need it. It wasn’t how we could perhaps set up 
a different set of labour standards that would be tailored to the 
hog industry. It wasn’t a matter of hearing the hog industry’s 
point of view at all, quite frankly. It was for the government to 
lay out perhaps a couple of options and you guys pick which 
one and you’re going to have to live with it. 
 
In April of this year a consultant from the government phoned 
the Sask Pork office and informed them that a committee was 
going to be set up that handle the negotiations between the 
government and the industry. The committee had until May 17 
to come to a consensus and submit a report. Well you know and 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that’s a ridiculous short period of time. 
 
The really goofy part of all that is, that if the committee came to 
an agreement, the legislation would be introduced this session. 
But the other ironic thing is, if the committee didn’t come to an 
agreement, that was okay, the legislation would be introduced 
this session. So what was the point? The outcome was 
predetermined. We all knew that the legislation was going to be 
introduced this session. 
 
And also in April, a little later, the government announced who 
would be on that committee, Mr. Speaker. And there would be 
three people from the government, three who would be hog 
producers, and three people who were supposed to be hog barn 
workers. But in actual fact, that did not take place. The three 
people who were supposed to be hog barn workers ended up 
that only one of them, I believe, are. 
 
And all of them — surprise, surprise — are quite active union 
representatives. And they say that the intent was not to please a 
promise to the union. But the question keeps on coming up, 
how can they keep saying that? What is the intent of this Bill 
when the union is so heavily involved with it? 
 
And the Minister of Agriculture, he implied, you know, I had 
spoke to him — I forget the date, no, I have that here, I’m sorry, 
on May 17 or 13 — when we had Agriculture estimates on the 
floor of the Assembly. I asked the Minister of Agriculture about 
that and he gave me the roundabout, you know, when you do 
consultation processes it’s extremely hard to get people to 
participate on these committees and so on and so forth. 

And I reminded him again, I live in an area that’s surrounded by 
hog barns. I know many, many, many hog barn workers. Why 
didn’t he pick up the phone and ask me? I’m sure I could have 
come up with three hog barn workers that would have been 
quite willing to enter into this consultation process. I don’t think 
he even tried, to be honest with you. I don’t believe there was 
any effort that was made to involve actual hog barn workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, beyond the consultation process which I’ve just 
sort of outlined or . . . and which has already ended, I believe I 
already read the press release where Joan Steckhan had raised 
concerns that after only one meeting the process was shut down. 
 
My understanding — and again I could be corrected if I’m 
wrong — the department isn’t even returning phone calls to 
Sask Pork at this point in time. That’s how wonderful the 
consultation process is going. 
 
There are so many concerns of how this will affect our province 
and growing our province. And ultimately, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party believes that we must view every policy 
and every legislation on whether or not it’s going to help grow 
our province. And our concerns are definitely centred around 
that it may not help grow our province. In fact, it may work in 
the reverse effect. It may create yet another piece of red tape, 
another deterrent for attracting investment dollars that would 
help the industry grow. 
 
We’re concerned that it’s showing discriminatory opinion 
within the agriculture industry itself. I raised the question 
earlier: why hog barns? Why was that industry chosen? And is 
this just a beginning? Is this just the beginning of where they 
want to go as far as legislating Labour Standards Act 
throughout the agriculture industry? 
 
We are concerned about the mixed operations — there can be 
no doubt — because there are mixed farms who have barns and 
fieldworkers. So will this impact them in a real negative 
manner? 
 
We have concerns, Mr. Speaker, of how this is going to affect 
the Hutterite colonies that’s in our province. And they’re an 
extremely important player in the hog industry — 22 per cent of 
the hog production in this province is on Hutterite colonies. So 
there is concerns of how are they going to fit into this type of 
restrictions and regulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to put into the record something that 
was written by the Chair of Sask Pork. He’s a fellow I know 
personally and have had the occasion to work with him on a 
few agriculture issues. And he wrote on April 23: 
 

The pork industry was advised by a government consultant 
. . . last week that it is to negotiate the terms of both the 
legislation and regulations with three industry employees. 
Those appointments, now made, are not representative of 
pork industry employees. Further, (to) this process has a 
restrictive deadline in which it is to be completed with 
consensus by May 17th or the Government’s commitment 
would be to introduce legislation by the end of this current 
session. 
 
“We believe the pork industry has been betrayed by the 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

 

government and the Premier, . . . Our producer 
representatives had clearly met and entertained discussion 
with the government on labour standards in good faith. We 
had asked for a process that would be consultative with 
agriculture and our industry and which would undertake the 
required due diligence necessary for the introduction of 
proper legislation. Instead, three of our producers have 
been asked to negotiate legislation and regulations with 
three individuals from unionized labour who do not fairly 
represent our industry, or its employees. Save one 
commercial barn with 12 employees, our industry, as most 
of agriculture, is not unionized. The Minister of Labour is 
basically saying to the pork industry, along with agriculture 
and business in this province, that legislation affecting 
Saskatchewan people and business is now to be made by 
unionized labour. This is a huge wakeup call to not only 
our industry but also to any family farm operation, 
agricultural business, commodity groups, or business, 
either rural or urban, wishing to set up new business or 
venture capital opportunities.” 

 
And the hog industry — make no mistake, Mr. Speaker — the 
hog industry is extremely important to our province. And this 
government actually has taken a number of steps and had a 
number of initiatives to encourage the growth of that industry, 
but they now are going to take an initiative to cause deterrent to 
the industry. 
 
The document that was prepared by Derek Murray Consulting 
Associates called The Economic Impact of Saskatchewan’s Hog 
Industry, prepared in May of 2002, said that “Saskatchewan 
ranks third behind Manitoba and Alberta in terms of hog 
production.” 
 
So again I, you know, really have to stress that we’re competing 
with Manitoba and Alberta for investment dollars for hog 
production. 
 

In 2001 Saskatchewan hog production was 1.8 million 
compared to 3.3 for Manitoba and 3.6 million for Alberta. 
The total employment impact of hog production and 
processing in Saskatchewan is 8,250 jobs generating $289 
million in employment income. 
 
If current growth projections are accurate, the impacts of 
the hog industry would more than double to 18,563 jobs by 
2005, generating $650 million in employment income. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we would love to see that growth 
opportunity happen by the year 2005. So you have to 
understand why we have some concerns that this is going to be 
seen as another piece of red tape that’ll stop investment dollars 
coming to Saskatchewan. 
 

(The) taxes paid to governments average between 26% and 
30% . . . (in) the total wages paid. Using 28 % applied to 
the total wages paid, the total tax impact is $80.9 million 
annually. 

 
So I don’t think that we should question the importance of the 
hog industry for our province, for the economy of our province. 
And I think that we should be looking very carefully at 
legislation that will prevent that growth. 

Some questions that need to be answered before this legislation 
can be passed in the House is: why does the NDP government 
even want to take the chance with the economic development in 
the industry that has proven to be a success over the last few 
years? In fact the hog industry has been one of our . . . probably 
one of the few success stories this province has had because 
they’ve had rather a dismal record in the past. 
 
New investment and growth in the hog production in the 
coming years is good for everyone in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, so why is the Premier taking this chance with so little 
consultation and, quite frankly, so little complaint from workers 
demanding that this change be made? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another article that I have. It’s written by 
the chamber. And the chamber also poses many of the questions 
actually that I’ve mentioned. They write: 
 

It is discriminatory to segregate the pork industry from the 
rest of agriculture. It must be made clear how this 
legislation will affect the 95 per cent of producers that are 
mixed operators. 

 
And again I say, 95 per cent of producers are mixed operators. I 
know the minister earlier said that this is going to only affect 
commercial hog barns, but we’ve yet to hear a definition of that. 
 

There must be clarity of future intention. Does the 
government intend to later bring other agriculture sectors or 
all of agriculture, including the family farms, under the 
Act? 

 
And this goes further, Mr. Speaker. I’ve mentioned about this 
piece of legislation perhaps creating a difficulty in attracting 
investment dollars. But I’ll tell you, it’ll create difficulty in 
investment attracting . . . or difficulty in attracting investment 
dollars to other industries as well. Because they’re going to look 
at what we’ve done to the hog industry and the cattle industry’s 
going to say that . . . see it and they’re going to say, aha, I don’t 
know, because that . . . they’re going to do that next to the cattle 
industry, and so on and so forth. So it doesn’t just stop at the 
hog industry. 
 
The chamber goes on to say: 
 

There must be a clarity of future . . . 
 
(15:00) 
 
Oh, sorry. I read that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

There must be thorough economic analysis to determine 
how this legislation will affect the growth and development 
of an industry that the government Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization has itself 
promoted and supported. 

 
And so I must question the minister: have we done an economic 
analysis on how this is going to adversely affect the industry? 
 
It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP are simply going to push 
ahead with this legislation without any consultation, without 
any analysis, without any thought to the effects that it will have 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

on the economy of the province. 
 
And I find I guess there’s probably rare to no occasion where 
— or, well I shouldn’t say no occasion — rare occasions where 
I can say I agree with the member from Watrous that was there 
before me. However I know that the member who was in 
Watrous prior to my being elected really, truly had huge 
expectations for the hog industry. And it would be interesting to 
see what his opinion is of his government’s piece of legislation 
that’s now being introduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to give this piece of 
legislation more thought. We would like a lot of the questions 
that I posed answered. We would like to hear the government’s 
explanation as to why they’re even bringing forward this piece 
of legislation because it’s definitely looking like it’s politically 
motivated and not motivated by good government sense. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to hear more and 
more of the minister’s answers on these questions and there are 
a number of other questions that I feel absolutely need to be 
answered by this government. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re talking about a very important issue today — 
both labour standards and the economy, Mr. Speaker, and how 
they interact. In particular, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about 
how labour standards interact with the agricultural economy in 
this province, Mr. Speaker — our largest single industry. 
 
Now the government has long said, and it’s been a long practice 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that the agriculture industry is 
outside of The Labour Standards Act; that while corporate 
farms, if they wish to, may place themselves voluntarily under 
The Labour Standards Act, they don’t have to be under The 
Labour Standards Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because agriculture isn’t like a normal industry. Agriculture 
doesn’t work a nine-to-five job at the same location every day. 
Agriculture works, depending on the season, Mr. Speaker, from 
first light to last light and even beyond. Or, Mr. Speaker, at 
some times of the year, there’s very little work to actually be 
done on the farm. People are doing maintenance, they doing 
cleanup, they’re doing make-work projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But at times like seeding, at times like harvest on grain farms 
you put in long hours, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not just five days a 
week. It’s seven days a week, Mr. Speaker, because it runs for a 
very short period of time. 
 
In the livestock industry you run in a cycle also, Mr. Speaker. 
There are times when you’re busier and times when you’re not 
as busy. And so the employees, Mr. Speaker, in those industries 
know when they enter that industry that it’s not going to be, you 
start work at 8 o’clock and you get an hour off for lunch and 
you’re done at 5 and you have coffee breaks in between. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, employees know that when they go to work in 
the farm industry that you work as long as the work is there to 
be done. That means you start early and you work late. And 
when it rains you go for coffee, Mr. Speaker, that the work isn’t 
there that day. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why the agriculture industry has had a 
special exemption from The Labour Standards Act. Now the 
minister wants to bring a portion of agriculture under the labour 
standards. 
 
They still face those same cycles, Mr. Speaker. It’s just that 
now these farms — some incorporated, some not perhaps — 
family farms have got bigger, Mr. Speaker. Bigger than they 
were in the ’60s, bigger than they were in the ’70s, but they’re 
still family farms and farm corporations, Mr. Speaker, still 
dealing with the same kind of problems and the same issues, 
Mr. Speaker. How do you raise and feed, in this particular case, 
hogs? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while things have got bigger, the requirements 
in those industries are still very much the same, Mr. Speaker, 
very much the same. And so there’s still a need, there’s still a 
need to have that flexibility, Mr. Speaker, in place for labour in 
those industries. And my colleague has mentioned a number of 
the problems associated with labour and the regulations as set 
out under The Labour Standards Act. 
 
You know she mentioned the Hutterite colonies. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve worked around Hutterite colonies for a number of 
years, got to know some of the people on the colonies, and a lot 
of cases, Mr. Speaker, there is no salary paid to an individual. 
So is that individual an employee in the hog barn? Is he or she 
an employee in the chicken barn? Is he or she an employee on 
the grain farm? Or are they all owners, Mr. Speaker? Are they 
all owners? Therefore if they’re all owners, they’re not 
employees, Mr. Speaker. So how and where do you draw the 
lines in this particular case? 
 
I look at the minister’s Bill, Mr. Speaker — that’s it, one page, 
Mr. Speaker. One page that is changing the working facts of life 
in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, the way things have been done in 
Saskatchewan for a long, long period of time. And it’s not just 
the hog industry, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind you. It’s not 
just the hog industry that is going to be impacted on this. It’s 
going to be people who operate egg hatcheries, greenhouses, 
nurseries, brush clearing operations, and commercial hog 
operations. 
 
And that’s an interesting thing, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 
interesting thing. What is a commercial hog operation? I don’t 
know very many people across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that 
raise hogs for pets. Now there may be the odd one, there may 
indeed be the odd one and fact is, I think I have a person in my 
constituency that I know of that has a hog for a pet — not a 
very big one, he only stands about yay high off the table — but 
they do have a hog for a pet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t . . . in that particular family there 
isn’t six people looking after that hog so I don’t suppose that 
they could classify as the six-plus employees. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s talking about his Harley-Davidson. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — No, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
opposite hollers, is that a Harley-Davidson? No, it’s a real live, 
breathing, eating hog, one of those little miniature, fuzzy ones. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does it put any carbon dioxide in . . . 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker . . . yes, and it does 
produce carbon dioxide, Mr. Speaker . . . but so does the 
Harley-Davidson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at a commercial hog operation, 
what does the minister really mean by that? Does she mean the 
single person on the farm operating with 10 hogs who runs a 
farrowing operation? Is that a commercial? Because he sells it 
and, hopefully, makes a profit. Or at least at some point in time, 
Mr. Speaker, intends to make a profit from it. 
 
Is it 20 hogs; is it 100 hogs that makes you a commercial 
operator, Mr. Speaker? Or perhaps, seeing as how farming is so 
tough, is it, you made a profit or you didn’t make a profit — 
does that make you a commercial operation? 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, is it that you actually pay someone to be an 
employee of your operation? Does that make you a commercial 
operation? 
 
Well if it is, you want to take Mother’s Day off to take the 
missus out for dinner and you’ve got to hire somebody to look 
after your hogs, Mr. Speaker, does that mean that you’re now a 
commercial hog operation? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are lots of questions here dealing with this 
particular piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Pork, Sask 
Pork has raised a number of issues, Mr. Speaker, about this 
particular piece of legislation. And the first thing, Mr. Speaker, 
that they raised as an issue was consultation. 
 
Now there’s been some heckling back and forth here and I’m 
not going to comment on all of the comments that were made, 
Mr. Speaker. But the, Mr. Speaker, the consultation as set up by 
the minister seemed to allow for two weeks for the regulations 
and the rules to be developed between the owners, Mr. Speaker, 
the employers in the hog industry, and representatives of 
employees. 
 
Now interesting thing there, Mr. Speaker, only one of those 
employees was actually an employee in a hog barn. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it took . . . they allowed about two weeks for that. Mr. 
Speaker, that wasn’t even as much time as it took the Premier 
and the cabinet to make a determination on the harassment 
complaint against the Minister of the Environment. They had 
three weeks for that one, and that was a fairly open-and-shut 
case, Mr. Speaker. Everybody was in the same office to deal 
with. 
 
Here you have an entire industry to consult with and they’re 
allowed about two weeks. So, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a 
lot of problems in this particular piece of legislation, and the 
first problem is the lack of consultation. 
 
The operators of the larger hog barns around the province, Mr. 
Speaker — and the minister even admitted to this — are 
meeting the labour standards and in some cases even exceeding 
labour standards. So it’s not a question, Mr. Speaker, that some 
employees are being hard done by. So you ask yourself, since 
there isn’t a rash of complaints, what is the motivation? What is 
the motivation driving this forward? 
 
Well perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the minister gave that motivation 

when she made the announcement that this legislation was 
going to come forward. The location she made that 
announcement, Mr. Speaker, was at the SFL, the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour convention. That, Mr. Speaker, I think is 
the hint on what the motivation behind this is. This is payoff for 
support in the leadership campaign of the Premier — payoff to 
the unions. 
 
Now you have to ask yourself, why do they need that? Why do 
they need that, Mr. Speaker? Because there’s nothing stopping 
the unions today from going into every one of those hog 
operations and seeking to unionize them. In fact one of them 
already is. 
 
So why was that promise made and why was the announcement 
delivered at the SFL? One can only speculate, Mr. Speaker. One 
can only speculate as to what the reasoning is. Mr. Speaker, one 
can only speculate why these announcements were made to the 
unions of Saskatchewan at their convention. Why wasn’t it 
made to the hog industry? You know, that would have seemed 
more appropriate. 
 
I remember years ago — I wasn’t paying much attention to 
politics at the time — but there was a major change in 
marketing of hogs that took place in Saskatchewan. Major 
change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Jack Messer was actually the minister of Agriculture at the time 
who later became the president of SaskPower under Roy 
Romanow and who actually happened to get fired under Roy 
Romanow as well, as the president of SaskPower. 
 
Well Mr. Jack Messer made the change that hog marketing was 
going to be done through a marketing board in the province, 
and he went to a large gathering of hog producers and told them 
that’s what was going to happen. He didn’t go to the SFL. He 
didn’t go to the dairy producers to announce it. He didn’t go to 
the chicken board, Mr. Speaker. He went and told the hog 
producers. This minister doesn’t even have that courtesy. She 
goes to the SFL to make the announcement, a friendly crowd to 
her, but ignored the hog industry that’s going to be impacted. At 
least Jack Messer had the courage to face the people he was 
going to be dealing with. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hog industry has a great deal of concerns about 
the consultation process that has taken place. They want to have 
the ability to sit down and negotiate with the minister before 
this legislation is passed, Mr. Speaker, not after. Not after. 
 
One of the things you look at in this particular Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is where are the limits? Where are the lines drawn 
here? Well the minister stood up and said this Bill will apply to 
people, to operations with six or more employees. And yet, you 
look at this and there are no lines and rules drawn in this piece 
of legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
apologize to the speaker, just . . . or to the presenter. 
 
I wanted to point out that we do have a very special guest in the 
west gallery. He’s from my hometown of Ile-a-la-Crosse. His 
name is Gerald Roy, and Gerald served on council in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, worked for the Friendship Centre Board and is 
actively involved with many young people. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, at one time, he was going 
to be perhaps a candidate for mayor of our home community. 
And when I asked him to join me in that capacity as deputy 
mayor when I served as mayor, his phrase was to me, blow my 
hair back, you know. So at the time, he wasn’t ready for that. 
But obviously, as time goes on, he’s becoming more and more 
of a prominent politician in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would ask that the Assembly recognize Mr. Roy and make 
him welcome here. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 70 — The Labour Standards 
Amendment Act, 2002 

(continued) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister says that this is only going to apply to operations 
that have six or more employees. I guess the question has to be, 
where is that written down, Mr. Speaker? How can the people 
involved — not only in the hog industry but also as the Bill 
points out, the egg hatcheries, greenhouses, and nurseries, and 
brush clearing operations — how can they be comfortable that 
that line isn’t going to move? That it is always going to be six 
or more? Because it’s not in the Act, Mr. Speaker. So tomorrow 
. . . some time down the road, let’s say, the Bill has passed and 
received Royal Assent and is now the law of the land. 
 
The minister can wake up one morning and decide h’m, I think 
it’s time to change the regulations on this that it’s going to be 
four employees now. There’s nothing to prevent her, Mr. 
Speaker, from doing so. There is nothing in this piece of 
legislation bringing agriculture under The Labour Standards Act 
that prevents that minister from — on a whim — changing the 
line where it now becomes the labour standards apply to that 
operation. 
 
The minister, if she wanted to, on a whim — or any, any 
ministers to follow her — can simply say any one of these 
operations that has a single employee now falls under The 
Labour Standards Act. It just takes a stroke of the pen from the 
minister to accomplish that. It doesn’t come to the legislature 
for review; the minister is solely responsible and has that 
power. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, personally, and the members on this side of 
the House, and obviously the hog industry, do not trust that not 
to happen. Because one of the advertisements they put forward, 
Mr. Speaker, says, who’s next. The government says the hog 

industry is unique and the rest of agriculture doesn’t have to 
worry. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, because the minister has the power to 
unilaterally make changes to regulations, and the number of 
employees is in regulation, the minister has the power to change 
the entire context of what this Bill is about, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people in the hog industry are not opposed to 
bringing their operations under The Labour Standards Act. But 
they don’t believe that they fit into the square hole that the 
Minister of Labour has set out for The Labour Standards Act. 
They believe they have unique circumstances that need to be 
recognized and they wish to sit down with the minister and 
negotiate those unique measures. 
 
But the minister hasn’t allowed for that consultation. The 
consultation that took place, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned 
earlier, was with one person from the hog industry, one person 
who actually worked in a hog barn, and two others, one 
representing the Grain Services Union, and the other one 
representing another union, Mr. Speaker. I believe I have which 
one that is here. The other union member represented 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union. 
 
You wonder how that ties into hog operation — 
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers, Mr. Speaker. It 
seems to be a bit of a stretch to get into a hog barn from a 
communications operation. But maybe, you know, who knows 
— maybe they talk to the hogs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is too much power being given to the 
minister under this change. It allows for too much uncertainty in 
agriculture, not just in the operations that are being affected, 
Mr. Speaker, but in the entire agricultural operation in this 
province. There needs to be further consultation. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, should be held up, held back by the 
government, brought forward after consultations; perhaps 
brought forward in a fall session, Mr. Speaker, that would be 
appropriate. That would be the thing to do with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Take time over the summer, the early fall, meet with the hog 
industry, meet with the people who actually work in the hog 
industry, Mr. Speaker, go through a proper consultation 
process. And that isn’t driving passed a hog barn or introducing 
yourself to a hog worker; that’s sitting down and talking to 
them, Mr. Speaker, giving them time to express themselves. 
 
I’ve seen some of the ways the government consults. I’ve seen 
some of the way the federal government consults. You go to a 
one hour meeting with a lot of people, everybody introduces 
themselves and says who they are, and by the time you get 
around the circle it’s time to go home. That’s not consultation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government needs to give some hours of 
consultation to the hog industry to develop a method of 
bringing these employees under a proper labour standards that 
fits their unique situation, Mr. Speaker. A unique situation for 
the hog industry, for the egg producing, Mr. Speaker, a unique 
situation for all of agriculture. 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have asked the government a number of times, 
both now publicly and privately, to hold this Bill in abeyance. 
Do the proper consultation. The minister says when did you do 
that? 
 
I’ve done it a number of times with your House Leader. I’ve 
done it with your House Leader, who makes the determination, 
Mr. Speaker, with how this legislation comes forward, Mr. 
Speaker — how this legislation comes forward. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we do have a great deal of concern just as the hog 
industry does on this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Their recommendation, Mr. Speaker, in the selected issues 
forum presented to the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
annual convention by the hog industry says: 
 

Government should pull back legislation from this session 
and engage in a complete and fair consultation with the 
pork industry and stakeholder groups. They should conduct 
the impact assessment on the provincial agribusiness and 
rural economy. 

 
There’s a good point, Mr. Speaker. Just what kind of study has 
the minister done that will deal with the impact this legislation 
will have on the hog industry and on agribusiness in this 
province? 
 
Do they have any studies that indicate it’s good for the 
industry? Do they have any studies that indicate it’s bad for the 
industry? The hog industry thinks it’s going to be bad, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what does the government think? Does the government 
have any proof, one way or the other, that it’s going to be a 
benefit or that it’s going be a negative? Or are they just going 
ahead, Mr. Speaker, because the Premier made a promise? Is 
that why, Mr. Speaker, just because the Premier made a 
promise? 
 
They further recommended, Mr. Speaker, that the Department 
of Labour, Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Revitalization, and potentially Industry and Resources should 
carry out proper consultations with agriculture and agribusiness. 
 
So they want to bring in, Mr. Speaker, more than just the 
Department of Labour but all of those areas that the government 
has brought forward that says they’re interested in economic 
development in Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan. Labour, 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization as well as Industry 
and Resources, Mr. Speaker — they want to consult with those. 
 
And furthermore the consultation report should clearly identify 
issues and costs and assess the impact on growth and 
sustainability of the pork industry. We’ve heard the Minister for 
Economic Development stand up and say how we need to 
expand our economy, how we need more hogs in this province. 
And the backbenchers are always standing up and saying, good 
news for Saskatchewan — another pig was born, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is good news for Saskatchewan. We need 
to have, Mr. Speaker, more industry in this province. 
 
So what impact is this particular Bill going to have, Mr. 
Speaker, on the potential for economic development in this 

province? 
 
The minister has given no proof, either in her statements outside 
or her statements in the House, that this is in any way, shape, or 
form a benefit to Saskatchewan. It’s only in compliance with a 
promise made by the Premier. 
 
You know, it’s too bad, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t keep some 
other ones of his promises. That would also be of benefit to the 
province, like the creation of 30,000 jobs. Now that would be a 
benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But he takes these little ones that are given for reasons we don’t 
know or understand, Mr. Speaker, to fulfill, even though they 
have a negative impact according to the industry on themselves, 
whereas he fails and fails miserably, Mr. Speaker, in fulfilling 
his other promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m in agreement with the industry that there 
needs to be more time for consultation. We need to give the 
government the opportunity to sit down with the people in the 
hog industry and develop what they want for consultations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Therefore I would move, seconded by the member from 
Humboldt: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “that” and substituting the following therefor: 
 
Bill 70, The Labour Standards Amendment Act be not now 
read a second time, but that the Bill be read a second time 
this day six months hence. 

 
The division bells rang from 15:31 until 15:41. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 24 
 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Gantefoer Bjornerud Toth 
Wakefield Stewart Elhard 
Eagles   
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Members, 
I would ask for silence during every vote — every voice vote. 
The voting will proceed. 
 
McMorris D’Autremont Bakken 
Wall Brkich Weekes 
Harpauer Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert  
 

Nays — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Axworthy Nilson 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

Junor Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Thomson 
Yates McCall Hillson 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment defeated. The debate 
resumes on the main motion. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted to 
stand and represent the many . . . not only the many farm 
families in the province, but especially the hog producers that 
are really concerned with this Bill that’s been brought forward 
by the government — not that there’s many of the hog 
producers that are really concerned about not meeting the 
standards, because we all know that they not only meet the 
standards but in most cases exceed the standards that are 
brought forward by this government. 
 
The problem with this Bill is the consultation process, or better 
said, the lack of consultation that this government had when 
they brought forward this Bill. And the other issue that many of 
the farmers are concerned about is the fact that this is really the 
thin edge of the wedge. If the government has decided right 
now that hog producers should come under the labour 
standards, what will be the next group of people that will be 
brought under labour standards? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the consultation process . . . 
the minister talked about the consultation process. It was 
interesting to get the other side of the story from the many hog 
producers, many of which are in my constituency. 
 
Actually I went to a meeting in January in Humboldt this year 
to talk about this Bill with the consultant that the government 
hired, Mr. Tom Halpenny, I believe his name was. And at that 
meeting he said that the discussion today wasn’t what and . . . it 
was what and if, and who and how. Really they wanted to know 
the definition of a family farm. The decision was already made. 
They weren’t there to consult with the people who are actually 
raising hogs in this province. They weren’t there to find out 
what the people actually wanted. They came to tell them what 
was going to be happening. 
 
When the government decided they were going to bring forward 
this labour legislation, they didn’t announce it to the hog 
producers, they announced it at a convention of the SFL. Now 
that is not the group of people that are really concerned about 
the industry and the potential growth of the industry in this 
province. 
 
The hog producers in this province actually knew that the — 
under the former premier of this province — that the hog 
industry is one that they felt had a potential for growing the 
province. Everybody on this side of the House knows that that’s 
what has to be done. If we’re going to have money for health 
and education and infrastructure, we have to be able to grow the 
province. 
 
And actually the former premier, Mr. Romanow, indicated that 

the hog industry is one area where yes, we could grow the 
province. So they had faith that this was something that was 
going to be a success for the province. But then this government 
comes forward with this idea that maybe to be successful what 
they should be doing is putting it under labour standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is many issues that could be spoken about on 
this Bill, and I and many of my colleagues would like to do it in 
the next little while, but for this time I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise this afternoon to address The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2002. And at the end of my remarks I will be 
moving second reading of the legislation. 
 
This afternoon I’d like to give a little bit of background to this 
piece of legislation and details on what the amendments will do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will know that there is a statutory 
requirement for a committee to review and report on all matters 
relating to The Workers’ Compensation Act every four years. 
That committee is made up of a Chair and an equal 
representation from employers and organized employees. 
 
The most recent committee of review was chaired by Mr. James 
Dorsey and it held eight days of public hearings last fall. The 
committee heard 89 oral presentations and received over 100 
written briefs. The committee submitted its report containing 48 
recommendations to me, which was made public in March. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can report that to date 29 of the 48 
recommendations have been or are being implemented as 
matters of Workers’ Compensation Board policy. Fourteen are 
being implemented through the legislative amendments before 
us, and five recommendations have been deferred. In terms of 
those five deferred recommendations, two deal with appeals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will not be moving forward with the 
recommendation to establish a chief appeals commissioner at 
this time. The establishment of an office of the appeals 
commissioner is a very complex undertaking. It will require the 
careful development of appropriate responsibilities and the 
establishment of due processes, as well as a complete review of 
the Act for consequential amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following the release of the committee’s report in 
March, five stakeholder groups were invited to meet with me so 
that we could begin the process of gathering their feedback on 
the recommendations. 
 
I met on two occasions each with the employee and employer 
representative groups to receive their feedback on the 
committee’s recommendations. As well, another 23 groups 
representing a wide range of interests were invited to make 
written submissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments before us are the result of 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

 

extensive consultations with employers and employees. We 
believe they will result in a fairer and a more accountable 
workers’ compensation system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of all members, I’ll now take a 
moment to outline the amendments to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act we are proposing. 
 
First, the maximum wage rate. Since 1985, the maximum gross 
insurable earnings for an injured worker has been set at 
$48,000. The amendments proposed will raise that level to 
$51,900 on January 1 of 2003, to $53,000 on January 1 of 2004, 
and to 55,000 on January 1, 2005. 
 
Alberta sets its maximum insurable earnings ceiling at $58,000, 
while in Manitoba the figure is $54,590. It’s time that we 
change with the times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The amendments before us also increase burial expenses. 
Actual costs associated with burials have increased over time, 
but the legislative provisions for such costs have not kept pace. 
 
The legislation currently authorizes a payment for burial 
expenses of $5,000 with an annual consumer price index 
adjustment. Today, the payment for burial expenses is $5,870, 
where actual cost may run as high as 10,000. The amendment 
will set the burial expense . . . expenses payment at $10,000 and 
the indexing provision will continue. 
 
Our current permanent functional impairment award now has a 
minimum of $1,100 and a maximum of $22,600. Our levels in 
this regard, Mr. Speaker, are among the lowest in Canada. As a 
result, the committee of review recommended doubling our 
minimum and maximum permanent functional impairment 
awards, and the amendments do that. 
 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, I should draw all members’ attention 
to the impact of this amendment on the independence 
allowance. 
 
The independence allowance is currently set at 10 per cent of 
the permanent functional impairment award. Since the PFI 
(permanent functional impairment) award levels are being 
doubled, these amendments set the independence allowance at 5 
per cent of the new PFI award levels. 
 
The committee of review also recommended a change to section 
30 of the Act, the presumption of death clause. Section 30 
currently says that where an employee is found dead at work, it 
is presumed that his death was the result of injury arising out of 
and in the course of his employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment will add the phrase “unless the 
contrary is shown.” The new . . . provision will then read that 
where an employee is found dead at work, quote: 
 

. . . it is presumed that . . . (his) death was . . . (a) result of 
injury arising out of and in the course of his . . . 
employment, unless the contrary is shown. 

 
A similar clause existed in the legislation before 1979 and this 
amendment is being made because the current provision is too 
inflexible when dealing with situations where a worker is found 

dead in the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee of review also identified nine 
amendments to the Act that are of a housekeeping nature. And 
those are: amending the definition of a common-law spouse 
from two years of cohabitation to one in order to be consistent 
with the federal government; including a provision that requires 
employers to be notified of a worker’s application to be 
included within the scope of the Act; allowing the injured 
workers to choose to take a lump sum payment when they reach 
retirement age and if their annuity is $20,000 or less; providing 
flexibility to consider comparable salaries when assessing 
benefits for casual, seasonal, or part-time employees; 
establishing consistency respecting the apparatuses covered by 
the Act — sorry, Mr. Speaker — and establishing consistency 
in the definition of average weekly wage wherever it is used in 
the Act; replacing the title, executive director with the title, 
chief executive officer; requiring the board rather than the 
executive director to certify assessments are owed and recovery 
is required by the courts; and including a provision that 
identifies the maximum wage rate as the upper limit for gross 
earnings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to support these needed 
amendments. Our government and the Workers’ Compensation 
Board are working with the employers and employees of 
Saskatchewan to ensure the most accountable and responsive 
workers’ compensation system possible. These amendments are 
based on comprehensive consultations with those employers 
and employees. And they reflect the informed input we have 
received from them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are putting forward a balanced set of 
amendments that meet the needs of injured workers and their 
employers. The results will be an improved workers’ 
compensation system in Saskatchewan, one that is both fairer to 
those who rely on it and more accountable to those who fund it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 72, The Workers’ 
Compensation Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 72, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, is a 
piece of legislation that, as it comes before us, raises our 
attention greatly because any time we start talking about the 
Workers’ Compensation Board there are a number of issues that 
come into play, not the least of which is how the Workers’ 
Compensation Board has operated over the last year or two. 
 
They’re talking about some changes and I know it seems like 
about every four years there is a study done on the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and recommendations are made, and then 
nothing is done about them. Then four years later more 
recommendations are made from another report. The 
recommendations are almost identical and very little has 
changed. 
 
It’s interesting now that the Workers’ Compensation Board, this 
year especially, is . . . shows some real concerning — 
disconcerting I guess I could say — issues. This first one is a 40 
per cent . . . a 48 per cent increase in administration costs, Mr. 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

Speaker. Those administration costs are coming strictly out of 
businesses’ pockets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you have a Workers’ Compensation Board that has 
an adjustment, a $56 million adjustment because of an actuarial 
adjustment, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t know about it until right 
near the end of the year . . . one thing that we’ve been saying is 
there needs to be, at the very minimum, quarterly reporting 
process and that has not been done. They find out in December 
where they are standing for the whole year and that’s a little 
late, Mr. Speaker, to do any adjusting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are a number of things that we think that the Workers’ 
Compensation Board need to adjust, not the least of which are 
some of the recommendations that are put forward in this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think until they get their own house in order . . . And I mean 
they’ve hand-picked the person they want running it — a 
former NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) I 
guess he was, and MP, Mr. Solomon — and it’s interesting to 
see the shape of the Workers’ Compensation Board after the 
first year of his tenure. It’s not very positive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The recommendations put forward — although there are I 
believe 14 of them and 5 have been deferred — really makes 
me question: of the 40 recommendations that were proposed, 
how far along are they moving? 
 
And so in another three or four years when there’s another 
report done on the Workers’ Compensation Board, the 
recommendations that we don’t see in this Bill will probably be 
mentioned again four years hence and nothing will probably be 
done about them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister also talked about consultation — wide-ranging 
consultation — and we certainly heard in the piece of 
legislation that was spoke before about all the consultation that 
was done, unfortunately none with the pork producers and 
that’s the Bill that affects them directly. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Well I question how much consultation was done in this 
process. I stood and spoke to a Bill yesterday, the Watershed 
Authority, and they were talking about consultation that was 
done in that Bill. And the people that run the C&Ds 
(conservation and development authorities) weren’t even 
notified; they don’t have any idea. 
 
So what kind of consultation does this government really do? 
They like to hang their hat on the fact that they consult and they 
have talked to the interested parties, until we go and talk to 
those interested parties and they had known nothing about the 
legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, until we’re able to discuss with 
business owners, with workers, how this Bill is going to affect 
them, it gives us some real concern. 
 
And certainly I think all of us, as MLAs, would probably be in 
the same position. I know in my office, Workers’ Compensation 
issues are a major part of our work. We have a lot of complaints 
coming in from employees and also employers on the whole 
process of how the Workers’ Compensation Board works, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
So until we’re able to consult, ourselves with a number of the 
organizations that this Bill is going to be affecting, Mr. Speaker, 
I would move that we would adjourn debate right now. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Speech-Language Pathologists and 
Audiologists Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m pleased to have with me 
this afternoon Lawrence Krahn who is the assistant deputy 
minister; Duane Mombourquette who is the director of health 
planning in the policy and planning branch of Saskatchewan 
Health; and Cathy Dermody, who’s a policy analyst, health 
professions, policy and planning branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and welcome this afternoon, committee, to the minister and the 
Health officials. 
 
Minister, Bill 13, The Speech-Language Pathologists and 
Audiologists Act, as I read it and understand it, is a Bill to 
facilitate the professional association of this group of medical 
professionals. And I would like you to indeed confirm that. And 
if you could outline some of the highlights of the changes, it 
may indeed cover the couple of questions that I have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’d be happy to outline the 
changes. The first change will increase the number of public 
representatives on the council from one to three representatives 
and extend their term of office from two years to three years. 
And this puts it so that it’s similar to all other professional 
legislation in the province. 
 
The second change is to clarify that regulatory bylaws do not 
receive automatic approval if the minister does not respond 
within 90 days after submission of the bylaws. This is a clause 
from another decade of law-making and at this point we’re . . . 
we have quite a different procedure in the professional 
legislation. So this will just allow it to match present-day 
legislation. 
 
Third change is . . . will allow the minister to amend, repeal, or 
add regulatory bylaws. 
 
The fourth change will require the association to file an annual 
membership list. 
 
The fifth change will require the association to file an annual 
report. 
 
And there will be some administrative changes to add 
definitions for administrative and regulatory bylaws, require 
that certified copies of the bylaws or amendments be filed with 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

 

the Department of Justice rather than the long gone Department 
of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
 
And finally to delete the requirement to file certified copies of a 
bylaw as well as an amendment to the bylaw since the bylaw 
that is being amended will already have been filed at some 
earlier date. 
 
So I think that’s the summary of all of the changes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I understand 
from your comments and the information that I have that these, 
in the main, these changes are consistent with the way new 
professional regulatory frameworks and legislation are set in 
place. 
 
Are these frameworks for health professionals any different 
than they would be in other professions like law or accounting 
or things of that nature? Or has there been a move towards a fair 
degree of standardization among the professions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think we could say that there’s 
standardization among all the different professional groups and 
the legislation that governs them. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we understand that these are routine in nature and that 
the professional association themselves are supportive of them, 
and therefore, we’d be pleased to vote. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — The minister has the same officials so I won’t 
invite him to introduce them again. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and minister and officials, my reading and 
communications on Bill 37, the medical professionals Act, is 
designed primarily to accompany the professional supervision 
and regulation of podiatric surgeons in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I believe that they do not have a sufficient number to have 
their own independent professional association, but that it’s the 
desire of the department and I guess the whole health care 
system is that there is a framework for professional regulation 
and oversight of their medical profession as in other cases. 
 
I understand that when the College of Physicians and Surgeons 
was tasked and communicated with them and asked that they 
consider being the vehicle for this oversight framework, that 
initially they were reluctant but when they thought about it they 
recognized that perhaps in the general public good or in the best 
public interest that they would accept this responsibility. 

I also understand that there are other jurisdictions and as I 
understand it, that the college of medicine in Alberta provides a 
similar function in that province. Can the minister confirm that 
there are other jurisdictions where a College of Physicians and 
Surgeons actually provides the oversight supervision and 
responsibility for podiatric surgery as is being proposed in this 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I’d be happy to confirm that the 
Alberta College of Physicians and Surgeons do regulate 
podiatric surgeons and we have actually worked with what 
they’ve done in Alberta and modelled what we’ve done here 
based on their experience so far. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m sure the 
minister is also aware that the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association did address some concerns about this framework of 
having the College of Physicians and Surgeons provide this 
function. 
 
I would like to ask the minister, what communications have you 
had with the Saskatchewan Medical Association to address the 
concerns that they’ve raised? And secondly, have you been able 
to satisfy to the Saskatchewan Medical Association’s 
satisfaction the concerns that they raised in regard to this 
proposed amendment to the medical professionals Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We have been in discussion with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association all this year, starting in 
January, and we’ve also had some understanding that they’ve 
had questions about this. 
 
They wrote a more formal letter about this on May 3 this year. 
And we, in fact, ended up talking with them, but also wrote 
them a letter in response explaining why we wanted to do this, 
on May 17. And they aren’t in total agreement with doing this 
but they understand for the good of the people and for our 
ability to regulate podiatric surgeons that we need to do this. 
 
And so that’s where it’s at now — they’re not total agreement 
but they’re, I think, at least having a better understanding of 
what we’re doing. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was cc’d 
(carbon copy) a letter dated May 1 to Mr. Lawrence Krahn 
about the medical professional Act’s amendment. And is this 
the letter that the minister is referring to? And since I was cc’d 
to the original letter, would the minister make a copy of the 
government’s response available to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, and I would correct myself. The 
letter to us was dated May 1, as you point out, not May 3. And 
we’ll be happy to give you a copy of the letter. I think it would 
be similar just to the information that was there before. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, you said that 
you’ve had some discussions with the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) subsequent to that letter. Has there been 
correspondence in reply to your letter that would indicate that 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association is at least concurring or 
recognizing that this is in the general public good as you 
indicated in your statement? 
 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We haven’t received a written response to 
our letter of May 17, but verbally they’ve acknowledged that 
we’re planning to proceed with this and accept the fact that we 
need to set up a method of regulating podiatric surgeons in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Minister, under the current framework 
where there isn’t this regulation, are there any podiatric 
surgeons actually operating in the province? And how are they 
currently being . . . What oversight mechanism is there 
currently in place for them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are no podiatric surgeons who 
currently operate within the province. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Does the minister have some expectation or 
has there been some communications that with this framework 
in place that some podiatric surgeons will indeed be interested 
in coming to establish practice in our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Minister, I’m pleased to hear that. 
And that’s why we are supportive of the general thrust, because 
I think there is a whole issue coming out of the condition of 
diabetes which creates some fair . . . severe limb damage and 
extremity damage that requires this type of training and 
intervention. And I would hope that this framework legislation 
is going to be a major assist in having people come to this 
province that are particularly trained and suited to deal with this 
condition. 
 
And so, Minister, we certainly support the general thrust and 
the specifics of the legislation and we’re willing to vote it at this 
time. 
 
The Chair: — Members, the Bill before us has 45 sections. Is 
leave granted to deal with this by page? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 45 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — And I would also like to thank my 
officials who were in assistance on this particular two files that 
we dealt with. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Prescription Drugs 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
The Chair: — Does the minister have new officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I have one new official who I’d like 
to introduce and that’s Andrea Laturnas, and she’s a pharmacist, 
and she’s part of the information management union of the drug 
plan and extended benefits branch of Saskatchewan Health. 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome to the new official that’s joined us this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that Bill No. 39, The Prescription 
Drugs Amendment Act is a direct response to a very tragic 
situation in Saskatoon that came out of a coroner’s inquest that 
related to the death of Darcy Ironchild; and that this legislation 
is designed to be able to track and keep track of multiple 
prescription type of conditions that could lead to individuals 
inadvertently or purposefully having an overdose of 
prescription drugs. 
 
And I’ve been made aware in my inquiries about this legislation 
that it certainly has the support of the Saskatchewan 
Pharmaceutical Association and the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, and virtually all the medical health professionals. 
And I think it’s a very important and appropriate bit of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, I very much support the intent of this legislation 
and I believe the detail. And I wonder if you could just 
comment on, given the need to make sure that there isn’t a 
capacity for this multiple prescription writing and scripting, and 
also purchasing, have you taken reasonable precautions — and I 
emphasis the word reasonable — to make sure that this process 
doesn’t inadvertently sort of impede the right to individual’s 
privacy, and that that has been put into the mix. 
 
I don’t want to suggest that we should go overboard and be so 
cautious about safeguarding the privacy that the Bill becomes 
ineffective. But that is always an issue and I would like you to 
comment on how you’ve addressed it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I appreciate that question, and that is 
clearly a concern in Saskatchewan Health as it relates to all 
kinds of patient information. And in a specific situation what 
we will be doing is using the very strict controls that are around 
the present prescription drug program and then just adding in 
the information from the purchases across the province. And 
that includes the First Nations purchases, some of the armed 
forces, RCMP kinds of things that happen, and the general ones. 
 
I think the key thing is we’re making sure we have what were 
protections that we do have now; plus with more sophisticated 
protections that we have now, we will clearly have other ways 
of dealing with patient consent and also with tracking who 
actually has access to the material, which we do have now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. One final question. Is 
the new system, when this legislation comes into effect, going 
to be able to make this determination of duplications or multiple 
uses in a timely fashion? 
 
Because quite often if a person is seriously trying to make sure 
that they get multiple prescriptions, they might be wanting to 
move forward very quickly to do this. So is the system going to 
be respond . . . be able to respond in a timely fashion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What you’ve raised is clearly the intent to 
do this. And the first part will be gathering of all of the 
information and then setting up the appropriate methods 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

 

whereby professionals, pharmacists and doctors, can access the 
information. And also to set up automatic alerts that deal with 
the extra or duplicate or triplicate prescriptions. 
 
So all of those things will be built. But the first layer has to be 
to get the information. And all of these things will be 
proceeding as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Minister, what timeline do you envisage that this whole system 
will be in place, including the automatic safeguards that will 
trigger misuse of the system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The hope is to have all of this fully 
operational within the next year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I note 
that the Bill will come into force on proclamation. I would trust 
that it’s the intent of the government to proclaim it very early 
on and not hang onto this Bill because I think the whole inquest 
coming out of the tragic circumstances involving Darcy 
Ironchild sort of have a timeliness issue involved with it. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re prepared to vote at this time. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: —Yes. And before I make that motion, I will 
thank my officials for their good work and with that, I will 
move that this committee report this Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — And does the minister have a new official? And 
I would invite the minister to introduce the official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. I’m pleased to have with me Bob 
Firnesz, who’s the associate executive director of the medical 
services branch, to assist with this Bill. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome to the new official that joins us this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I read this legislation, it strikes me as the main 
intent of this is to put chiropractors, dentists, and optometrists 
into the same situation as physicians in their ability to have 
medical or professional incorporations. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes. That’s the main intent, but I also 
might as well tell you very simply what the other two points are 
that are here. 
 
We also have made an amendment that allows money owed to 
the medical services plan due to a billing error or reassessment 
to be collected from the practitioner’s professional corporation. 
And so this is one where we needed to make sure that the 

professional corporations were responsible for these 
overpayments in the same way that an individual physician 
would be. So that’s another change. 
 
The other one is that there, there was a reference to certain taxes 
paid under The Health Services Act. The Health Services Act 
was appealed about five years ago and so we’re just deleting 
that reference. So those are the two changes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We certainly on 
this side of the House have been very much in favour of the 
ability for medical professionals to establish incorporations to 
be a vehicle for them to perhaps have an added advantage to 
conduct their practice in the province. So we’re very supportive 
of this direction, and we understand the housekeeping nature 
that, for billing purposes, that the corporation has to be 
considered the same as the individual. And that’s an appropriate 
amendment as well. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly am willing to do it . . . 
and support this and vote it. And since this is the probably the 
last opportunity that I have to thank the officials for their 
attention this afternoon, I would like to do that and indicate that 
I’m ready to vote this as well. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, I would like to thank my officials 
who have been here this afternoon. And I also like to thank the 
member opposite for the questions and clarifications that we 
were able to make this afternoon. And with that, I move that 
this committee report the Bill without amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(16:30) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Speech-Language Pathologists and 
Audiologists Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Medical Profession 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Prescription Drugs 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce to the House today deputy minister of Highways and 
Transportation, Harvey Brooks, who is seated on my left. On 
my right is assistant deputy minister, Barry Martin, for 
operations, and behind me on my left is manager of 
transportation, trade, and logistics, Mike Makowsky. And next 
to Mike is assistant deputy minister Don Wincherauk. And 
further to my right is Fred Antunes, director of operations, 
planning, and business support; and leader of our budget 
development team, Cathy Lynn Borbely in the back row. 
 
And I’d like to note, Mr. Chair, that I also have answer to the 
questions that were asked by the member opposite, and I would 
ask that the Page take that to the member. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon, 
Mr. Minister, and to your officials as well today. 
 
Before we get into the line of questioning that I had originally 
anticipated covering, I would ask if the minister would provide 
me an answer in terms of the globals requested of the 
department. I think the questions were made available to the 
department towards the end of March, and I think the original 
anticipated arrival date for those globals was about May 23 and 
we’re well now into the month of June. 
 
Could I have a confirmation from the minister as to when we 
could expect them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, I would report that we are 
still working on those and that we’ll make them available as 
soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, I think there’s some urgency on the 
part of the official opposition to have those globals answered. 
There’s information gleaned from those particular questions 
that are important to the job that we perform and we would 
appreciate your co-operation and expect or anticipate the early 
arrival of those responses. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re going to move to an area that I think is 

fairly contemporary or immediate in terms of interest. I refer to 
the June 6 story that was carried by several media outlets in the 
province regarding the department’s offering of a $250,000 sum 
of money to the Farmer Rail Car Coalition in Saskatchewan, 
allowing them to prepare for a bid on the federal grain car fleet 
that is anticipated up for sale this summer. 
 
Would the minister outline for the House the details of the loan, 
describe . . . I’m sorry, I assume that it’s a loan. Maybe I can 
ask the minister to describe the amount of money, what in fact it 
is, the terms of reference for that amount of money, and, if you 
could, also the purposes of the money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — The $250,000 that you’re referring to 
was actually part of the policy that was developed in 1996 and 
that was to give what support we could to producers and to 
enable the Farm Rail Car Coalition to make its position known 
to the federal government. 
 
At that time, the federal government was talking about getting 
rid of the federal hopper car fleet which is about 13,000 cars. 
And there was great concern that those cars would be going 
directly to the railroads and that the cost would then come back 
again to producers. And so the Farm Rail Car Coalition was 
formed and began to put its case before the federal government. 
 
The partners who also contributed funding to the lobbying and 
development process for the Farm Rail Car Coalition are the 
Manitoba government and the Western Economic 
Diversification. And so our portion of the funding, the portion 
the provincial government puts in through the Saskatchewan 
Grain Car Corporation, is indeed a loan contingent on the 
Farmer Rail Car Coalition receiving the cars in the end and they 
would pay it back out of the returns from leasing those cars. 
 
I think basically that gives the outline of where that decision 
was made, where the funding came from, and the terms of the 
funding. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through you, Mr. 
Chairman, to the minister, I’m not clear at all actually, given 
your answer, where the money came from or how it’s going to 
be handled. 
 
I gather from what you said that the loan is contingent on the 
Farm Rail Car Coalition being successful in their bid. But what 
happens if they’re not successful? Is this then a repayable loan 
or a forgivable loan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. I’ll try and clarify. First of 
all the funding that we have put in as a province has come 
through the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. And that 
funding has already paid significant dividends. 
 
In 1996 when the government was, federal government was, 
talking about selling these hopper cars and the farm rail car 
coalition began to put together its plan and to speak to the 
federal government about how important it was that they have a 
place at the table in terms of dispersion of these cars, what their 
work has done has given us another five years where the federal 
government held the cars and returns were coming to the 
province. And we can estimate . . . we have estimated those 
returns at somewhere around $1 a tonne over those years. 



June 13, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

 

So that’s about 30 million a year. We’re looking in the 
neighbourhood of $180 million that is basically for our 
investment. Because of the work of the Farm Rail Car 
Coalition, that money has been returned to producers. 
 
And if indeed the cars had been sold, there would not have been 
that kind of dollar per tonne estimated savings for the producers 
in the province. 
 
So even though the Farm Rail Car Coalition may not in the end 
be successful in their bid — and we continue to hope that they 
are and will continue to support them in that process — but 
even if they are not in the end successful, there have already 
been significant savings for producers in this province which 
we consider to be well worth the investment. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So if I understand the minister correctly, Mr. 
Chairman, the very existence of this five-year extension has 
allowed money to go back into the farm economy and to 
farmers’ pockets ostensibly. 
 
But that still doesn’t answer the question of, you know, where 
does the $250,000 come from? Does it come directly out of the 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation? And will it be a 
forgivable loan or will it be a repayable loan depending on the 
success of the offer or the bid by the Farm Rail Car Coalition on 
this possible purchase? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Through the lease of the 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation cars, there are 1,000 cars 
held through the lease and through returns for damaged cars is 
where the funding comes in. The money comes then through to 
the . . . this $250,000 loan, through that return, goes to the . . . 
was taken out and given to the Farm Rail Car Coalition. 
 
It is . . . the simple answer is that it is a forgivable loan. If they 
do not receive the cars, it’s forgivable. And in terms of 
rationale, as I said earlier, the return that it has brought to 
producers over these five years has already been well worth the 
investment in our view. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, the press release I alluded to only 
talked about the $250,000 the provincial government has given 
the Farm Rail Car Coalition. But you have mentioned other 
partners — the province of Manitoba, and I don’t recall the 
other partner off the top of my head. So can I assume that the 
coalition has got similar funding from the other partners in this 
effort to put a bid together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I know we have the information 
available, but I don’t have it right at my fingertips, so we will 
provide that to you at our earliest possible time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, would you be prepared today to 
give us an indication of what this money is intended for? We’re 
sending a sizable amount of money to an organization that has 
representation from various groups. But would you be specific 
today and indicate to us what the money is expected to cover; 
what the project will entail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. The $250,000 which was 

allocated many, many years ago, I think it’s very important to 
recognize there has been a lot of ongoing work with the federal 
government working to try and make the case of the Farm Rail 
Car Coalition. 
 
There has also been work on developing a business plan, work 
in partnership with a number of other bodies. There has been 
work on developing operating procedures. There’s work on 
developing a financing package. There’s been work . . . primary 
work has been in terms of representing the shippers’ views and 
the shippers’ interests in relationship with the federal 
government. 
 
The process of lobbying, of making the case, of bringing 
forward the shippers’ interest to the federal department and to 
the federal politicians has been very, very important. And we 
believe that it’s because of that work that we got the extension, 
as I indicated earlier. 
 
So that’s been the primary work — is business plan, operating 
procedures, development of financial package, what is needed 
now to move things further ahead, and there has also been that 
very diligent work of putting the case forward. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the Minister. 
Mr. Minister, are there consultants being hired by the Farm Rail 
Car Coalition? Are there professional people being hired as 
lobbyists? Is some of the money going to groups or individuals 
or businesses that specialize in preparing business plans and 
unique financing packages? And is there somebody in particular 
in mind in terms of the lobbying effort that you describe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes. The Farmer Railcar Coalition has 
used consultants. And in their . . . the work of those consultants 
has been to help them in lobbying. 
 
There have been consultants used in terms of industry expertise 
and they have tried, wherever possible, to pick up that industry 
expertise and use that. They have used consultants for the 
development of a financial plan. They have also been working 
with consultants as they try and set out a process for operating 
. . . operating procedures. They have used consultants and 
lobbyists to bring the information forward to the political scene 
in Ottawa. 
 
And I think it’s very important to note that the other interests 
. . . the railroads have significant bodies of lobbyists who live 
and work in Ottawa constantly. And so it’s remarkable actually 
that the . . . that the Farmer Railcar Coalition has been able to 
go down to Ottawa and have their influence felt as strongly as 
they have. And when . . . again I would allude to the five years 
that they gained through their initial lobbying. 
 
Now we know that the federal government has kind of changed, 
shifted the scene a little bit because the right of refusal for the 
railroads comes to an end at the end of June. And so really now 
the Farm Rail Car Coalition is truly ramping up its efforts to 
make sure that they’ve got the whole process of operating the 
fleet lined out, that they have developed a very fully informed 
plan of the producer/shipper option. And that they have made 
sure that the federal government, both the elected officials and 
the officials in the department, know what the issues are for 
producers and shippers. 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard June 13, 2002 

 

And so they’re really intensifying their work. And you may 
have — just bring forward the news releases that the Farm Rail 
Car Coalition has put out recently — you may have copies of 
those. And they indicate the kind of work that they’ve been 
doing, who they’ve contacted. And so you can see the intensity 
certainly is gearing up now as we’re looking at this possible 
dispersion becoming more of a reality. 
 
So the consultants that they are using are talking about and 
working with them to make sure that the best case is 
represented for producers/shippers and for the possibility of 
producers/shippers either owning the cars or certainly having a 
place at the table in terms of the dispersion and allocation of 
cars. 
 
And so they’re gearing it up and looking for further support in 
order to make sure that their views are well known and that 
their bid is hopefully successful. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister. There are many, many additional 
questions I would like to ask in regard to this particular subject 
because it seems to me that there’s lots of ramifications that 
might arise from this potential purchase. 
 
One of the things I alluded to when I responded to the 
ministerial statement on the fact that this purchase might go 
ahead, was that I think it’s more important for farmers to have 
access to the cars than actually owning the cars. 
 
And it seems to me that there is some flawed logic that comes 
from the argument that if farmers own these cars outright, it’s 
going to save them money in the long run. I don’t see how 
buying them a second time will achieve that. And I certainly 
don’t understand how having a commercial rail operator haul 
the cars down on trackage is going to save them any money 
either. 
 
So I think there’s some issues there that we need to develop. 
And I’d like to also talk more about who’s been involved with 
this bid and so forth. 
 
I see that we’re rapidly running out of time here, so I’d just like 
to change gears briefly in the last few minutes, Mr. Chairman. 
And I have a question I would like to ask the minister. It has to 
do with railways and basically the question is this: have there 
been recently any discussions or negotiations between the 
Department of Highways and Transportation and the Crown 
Investment Corporation on the potential development of a 
provincially owned railway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Unequivocally no. We have no 
information available to us that would indicate there have been 
any discussions going on. If they have been it’s not been in 
relationship with our department. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 


