















































Hansard: March 18, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 37 
 March 18, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today in the Assembly to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
of our province who feel it is unfair that SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) is refusing to waive the $700 deductible 
for vehicle owners whose cars are damaged but not stolen as a 
result of using an anti-theft device. And the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to work with SGI to develop more fair 
guidelines for deductibles on vehicles that are damaged as a 
result of an attempted car theft. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Allan, Bradwell, Saskatoon, and Watrous. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present on behalf of constituents, Mr. Speaker. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation, and to 
ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 

The constituents are from the communities of Langenburg and 
MacNutt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in this area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Fillmore, 
Creelman, and Francis area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in my home community of Swift Current, concerned 
about tobacco control issues. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of their 

petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of constituents of Carrot River Valley 
concerned about certain omissions in the tobacco control 
legislation. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And the petition is signed by the good citizens of Nipawin and 
Arborfield. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition dealing with 
tobacco legislation. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the government to 
amend tobacco legislation; and 
 
To make necessary repairs to Highway 35 in Indian 
Head-Milestone. 

 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 8 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Agriculture 
and Food: to date, how much of the farmland property tax 
rebate has been returned to producers? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower: how many 
accidents were reported to SaskPower in 2001 arising out 
of the use of a knife in a live toaster; (2) what personal 
injuries or damage to property resulted from the accidents 
so reported? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I would ask that 
you indulge me in making some rather lengthy introductions 
first of all, please. 
 
In the Speaker’s gallery there are four young people that I want 
to officially introduce to the Legislative Assembly today, 
despite the fact that they are already becoming known —well 
known — to many members. They are the very first interns to 
participate in our newly established Saskatchewan legislative 
internship program. 
 
They are: Jessica Waiser from Saskatoon, who earned a B.A. 
(Bachelor of Arts) with high honours in political studies and a 
minor in women and gender studies at the University of 
Saskatchewan; Wendy Moellenbeck from Englefeld, who is 
currently working on her B.A., honours in political studies at 
the University of Saskatchewan; Maria Kurylo from Saskatoon, 
a recent graduate of the University of Saskatchewan where she 
obtained a Master of Arts in political studies after completion of 
a B.A. with a double honours in political studies and French; 
and Tim Baker from Regina, who studied both at the University 
of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan and recently 
completed a B.A., high honours in international studies from 
the U of S (University of Saskatchewan). 
 
I would ask all members to officially welcome our four interns 
to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, the University of Regina and the 
University of Saskatchewan, in conjunction with the Legislative 
Assembly, developed this new program. I want to introduce the 
first academic director for the program, Dr. Gordon Barnhart. 
Gordon is no stranger to this Chamber, having served as clerk 
of the Assembly for 20 years. He is now university secretary for 
the University of Saskatchewan. Dr. Barnhart. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It is also my pleasure to introduce and thank 
two former members who have assisted with the selection 
process by serving on the selection committee. With us in the 

Speaker’s gallery here today are two former Speakers of this 
Assembly, Herb Swan and John Brockelbank. 
 
The other members of the selection committee are Dr. Barnhart, 
a representative for the U of R (University of Regina), and Dr. 
Phillip Hansen, and the Clerk of the legislature and, in the 
future, a former intern — but for this year, a current intern is 
serving and that is Maria Kurylo. 
 
But I want to welcome our two former Speakers, Brockelbank 
and Swan, and I think we should all look so good after politics. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — My last introduction is to introduce four 
young people from Korea and Australia who are here as 
exchange students at the University of Regina. 
 
Mijin Lim, from Seoul National University in Seoul City. 
Mijin’s home is in Masan, Kyung-sang-nam Province in South 
Korea. And Megan Gibbens is a student from the University of 
Technology in Sydney, Australia. Courtney Trenwith is from 
Adelaide; Courtney is a student at Charles Sturt University, 
Bathhurst Campus in Australia. Rachel Thornton is from 
Charles Sturt University, as well, Wagga Campus in Australia. 
 
They are accompanied today by Clinton Kleisinger, son of 
Speaker assistant Margaret Kleisinger, a University of Regina 
student who has just returned from a year in Australia as an 
exchange student at Charles Sturt University, Wagga Campus, 
New South Wales. 
 
Welcome to the students from Korea and Australia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and you’ve 
done an excellent job of welcoming a number of guests to our 
Assembly. And I would like to share in also welcoming each of 
the people that you did, but a particular notice of my former 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), Mr. Herb Swan, 
who represented Rosetown-Biggar for a number of years. Not 
only was he at one time a MLA but he happens to be a 
neighbour coming from the community of Beechy, the same 
community I’m from. 
 
Mr. Swan has had a very dignified career, not only in 
agriculture but also serving as the president of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, serving as a MLA 
for a number of years including sitting in your chair, Mr. 
Speaker, for a number of those years. And currently as you 
noted he is on the selection committee for choosing the interns 
that serve the MLAs. 
 
So I particularly would like to extend a warm welcome to Mr. 
Swan on his attendance in the gallery today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce to you, seated in the opposition gallery, Mr. David 
Karwacki, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. He is 
accompanied today by his brother Grant Karwacki. I would ask 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

 

hon. members, especially those who plan on being around after 
the next election to welcome two of their future colleagues. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to join you in welcoming colleagues, former 
colleagues, to the Saskatchewan legislature, former speakers, 
Herb Swan and John Brockelbank, as well as the interns and 
our guests from Korea and Australia. 
 
In particular I want to pay special tribute to Herb Swan who I 
served with when I was a member of the opposition between 
1986 and 1991. And I want to particularly note that Herb Swan 
was the Minister of the Environment when I was a member of 
the opposition. And I want to thank him, Mr. Speaker, for all of 
the work that he did as a result of people raising the whole issue 
of PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyl), particularly in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
I happen to have an old electrical substation that was . . . which 
was storing PCBs; I raised it in the legislature for many days, 
and Mr. Swan and his government responded by having those 
PCBs moved to Estevan and then destroyed. 
 
My point is, Mr. Speaker, that members of the opposition can 
have an impact and private members can have an impact with 
ministers. And I want to thank Mr. Swan for the work that he 
did around that issue. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
welcome the interns to the Assembly today. Two of the interns 
serve on our side of the House — Jessica and Maria. And we 
look forward to the other two interns coming to us in the middle 
of next month — Tim and I . . . Wendy. Sorry. I haven’t had a 
chance to get to know her yet; we’re waiting until April 15. 
 
I’d also like to welcome the two Speakers and Dr. Barnhart to 
the Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I would like to include in that 
welcome the students from Australia and Korea. I and a number 
of my colleagues had an opportunity to visit Australia last year; 
and we visited both Sydney and Adelaide and the legislatures 
there and found it to be very rewarding and refreshing. And we 
hope that we can take some of the ideas that we learned in those 
jurisdictions and implement them in Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all colleagues to again welcome all of our guests. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleagues on the government side of the House, I’d also like to 
take this opportunity to welcome the interns for the internship 
program. 
 
I’ve been very fortunate to be able to work with Tim Baker. 
And we’ve had many experiences together; he’s been to a lot of 

the committee work of the Assembly before we arrived here. 
He’s been assisting in some research projects. And we’ve had 
some good opportunities to share ideas and the knowledge and 
experience that I’m sure he’ll find useful in later life. 
 
Also the other interns, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure they’ll have 
experiences from both sides of the House to be able to add to 
the resumés that are certainly lengthy and we have . . . we are 
very fortunate to have very qualified individuals. 
 
I’d like to also welcome the foreign students and the support to 
the internship program that are here with today — Dr. Barnhart, 
Mr. Swan, and Mr. Brockelbank. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Tourism Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know that 
Saskatchewan is a pretty special sort of place. Indeed some 
once suggested that Saskatchewan is spelt s-p-e-c-i-a-l, and 
there is nothing easier than being an ambassador for this great 
province. Despite the doomsayers, we definitely have 
something wonderful and magical here — and some very 
special people. 
 
That’s why at the recent annual gala Tourism Awards of 
Excellence, 14 different organizations and individuals from all 
across Saskatchewan were honoured by the tourism industry. 
From corner to corner, from border to border, all across this 
great province, tourism organizations and businesses gathered 
to celebrate the essence and spirit of Saskatchewan. Our living 
skies, endless rolling plains, vibrant forests and lakes, our 
multicultural and ever-fascinating people were all 
enthusiastically acclaimed. 
 
And who can blame them. Saskatchewan is great — peaceful, 
clean, and safe, with a good quality of life. When we think back 
over the events of this past year — the September 11 tragedy, 
the war against terrorism, the voting problems in Zimbabwe — 
it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the world could use a little bit 
more Saskatchewan. 
 
Congratulations to all the winners and nominees for the 
Tourism Awards of Excellence. They are truly ambassadors for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Return of Member from Battleford-Cut Knife 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m particularly 
pleased to have the hon. member from Battleford-Cut Knife 
back with us in the House this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — In the last session the member was 
diagnosed with leukemia. The prognosis was indeed very 
serious but there was hope offered, to which the member 
grabbed onto as best he could. And with the determination that 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

encouraged all of us, he was prepared to beat this cancer no 
matter what the odds were against him. 
 
He tells a story about his minister, and as we know ministers — 
and these are not ministers of the Crown but ministers of the 
gospel — was even skeptical that he would survive, and 
perhaps he might want to think about changing churches. He 
enjoyed the wonderful support of his family, particularly his 
wife, Shirley, who was constantly by him and made sure that he 
obeyed the doctor’s orders. 
 
The member for Battleford-Cut Knife must continue to be 
closely observed but his recovery has been truly remarkable. 
We would wish that every member in this House would join 
with me and say welcome back, Rudi. Well done, Rudi. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Community Clinic 40th Anniversary 
 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Regina Community Clinic has just celebrated its 40th 
anniversary. And I would publicly like to applaud those who 
have contributed to its longevity and success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Community Clinic was created in 1962 
during the medicare crisis. From the beginning, Saskatchewan 
people recognized the value of coming together for the common 
good. No endeavour is more central to our well-being than 
universal health care, and for 40 years the clinic has ensured 
quality care for its members according to the principles of 
universal health care. 
 
It is Regina’s only health care co-operative with a membership 
of 11,000. The clinic focuses not only on diagnosis and 
treatment but it also promotes good heath and preventing 
disease. It has built significant partnerships in the communities 
and continues to be on the leading edge of our approach to 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely congratulate the staff, the volunteers, 
and the clients who have made the Regina Community Clinic 
truly a success story for the past four decades. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dana Antel Appreciation Night 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday night the Premier and I had the opportunity to attend a 
Dana Antel appreciation night in Esterhazy. 
 
Dana, along with Kelly Bechard from Sedley, Colleen Sostoics 
from Kennedy, and Hayley Wickenheiser from Shaunavon were 
Saskatchewan members on the Canada women’s gold medal 
winning hockey team. 
 
That night Linus Westberg was MC (master of ceremonies) 
who many would remember from his TV days in Yorkton. He 
did a great job and broke the crowd up many times. Bob 
Hughes from The Leader-Post was guest speaker and also did a 

masterful job. 
 
The evening brought back many memories and stories about 
Dana growing up and playing hockey in Esterhazy. Len and 
Arlene Antel, mom and dad of Dana, were beaming with pride 
along with a large crowd from Esterhazy and area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this on behalf of everyone 
here and congratulate Dana and for that matter the whole Antel 
family. They have every reason to be very, very proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Local Company Exports Organic Canary Seed 
to US Markets 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been a while but I 
have more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, organic canary seed, grown right here in 
Saskatchewan and now being shipped to Texas, California, and 
other points in the US (United States) market with interest 
being expressed in Europe, South America, and Asia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the recent Team Canada trip to Texas, 
Randy Johnson of Harvest Sun Seed & Grain Company here in 
Regina travelled with the Premier. During the trip he signed a 
two-year distribution deal with Western Organics. 
 
As one would expect, Mr. Johnson and his partners, Donna 
Flaman-Johnson and Jerome Flaman, did their homework 
before the trip so they knew people in areas like California are 
looking for environmentally friendly, quality products. They did 
their homework and brought their reputation and their Premier, 
whose participation assisted them in opening doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is more good news about Harvest Sun Seeds. 
Not only are they helping make Saskatchewan quality products 
known, they subcontract their packaging to the Saskatchewan 
Abilities Council, providing meaningful employment to adults 
with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. Good for our communities. 
 
I want to congratulate this company and wish them well as they 
continue to expand their exports throughout the world. Also, I 
believe we should recognize the assistance of STEP 
(Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership Inc.) in providing 
marketing research and business contracts, and of course the 
help of our Premier in achieving these contracts throughout the 
world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Awards of Excellence 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have already 
heard about the gala for the Tourism Awards of Excellence and 
I’d like to tell you about two special award winners of note 
from the northwest. 
 
The Fred Heal Tourism Award was given to Peter Kingsmill of 
Hafford who has been involved in tourism for many years. His 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

 

focus is on sustainable tourism. He received the Governor 
General’s Award for Conservation in 1992 and the Nature of 
Saskatchewan Conservation Award in 2001. Among his many 
activities, he is best remembered for the establishment of 
Redberry Lake Pelican project in 1989 and as editor of the 
national Canadian Tourism Commission magazine. 
 
I’m also pleased to report that the Chairman’s Lifetime 
Achievement Award was given to Wayne Fenning of North 
Battleford. Wayne was instrumental in the establishment of the 
Heart of Canada’s Old Northwest, Battleford Tourism, and 
West Central Tourism. He has served as chair of all three. He 
has also served as chair of Tourism Saskatchewan and chaired 
many of their committees. He is the manager of the Western 
Development Museum in North Battleford and gave special 
thanks to his wife, Doris, and the staff of the WDM (Western 
Development Museum) for supporting his efforts on behalf of 
tourism in Saskatchewan. 
 
I thank the hon. member for bringing this gala to our attention, 
and ask all members to join with me in congratulating these two 
worthy recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Addition of New Doctors to Nipawin 
and North-East Health District 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s with 
pride that I draw the attention of the House to the community of 
Nipawin and the North-East Health District. 
 
This year, the Nipawin Health Centre and the Nipawin Medical 
Group will add five doctors to their complement of physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Nipawin presently has four physicians who will 
continue to provide assistance until the recruits arrive. This 
means that Nipawin will not only be retaining its four 
physicians, but also gaining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Alina Constantin will start on a permanent 
basis as of August 1, and is a Saskatchewan graduate, Mr. 
Speaker. Dr. Constantin is an example of how this government 
is succeeding in retaining our graduates and continuing to 
provide all people and communities of our province quality, 
universal, health care. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Commitments Made During 1999 Election Campaign 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) election platform from the 1999 election. In 
that document, the NDP made a number of very specific 
promises, and today we’d like to review how they’re doing on 
these promises. 
 
The NDP promised more jobs; there are now less jobs. The 
NDP promised more health care workers; now there are less 
health care workers. The NDP promised shorter waiting lists; 
now there are longer waiting lists. The NDP promised less 

crime; now Regina is the car theft capital of Canada. The NDP 
promised a balanced budget; and now they have a $500 million 
deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why has the NDP broken all of 
their major promises in the 1999 election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition well knows since that ’99 election we have . . . let’s 
take them. We’ve talked about health care in this province. Here 
was the government that went to the people of Saskatchewan, 
consulted with the people of Saskatchewan, worked with the 
people of Saskatchewan to develop a health care action plan; 
deliver to the people of Saskatchewan, taking leadership in this 
country, and will be debated in this session. 
 
Now we’re talking about election commitments. What did that 
party commit to in the last election? To freeze — to freeze — 
the spending on health care. 
 
Since that time, Mr. Speaker, we have been working with the 
people of Saskatchewan in building the strength of the 
Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker. We have seen the growth 
in our gross domestic product, Mr. Speaker. We have seen the 
growth in local and community and community-based 
industries, Mr. Speaker. We are working. We have not 
completed our term. We’ve not completed our package; but I 
tell you, we’re taking steps forward to a good plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier represents a government that has cut funding to 
education; and without help from the federal government, has 
cut funding to health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many ways . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There may be other 
speakers listening, members. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many 
different ways to measure the performance of a government. 
One way is to see: are there more people moving in or moving 
out? We know the answer is that they’re moving out. 
 
The NDP are failing this test. The other test that we can put to 
them — do they keep their promises or don’t they keep their 
promises? The NDP fails this test as well. Instead of more jobs 
there are less jobs. Instead of more health care workers there are 
less health care workers. Instead of shorter waiting lists there 
are longer waiting lists. Instead of less crime there’s more 
crime. And instead of a balanced budget we now have a $500 
million deficit, thank you to the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP broken all of its major 
promises? The Premier has not yet answered that question. Why 
now should the people of Saskatchewan believe anything that 
he says? 
 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition stands in preface of his question, and what does he 
say to this House? What does he say to this House and to the 
people of Saskatchewan? That we’ve reduced, he said, we’ve 
reduced funding for education. That’s what he said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite the Leader of the Opposition to read the 
budget documents from last year, where in that year alone we 
increased the funding to K to 12 education by over 9 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Over 9 per cent. Mr. Speaker, unless I’m 
mistaken, it’s in the neighbourhood of 24 per cent increase to 
education in just the last few years. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? 
Why is that? 
 
It is because this is a government that believes in Saskatchewan 
young people, believes in education as a tool for the future, and 
is determined to build this province. Not to be taking the advice 
of that party, which told us in the last election campaign — 
what did they say? — freeze the funding to education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the 
Premier knows that the NDP government has cut over $300 
million to education in the last ten years. That’s a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, but let’s look at jobs. The 
NDP made a very specific promise. They said, and I quote for 
the Premier: 
 

We have a comprehensive plan to create 30,000 new jobs 
over the next five years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, at that time, there were nearly 500,000 jobs in 
Saskatchewan. Today, there are just 465,000 people working. 
So that’s 35,000 fewer jobs instead of 30,000 additional jobs. 
We have not a target met. We have a promise broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the jobs? Where are the 30,000 new 
jobs that the NDP promised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I invite the Leader of the 
Opposition to consult even today’s Leader-Post — I think it’s 
in The Leader-Post — where the description of what’s been 
happening to our farm families, as what’s been happening to the 
agricultural economy in our province should be known to him, 
Mr. Speaker. It should be known to him. 
 
The question today before the people of Saskatchewan is who is 
best prepared to deal with the challenges that present us, 
whether it be the challenges in agriculture, the challenges in the 

international economy, the challenges in dealing with the 
finances of the province. The people of Saskatchewan will be 
asking who is best prepared to deal with these challenging 
times, Mr. Speaker. And I tell you, they are looking at the plans 
of the respective groups in this House. And they’re looking at a 
plan from that group which says cut the taxes, sell the Crowns, 
and decimate the public services, and somehow that’s to create 
nirvana in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite you and the people of Saskatchewan to 
look at the solid plan within this Speech from the Throne — 
investment in our economy, investment in infrastructure, 
investment in education, and good quality health and support 
for our families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
the Premier thinks that agriculture is not doing well, why 
doesn’t he change his Agriculture minister? Why doesn’t he do 
something about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the NDP 
campaigned on a very specific promise, a very specific promise 
to create 30,000 jobs over the next four years. 
 
And it wasn’t just agriculture, Mr. Speaker. They promised to 
create 10,000 jobs in forestry. That hasn’t happened either. 
They promised more jobs in rural Saskatchewan. Rural 
Saskatchewan is disappointed with their performance. They 
promised 30,000 jobs overall and there are actually fewer jobs 
today than there were in 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the 30,000 jobs that the NDP promised? 
Why have they broken this most crucial of promises? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, not until today did I realize 
that the Minister of Agriculture is now responsible for the 
drought. Mr. Speaker, I didn’t realize the Minister of 
Agriculture was responsible for the activities of the European 
Economic Community. This Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, is standing up on the national scene and on the 
international scene on behalf of Saskatchewan farm families, 
unlike that group. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Point number two, Mr. Speaker. The 
Leader of the Opposition wants to talk about forestry. We’ll talk 
about forestry in this House. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, in the 
last two to three years we have seen almost $1 billion — $1 
billion — in new investment in the Saskatchewan forest. That’s 
what happening in the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and some 
others in the province always will come with the doom and the 
gloom. Mr. Speaker, I refer to the Leader of the Opposition and 
to every Saskatchewan resident this article which appeared in 
one of Canada’s national newspapers just last week, the 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

 

headline of which reads, “Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just 
the best.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would say to the Premier . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Member will proceed. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course we 
don’t blame the Agriculture minister for the drought, but we do 
blame him for weakening crop insurance by taking away 
spot-loss hail. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The Premier’s words simply don’t match 
reality. The NDP is losing for Saskatchewan, jobs, investment, 
and our most precious resource — people. Thanks to the NDP, 
we’ve lost 30,000 jobs since 1999, not created 30,000 jobs. 
 
It wasn’t a target. It wasn’t a goal. It was an ironclad promise in 
their own election platform. 
 
My question to the Premier — and a yes or no answer without 
ducking the question would be appreciated — will his 
government fulfil the promise, will he fulfil the promise to 
create 30,000 jobs before the next election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, while we’re talking about 
our respective caucuses’ ministers and critics, I wonder if the 
Leader of the Opposition has spoken to his Ag critic about his 
ag critic’s support for the policies of the Liberal federal 
government in Ottawa? I wonder if they’ve, I wonder if they’ve 
talked that over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt about it — that we are 
challenged by significant difficulty and circumstances in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition on the 
night of the Throne Speech decided he would be better off to go 
off to Calgary, consult with some of his friends in Calgary. 
 
Well I read today in today’s paper some of those promises — 
so-called — made by the current government of Alberta, they’re 
now, they’re now having to say well, we’re just not going to get 
there. Alberta may delay the business tax cut, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we are working day and night in this 
government and with the people of Saskatchewan to meet the 
commitments made in the 1990 campaign to grow this 
economy, to make this the province of opportunity in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Issues and Staffing 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, prior to the 1999 election 
people in this province were critically concerned about the 
number of health care professionals. And so the NDP promised 
that they would hire 500 new health care professionals. And 

these were going to include nurses and doctors and other 
specialized professionals. 
 
And so what have we had instead? There’s a critical shortage of 
doctors in many fields. We have almost 1,200 fewer nurses 
practising in the province now than we had then. We have a 
critical shortage of technologists, laboratory and radiology; and 
you know that the exodus of midwives have resulted, with only 
one left in the entire province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has studied, and made 
promises, and studied, and made promises. How in the world 
can this government stand up to those promises in light of their 
record? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the current minister say how his promises to 
deliver health care professionals are going to be any more 
believable than the broken promises of the NDP’s past? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a real pleasure to get up 
here this afternoon and say that I came from a meeting this 
morning — where that member opposite was present as well — 
at the Saskatchewan association of health care organizations. 
Those people are excited about our action plan for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That plan includes working with all the 
people in the health system and in our educational systems to 
make sure that we have the right professionals for our health 
care system in this province. 
 
I would like to work with the people who have a positive 
attitude about our province. I would ask those people to keep 
quiet if they have nothing good to say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, our questions and concern are 
very simple. How in the world is this government going to 
deliver on its promises to build the action plan for health care in 
the future when none of their promises of the past have been 
kept? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing for this government to make 
promises idly after doing a study and then having a new 
committee. In ’99 they had a surgical waiting list committee. 
Now that they had another study and they’ve announced last 
week another committee that are going to deal with surgical 
waiting lists. And they promised that they were going to reduce 
them by 30 per cent. And what’s happened? They’ve almost 
doubled in the interval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t going to be enough to just have a sunny 
disposition. What you have to do is have a plan that is 
believable for this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, how in the world is this 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

minister going to address these critical issues when he’s lost 
1,200 registered and psychiatric nurses who are needed to man 
the operating rooms and recovery rooms of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a plan on this side 
of the House. The Premier and I were very proud to present that 
plan to the Romanow Commission while my friend opposite 
had no plan. They didn’t present anything about the future of 
our health care system in Canada. I ask them, put their plans 
out. We’ve been listening to all the people of Saskatchewan. 
We would like to hear what they have to say. 
 
What we are going to do is build on what we have built so far. 
We’re going to work with the people who want to build. We’re 
not going to be distracted by those people who have nothing 
positive to say about this province. We believe in this province, 
we believe in our people, and we’re going to build this province 
with our people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the one thing that this NDP 
government has a lot of is plans. They make them every year or 
so and then they never follow through and deliver on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, what I should do is start a file 
called good words and good intentions because that’s what we 
get from this government is a lot of good words and good 
intentions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but where is the concrete evidence of results? This 
province, Mr. Speaker, needs results. Mr. Speaker, they 
promised that they were going to implement a system that is 
going to have appropriate treatment times. And now we hear in 
the paper where people are being treated on gurneys in the 
hallways, that the operating rooms are understaffed, that the 
emergency rooms are understaffed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t good enough to sit here and keep 
articulating all these good plans and good intentions. The 
people of this province want results. When is this government 
going to give concrete results to the people who deserve it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in this legislature 
now almost seven years, the same time as the member opposite, 
and I would like to thank him finally for acknowledging that we 
do have a very good plan for health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — So I would like to thank him for that. 
 
The results that we have in this province show that we are going 
in the right direction. We are providing care for our people right 
across the province, and we are doing this in a very careful, 
balanced manner. 
 

We know that if we had followed the recommendation that they 
had in their budget plans in the ’99 election, we would be into a 
freeze and we would have some major, major problems in how 
we deal with the issues in our province. 
 
What we are going to do is make sure that we work together 
with the professionals and with all of the people throughout the 
province to make sure we have the best health care plan that we 
can for everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Resources for Law Enforcement 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice over there. In the 1999 
provincial election, Mr. Speaker, the NDP promised to hire 200 
more RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and municipal 
police. They said this would help reduce crime and it’s a good 
plan. 
 
But what did they do? What did they do? Since 1999, the NDP 
have hired only 45 new police officers — 45 new police 
officers — one-quarter the number that they said they would. 
Since then, crime rates are going up. Regina’s the crime capital 
of Canada. Who knows where else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell this House, this House, why 
he’s broken the promise not to hire 200 more police officers for 
Saskatchewan to keep it a safe, good province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad the 
member asked me this question because it gives me the 
opportunity to tell him once again and the people of 
Saskatchewan how much of a commitment this government has 
put into policing. 
 
In the last four years, Mr. Speaker, a $14 million increase in 
policing, the largest ever in this province. We have, Mr. 
Speaker, the first time in five years, every single spot in the 
RCMP filled; 140 new police officers on the streets, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province. And the government has also added 
46 . . . as he said, 45 new police officers. I ask the member 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, to have a little bit of patience, wait for 
the budget, and he will see how far we’ve gone in committing 
this . . . in fulfilling this promise, and we still have two more 
years left yet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
the people of Saskatchewan that are waiting. Half the mandate 
is over, one-quarter of the people have been hired. That’s not 
what they expect. They want all of those people promised, they 
want them hired. It’s a question of priorities, Mr. Speaker. $28 
million lost on SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) would have hired a lot of police 
officers. 
 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — They went ahead and went into competition 
with private security firms. That money would have hired a lot 
of police officers to make this place safer. Instead of investing 
millions in these sorts of things, the government could have 
spent that and spent it well keeping their own promise, one they 
are not keeping at this particular point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today that they will have 
enough resources from his cabinet, that he has enough clout to 
get those resources to meet at least half the commitment that 
they made in 1999? Will you hire at least another 55 police 
officers this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me remind the 
member: 147 new RCMP officers across this province; 45 new 
police officers straight from this commitment, Mr. Speaker; a 
record spending on policing ever in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And what did this party opposite during the last election 
promise for policing and crime control, Mr. Speaker — zero. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Finances 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s turn to another one of those broken promises. 
Let’s turn to 1999 when the then premier, Roy Romanow and 
Mr. Lingenfelter and Mrs. MacKinnon indicated that we were 
going to have balanced budgets and less debt — balanced 
budgets and less debts. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, very recently the Finance minister revealed 
the third quarter financial report. And I want to turn to that 
report, Mr. Speaker, because what he says is that as of March 
31, 2002, this government will have a deficit, a deficit of $478 
million — 478 million. 
 
On the other side, Mr. Speaker, we talk about debt. The debt of 
this government was projected to be 11 point . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — . . . wanted to talk about debt — 11.1 in the 
mid-term. We projected that debt to go to 11.5 billion — that’s 
what the Finance minister said. Now it’s been revised to 11.4 
billion — $300 million more, Mr. Speaker. Even at a time when 
we’ve just sold $200 million worth of Cameco shares. Mr. 
Premier, why have you broken . . . 
 
The Speaker: — By and large it’s been going pretty well, but 
every once in a while members slip up. Would you kindly 
remember to address all your questions through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the 
opposition member would say he’s concerned about deficit and 
debt because his leader, when he released his so-called plan for 
the province, said what? He said that this province should do 
exactly what they’re doing in the province of British Columbia. 
 

What are they doing in the province of British Columbia? Less 
services, Mr. Speaker, more tax, and more debt — this year a 
$4.4 billion deficit, Mr. Speaker. That’s where British 
Columbia is going. Where we’re going, Mr. Speaker, is in the 
right direction. 
 
The member wants to talk about deficit and debt. I want to 
quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Dominion Bond Rating Service 
which had this to say, Mr. Speaker, quoted in The Globe and 
Mail on November 23 last year. Only the federal government, 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, and PEI (Prince Edward Island) have 
managed to reduce its debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Good enough for the bond-rating agencies, 
not good enough for the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this government should know 
that if you take in less money than you spend it’s called a 
deficit. 
 
I want to quote from that very same Dominion Bond Rating 
company, and I quote from the February 19, 2002 issue. The 
quote is this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Dominion Bond Rating Service assistant vice-president 
Geneviève Lavallée said there is no way to categorize 
Saskatchewan’s budgetary situation this year other than a 
deficit. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how can the minister stand after he said in 
the Throne Speech, this government has said there will be less 
debt, there will be no reliance on deficit, when we indeed have a 
$478 million deficit that has been confirmed by the Dominion 
Bond Rating company. How can you answer that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as usual the opposition 
gets up as though they’ve got some kind of exposé from the 
Dominion Bond Rating Service. If they ever did their 
homework, Mr. Speaker, they would know that the Dominion 
Bond Rating Service, in August of last year, published a 
statement whereby, Mr. Speaker, they said that on a cash basis 
we had a deficit for the current year and they said we had 
deficits in ’97-98 and ’95-96. That’s what they said, Mr. 
Speaker. On a cash basis we have a deficit — no problem with 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the member wants to talk about debt. I want to quote to the 
member opposite an article from The StarPhoenix, dated March 
7, where the Provincial Auditor says this, Mr. Speaker. He says: 
 

The New Democrats have reduced the province’s 
accumulated deficit by $2.7 billion since 1993. Debt as a 
percentage of the provincial economy has dropped from 49 
per cent to 24 per cent. 
 

Debt has dropped, Mr. Speaker. But unless it has the Stockwell 
Day or Gordon Campbell stamp of approval on it, they won’t 
accept it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Proclamation of The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you will 
give me just a minute, Mr. Speaker, I’ll find my pieces of paper. 
Here we are. Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Maybe more cars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to make a statement today regarding 
the proclamation of The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 
2001, which all members of this House will be interested in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, keeping our communities safe is a top priority of 
this government. We’re specially committed to protecting 
children, our most valuable and important resource in our 
communities. It’s a shameful fact, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, 
that there are people who exploit children and youth through the 
sex trade. I’m pleased to announce this government is taking 
steps to deter those who cruise our streets and neighbourhoods 
for the purposes of buying sexual services from our youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased today to announce that The Highway 
Traffic Amendment, 2001 will be proclaimed on April 1, 2002. 
This legislation, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, gives the police 
the authority to seize and impound vehicles if there’s a 
reasonable belief that the vehicle was used to commit an 
offence under sections 211, 212, or 213 of the Criminal Code. 
These sections, Mr. Speaker, relate to procuring sexual services 
and prostitution. 
 
If any person in the vehicle at the time of seizure is convicted of 
one of these offences, the vehicle will be automatically forfeited 
to the Crown, Mr. Speaker. If the owner of the vehicle has been 
charged with one of these offences, he will get it back only if no 
one in the car is convicted or if everyone in the vehicle attends 
an approved program generally known as a johns school. 
 
These programs educate offenders about their impact on 
prostitutes and their families as well as on the community. 
Offenders must accept responsibility for their offence before 
they’re allowed into the programs. The offender will be 
responsible for all program fees, as well as the towing and 
impound costs associated with the seizure of the vehicle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should point out that this option — the option of 
attending the johns school and the option of being able to obtain 
the car back — is not available if the offence relates to a child 
under the age of 18 or if the offender is a repeat offender. 
Further, those who enrol in but don’t complete the approved 
johns school program, Mr. Speaker, will also have their driver’s 
licences suspended for one year. And those convicted of 
prostitution-related offences involving the vehicle will face a 
licence suspension of one year for the first offence and two 
years for a subsequent offence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know we’ve developed this legislation in 
response to the recommendations of the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation Of Children Through the 
Sex Trade. One of the problems identified by the special 
committee is the prevalence of street prostitution in residential 
areas. Children exposed to this activity on a regular basis in 

their communities increases . . . this increases their risk of 
involvement in the sex trade. As well, Mr. Speaker, children in 
areas where street prostitution flourishes are at a serious risk of 
being approached or accosted by individuals seeking sexual 
services. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will significantly 
reduce the car traffic associated . . . the vehicular traffic in the 
stroll areas and improve the quality of life for those living in 
those areas, as well, Mr. Speaker, as keeping children safe. As I 
said, Mr. Speaker, keeping communities safe is one of our top 
priorities and this legislation will give police another tool to 
protect children, deter offenders, and keep our streets and 
neighbourhoods safe for everyone. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy as are my colleagues 
on this side of the House that the government is finally 
proclaiming The Highway Traffic Amendment Act. It is one of 
many measures necessary to deter those who are engaging in a 
violent crime against Saskatchewan children — the crime of 
sexual abuse and exploitation through the sex trade. 
 
This legislation is a measure that the Saskatchewan Party and I 
have been pushing the government to implement for two years. 
The need for it is without question. Without the measures to 
protect our children and to deter offenders, there will be a 
continued . . . continued incidents of permanent, physical, 
emotional, and psychological damages inflicted on our children 
who are subject to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan who have presented 
their views and ideas on combating the sexual exploitation of 
children have spoken loud and clear through the provincial 
committee hearings of their support for the confiscation of 
vehicles as an important measure to deter offenders who are 
charged and convicted. This legislation is long overdue, but it is 
certainly welcome. 
 
What I was hoping for, Mr. Speaker, and I believe is necessary, 
is a more comprehensive piece of legislation that includes The 
Highway Traffic Amendment Act, but in addition, we need to 
include the minimum, mandatory fine of $25,000 if convicted 
of this offence against our children. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we need to be implementing measures to 
protect and assist children and their families into healing and 
healthier choices for their lives. So there were many other 
measures . . . recommendations that have been put forward by 
the people of Saskatchewan, through the committee that went 
throughout this province that need to be implemented in unison 
with this particular legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice states that this legislation 
gives police the authority to seize and impound vehicles if there 
is a reasonable belief that the vehicle was used to commit an 
offence under sections 211, 212 and 213 of the Criminal Code. 
 
The Committee to Prevent Sexual Abuse and Exploitation of 
Children recommended that the police be given new powers of 
search and seizure. I did not hear the Minister of Justice speak 
of new powers to search vehicles. This is necessary if this new 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

 

Act is truly to be a successful measure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, one other area worthy 
of attention regarding the new legislation is the question of how 
the Crown will use proceeds from the sale of vehicles from 
convicted offenders. 
 
During committee hearings there was a great deal of support 
from people of the province to target the proceeds from the sale 
of vehicles to support the healing of the child victim. And I do 
hope that the government of the day will respond favourably to 
that request. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — By leave to respond, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleagues. I want to congratulate the Minister of Justice and I 
think, fairly, all members of this House, especially the member 
for Humboldt and the member for Greystone. I think the people 
of this province expect that their elected officials will at times 
put partisan differences aside to work together for the good of 
this province. And I believe on this issue, that in fact happened 
and that is a representative democracy at its best. 
 
This is an important measure that I hope and believe will assist 
in suppression of prostitution, especially child prostitution and I 
congratulate the government and the Minister of Justice for 
moving on it. It is important for us to monitor now whether this 
has a real and definite impact. 
 
And I would like to say that while I’m not in favour of all of the 
suggestions made by the hon. member for Humboldt, I do 
believe that the suggestion that impounded cars, the proceeds 
therefrom, should be used for a shelter and for treatment for the 
victims is indeed an excellent suggestion and I do hope that the 
Attorney General will follow up on that. 
 
But I believe that this is a good day for this Assembly and for 
the elected representatives of this province and I hope that this 
measure will indeed advance the social environment of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 

The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I would 
like to bring to the members’ attention that I am tabling the 
report of an opinion and recommendations after an inquiry 
pursuant to section 30 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Act, which has been supplied to me on Friday by G.L. Gerrand, 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply, which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure again to enter into this debate and take a few more 
moments to just respond to the Throne Speech debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said in the few short moments I had on Friday 
before adjournment, that in many cases as you look through this 
Throne Speech and what the NDP government in the past has 
promised and their actions, on most occasions you would have 
to say their actions speak louder than words in the realities of 
what they do and don’t do in regards to their promises. And my 
colleague, the member from Melfort, mentioned that in the area 
of health care we saw it. The member from Rosthern was 
talking about their actions and their commitment to policing and 
the safety in our society. 
 
However I will have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that one area — and 
we’ve just seen it this afternoon — that we can agree with them 
on the government, is coming forward with steps to deal with 
child prostitution and how we begin to address this factor. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, a recent article by a noted columnist talked 
about MLAs and their remuneration and the workload and the 
question was: are we getting what we pay for? And I believe the 
member for North Battleford just pointed out the fact of the 
work of the committee in dealing with the issue of prostitution. 
And I’m pleased to say that the Minister of Justice this morning 
has finally acted on legislation last year to deal with a number 
of . . . some of the concerns that were raised and suggestions 
coming out of the committee that was addressing that 
prostitution issue. 
 
So on that hand, I think, Mr. Speaker, we would like to say that 
we acknowledge what is being proposed and we want to 
compliment the government for moving forward. And we trust 
that we’ll be able to, through the committee’s report that we 
saw last session, move forward in a number of areas that would 
address the serious problem and address the needs of young 
people on the streets in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, however, when we look at this Throne Speech 
there is still a fair bit lacking in the Throne Speech in regards to 
a game plan that will really build our economy, build our 
province, and give people a reason to, not only stay in this 
province, continue to call it home if this is where they’re from, 
they’ve been born and raised here, educated here, but as well, 
Mr. Speaker, giving people who have moved out of the 
province who would like to come back to the province a reason 
to return to this province. 
 
And this recent Throne Speech is certainly lacking in that area. 
In fact, I would have to say the government’s actions certainly 
speak louder than words. While they continue to talk about the 
need to build and grow our province, we have yet to see a 
serious game plan that would certainly do that. 
 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

I want to talk about a game plan. There’s no doubt, Mr. 
Speaker, that if we’re going to build this province we need to 
create an environment for investment. We need to create an 
environment where investment opportunities, and whether it’s 
from out of the province, or maybe, Mr. Speaker, within the 
province. I believe we’re known as one of the capitals for the 
largest levels of savings, when it comes to our retired 
community, almost anywhere in the world. And this is what it 
says. Mr. Speaker, there’s resources available, if we created the 
environment that gave people the opportunity to actually take 
their investment and place it back and allow it to work in their 
own province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech talks about economic growth 
in Saskatchewan continuing to be led by the private sector and 
private investment. And then it goes on to say: 
 

However, public policy and government initiatives can 
serve as a catalyst to investment. 

 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is the part that scares business 
and the business community away from this province because 
every time they make an investment, such as the wind 
generation investment in the Gull Lake area, as soon as it’s 
proven in the private sector that it can work, then all of a 
sudden we see that our Crown corporation, our Crown utilities, 
decide that they can do the job better. And rather than letting 
private investment come into the province and taxation then be 
put into the hands of . . . the Finance department’s hand so that 
we can meet the needs of health and education, the government 
decides that it can do a better job, and instead it takes our tax 
dollars to invest them in the capital that is much . . . the capital 
investment that is needed, rather than allowing the private 
sector to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about economic development, let’s 
not just think of the large corporate sector out there that may be 
looking at investing in this province. Let’s look at the 
individuals of this province. And the reason I say that, I want to 
bring to the attention of this Assembly today the community of 
Wolseley, for example, last fall, early last fall, were looking at 
something that they could bring to their community that would 
create jobs, especially when Abbott Laboratories pulled out of 
the community and 40 people found themselves without a job. 
 
And the mayor and the economic development group in the 
community said, well should we just take this lying down, or 
should we maybe look at . . . and see if there are other avenues 
we can explore to create investment in our community, and 
actually initiate some job development? 
 
And after some searching, they heard that possibly West 
Central Pelleting at Unity was looking at expanding its plant. 
And so they approached West Central Pelleting. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what West Central Pelleting had indicated to them 
that, well they had reached capacity in their plant, that if they 
were going to expand the business that was already there, 
coming their way, they would have to expand their plant. 
 
The unfortunate part was to expand the plant meant they had to 
go further afield for the feedstocks for the pelleting plant which 
started to cut into the real dollar value and the profit level at the 
plant. And so they, West Central said, well sure, we’d be 

willing . . . we’d really be happy to come down to your 
community. We’ll make a presentation and we’ll see whether 
there are enough people in that area who believe that we could 
be a major economic contributor to your community. 
 
And so as I said, Mr. Speaker, early last fall a public meeting 
was held, and at the time the organizers thought they might 
have a hundred, a hundred and fifty people show up for this 
public meeting. When the evening of the meeting arrived, Mr. 
Speaker, and I had the privilege of attending that meeting, there 
must have been in excess of 400 individuals had come out to 
the public meeting. 
 
And as a result of that public meeting, a go-ahead was given for 
the local committee to . . . (inaudible) . . . to the Securities 
Commission and get the authority to raise the funds that they 
needed for the capital investment for this plant to proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I liked about their proposal is that they put 
their share offering in increments that even just the average 
ordinary wage earner could invest in the plant, could have a bit 
of an ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to tell this Assembly today that as of 
last Saturday when another public rally was put together, 
because they were within a few days of meeting the 
requirements of their . . . the issue from the Securities 
Commission, when they arrived last Saturday to a house full of 
people again, Mr. Speaker, the 900-plus thousand dollars they 
needed for that capital investment, for that local investment had 
already been raised. In fact, they’d exceeded the 900 million . . . 
or $900,000, Mr. Speaker. And so as I understand it, they have 
gone to the Securities Commission for an extension so that 
everyone who would like to invest in that plant has the 
opportunity. 
 
What that says, Mr. Speaker, it tells us that people, if given the 
opportunity to invest in their community, are more than willing 
to do it. And we don’t need that large 50 or 100,000 or million 
dollar investment that we tend to always look for. Local people, 
if given the opportunity, are willing to invest in their 
communities. Why? Because they believe in their community. 
Because they want the school to continue to succeed. Because 
they want to see their hospitals and their doctors stay in the 
community. Because they want their young people to stay. 
 
And when I say the community, Mr. Speaker, I don’t refer just 
to the town of Wolseley. But as I was talking to one of the 
individuals who was kind of spearheading this project, the 
investments made in that project are probably anywhere from 
50 to a hundred miles away in that . . . pretty well a hundred 
mile radius of the community of Wolseley which shows the 
commitment of the people to that project and the fact that they 
look at it as a regional project rather than just a community 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to talk about another investment 
opportunity and the pursuit of the economic development group 
in the community of Moosomin. And they are currently just got 
underway to try and raise the funds, and I believe they need 
roughly $1 million there as well, to build for Purelean Hogs to 
come to the community and build one of what they are talking 
of down the road, maybe five or six or seven hog barns in the 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

 

area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we hear about hog barns, 
automatically we think about the stench, we think about the 
smell, and, Mr. Speaker, what most people, as soon as they 
think of that, they really don’t want a hog barn in the vicinity. 
But let me just fill you in and some of your . . . some of the 
government members are aware of what the Purelean concept of 
hog production is all about. And what the Purelean group has 
done, Mr. Speaker; they have addressed two concerns. They 
have addressed the concerns of the animal rights group. They 
have also addressed the concerns of the environmentalists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may ask . . . members may ask, how? Well, 
they have done it in two ways. They’ve taken the concept of 
raising hogs from that small, confined penning area to a larger 
confined penning area which can house up to 2,000 hogs with 
ample room for the hogs to get their exercise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then as well, Mr. Speaker, they take the waste and rather 
than investing and putting thousands of dollars into digging a 
pit and covering it over so you don’t have that offensive odour, 
they actually take the waste and they put it into a composting 
mechanism system, Mr. Speaker. And after 21 days, that waste 
material actually turns into an economic benefit as it is then 
packaged and sold through private retailers back to housewives, 
or to greenhouses as a fertilizer to be used in the growing of 
food and other products, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we see; we see an economic spinoff — another 
economic spinoff. And when you build . . . they’ll look at hog 
barns. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the hog barn, it’s not just the 
composting process and that revenue that flows in from the 
barn, but as far as the regional area — when they look at hog 
barns, it’s the trucking, it’s the feed mill processing that as well 
creates job opportunities for those areas, for those communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we can look all across . . . all around this 
province and we see where megaprojects in the hog barn 
industry — hog production industry — have added value — 
economic value, and job opportunities in communities all across 
the province of Saskatchewan. So I certainly want to wish the 
economic development community in Moosomin well in their 
endeavours as they pursue another avenue of economic 
development for this community. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? I say that because I want 
to point out to the members of this Assembly and to those who 
may be listening that we, we need to create avenues whereby 
local investment and local individuals have an opportunity in 
the small-business community to build their community versus 
always relying on the large entrepreneur or corporation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech unfortunately does not 
necessarily address all of those avenues. And that’s why, that’s 
why the Saskatchewan Party Grow Saskatchewan plan talks 
about working with small individuals, talks about levelling the 
taxation field and the corporate and business tax so that 
individuals and groups and companies can look at investing in 
this province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to talk about building the province. A 
number of years ago, a fair . . . a large investment was put into 
the uranium industry. And I notice this Throne Speech talks 
about our natural resources. And it’s imperative that we look at 
the natural resources that are a part of this province, that we 
look at how we can build on those natural resources, and we can 
add value to the natural resources so that the economic spinoff 
and jobs stay in the province. 
 
And yet the other day the member from Greystone was 
suggesting we should shut down the uranium industry. I’m 
wondering, Mr. Speaker, if that same member would like to tell 
the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and 
First Nations community that the 60 per cent-plus jobs working 
in those . . . in the uranium industry should be shut down as 
well. I don’t think so. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s why the Saskatchewan Party talks 
about working with the First Nations community of this 
province, to build on this province. And part of that building is 
enhancing uranium development. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we were to look at . . . We all remember 
last spring the state of California was short power. If we would 
have expanded and built on the resource we had here, we might 
have been in a position to really enhance the economic ability 
of this province through power generation as a result of the 
uranium industry we have here. Unfortunately, with the 
ideology of the NDP government that basically sits and we’re 
continued to be just hewers of wood and drawers of water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also talk a little about highway 
development. And in this Throne Speech — and I will give the 
government credit here — the government talks about a 
three-year commitment to $900 million over three years to 
expand highway construction maintenance to the area of 700 
kilometres of highway over the next three years. In that regard, 
I will give the government credit for that because we do need a 
plan to address the atrocious state of the highways of this 
province. While that plan is a little lower than their commitment 
investment last year, Mr. Speaker, it still lets the construction 
community know that this government and that this province is 
going to put some money into highway construction. 
 
The one thing, Mr. Speaker, I will be watching very carefully is 
the Minister of Highways. And in the budget speech . . . The 
Throne Speech talks about working with municipalities. And 
while we have a new Minister of Highways, maybe he’s had the 
opportunity to already take a look at some of the proposals that 
have come in from the regional transportation authority. Mr. 
Speaker, the atrocious state of the No. 47 and No. 48 Highways 
in my constituency, the southeast transportation authority has 
come up with some commendable ideas. 
 
And while I may not necessarily agree that municipalities and 
local governments should be assisting in building provincial 
highways, the facts are the need for those highways to be built 
and rebuilt is imperative for tourism and economic development 
along those highways. And I’m hoping that the Minister of 
Highways and his department have looked very favourably at 
the proposals that have been coming in from the regional 
transportation authorities — certainly the one in my 
constituency which I should be speaking for. 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will be waiting with a bated breath for the 
debate . . . budget address on Wednesday, March 27. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well . . . and I should make a comment about 
my colleagues here but no, I won’t. Mr. Speaker, one other 
thing I would like to talk a little bit about. This Throne Speech 
talks about rural revitalization. And the Premier talks about a 
committee that they have been sending around the province to 
address the depopulation of our rural community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I spent about 10 days at 
40-plus meetings, meeting with people. And one thing we heard 
from people across this province, if we want to see our rural 
communities revitalized, people want to know that they’re 
going to have access to quality health care. They want to know 
that they’re going to have schools available so that when people 
move, and young people move into job opportunities, they will 
have the places, the buildings where the young people can 
receive their education. And companies want to know that 
they’re going to have access to acute health care facilities 
should that be needed as a result of possibly an industrial 
accident that every once in a while unfortunately happens. 
 
So I want to ask this government, on behalf of the community 
of Moosomin, where their commitment is to their new hospital. 
And, Mr. Speaker, here again, the reason I raise that is because 
rural communities pay . . . put in 35 per cent of the capital 
construction, the capital cost, into their health facilities. And the 
community of Moosomin and the region around Moosomin 
were told that they, yes, they were in desperate need of a new 
hospital, a new heavy-care facility, but they had to raise 35 per 
cent of the funds. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that as of today 
basically the 35 per cent of those funds are already in place and 
we’re just waiting for the Minister of Health and this Premier to 
say to the community of Moosomin, it’s time to move ahead. 
 
I want to say one other thing about that project in Moosomin, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Premier joined with the 
community and joined me at that . . . when we’re all aware of 
that effort to . . . actually to have the longest hockey game and 
enter it into The Guinness Book of Records, back in November 
of 2001. And the Premier was there to drop the puck for that 
last period of hockey. And while the Moosomin Moose, the 
local recreation team, hockey team, when they were planning 
this big event were thinking to themselves, well maybe . . . I 
wonder if we could raise 10 or $20,000 toward our new 
hospital. It might be commendable if we can do that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I speak, over $120,000 was raised in the 
local area. And what is so positive and what people feel so good 
about in the project, is it’s not just Moosomin, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s seven communities — a couple in . . . on the border, in 
Manitoba, and all the surrounding municipalities. And even the 
players on the ice represented this large area. It shows a 
regional commitment to a health care facility that is desperately 
needed. 
 
And all we are looking for, and what they were looking for 
from the Premier is the Premier to say, well you’ve done a 
commendable job; yes, the money is there. The former Minister 
of Health indicated the money was there. And, Mr. Speaker, so 
while that answer hasn’t come forward as yet we will be 
looking forward to hearing what the Minister of Health has, and 

what the Minister of Finance has in this budget address next 
week in regards to that community hospital and the 
commitment to health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly much more that I can say, much 
more that I can add in pointing out the faults of this Throne 
Speech. However my colleagues are telling me they’d like to 
get in a few words as well. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to take my place having brought forward some of the areas that 
I feel need to be addressed. And I would like to as well, Mr. 
Speaker, before I sit down, move a motion seconded by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That the following words be added after the word, session: 
 

however this Assembly expresses its non-confidence in the 
provincial government which has failed to put forward a 
plan to deal with the growing crisis of out-migration from 
our province and a lack of economic growth caused by the 
short-sighted policies of the current Premier and cabinet. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Debate continues concurrently. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, of course it is good to be back into the House and back 
into another session of the legislature. It’s been quite some 
time. Much has happened and, of course, much is required in 
Saskatchewan to meet the challenges of the future. 
 
But before I get into a discussion of the Speech from the 
Throne, which we heard last week, I would like to offer my 
sincere welcome to the new member of the Legislative 
Assembly, the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld. It’s always 
exciting when you have the opportunity to first enter an 
Assembly like this and be able to serve the people of your 
constituency. And so I wish the hon. member well in this new 
role. 
 
The hon. member fills big shoes. The seat was formerly held by 
Janice MacKinnon who was a long-time member of the NDP 
caucus and certainly a member of the Romanow cabinet for 
many, many years. She also showed some courage. She was 
appointed to the cabinet and she saw the government heading in 
the wrong direction and she asked her colleagues to change that 
direction. She saw a deficit coming, she saw spending out of 
control, she saw the fiasco of the Information Services 
Corporation, and she let her colleagues know; they didn’t listen 
and she did the honourable thing and she removed herself from 
that government. 
 
So I would challenge the new member to uphold the same 
standard of commitment to the province of Saskatchewan and to 
his constituents, the people of Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to look at the current state of the province 
to know what future and what direction we need to strike out 
on. Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked at the population numbers 
recently revealed by the census that occurred in the year 2001 
and we’ve seen that Saskatchewan has seen a substantial loss of 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

 

people over that five-year period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to transport ourselves from the years 
1996 to year 2001. And these were basically for Canada, as a 
whole, very good years. Even in agriculture, there was some 
good crops and some fairly respectable prices during that period 
of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the census occurred before the drought. Can’t 
blame the drought on those population numbers. That census 
occurred before the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center 
in New York. Can’t blame September 11, 2001 for the 
population loss. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, those census numbers show that 
Saskatchewan lost a substantial amount, several thousand 
people, from the level that we were at in the year 1996. Mr. 
Speaker, these are Saskatchewan citizens that no longer reside 
in our province. They live in other provinces, many of them in 
Alberta. Some have gone to Manitoba, some have gone to 
Ontario and further abroad. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there will always be a coming and going of 
people to and from Saskatchewan. But the measure of success 
for a government is whether more people are coming to your 
province than leaving the province. And that is where this NDP 
government has failed so miserably, because thousands and 
thousands of people are leaving and they’re leaving for the 
wrong reasons. They’re not leaving to make the rest of the 
world a better place, to raise it up to Saskatchewan standards. 
They’re leaving Saskatchewan because it’s not affording them 
the opportunities that they need to make a life for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I looked at those census numbers I was also 
astounded by the fact that it’s not just rural Saskatchewan that is 
suffering from population loss. Had we have been listening to 
the NDP and buying every word they gave us, we would have 
thought that the entire problem was in rural Saskatchewan, just 
people leaving the smaller communities, leaving the agriculture 
sector — and in fact, if it wasn’t for the vagaries of the weather 
and the problem of low prices, Saskatchewan would be 
growing; we’d be booming as a province. Well, Mr. Speaker, it 
was quite an eye-opener to see that the city of Regina had lost 
people. In fact, most of our major cities, other than a couple of 
them, including Saskatoon, had lost population from the year 
1996 to the year 2001. Mr. Speaker, this does not cast a good 
light on our NDP government. 
 
So you look at population — not good. Then you move over to 
the job creation side of the ledger and again, Mr. Speaker, as we 
mentioned in question period, the numbers are rather . . . not 
dismal, but disastrous. We had a government that made a 
clear-cut promise. And I know the other day, I believe it was 
the Minister of Economic Development said, well no, it wasn’t 
a promise, it was just a target. So you know, kind of a goal out 
there that they hope to hit. He almost made it sound like he was 
at a hockey game, you know, where you shoot the puck and try 
to hit that little hole — wasn’t much chance of ever hitting it, 
but it was kind of nice to mention it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:00) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I looked at the document, read their platform 

and it said, we . . . Mr. Speaker, it said, we will. One place it 
said, we will; another place it said, we’ll. Either way, it means 
that they made an ironclad commitment to create 30,000 jobs 
over a five-year period. Mr. Speaker, not only have they failed, 
they’ve been moving this province in the other direction. This 
province now has many, many thousands fewer jobs than it had 
when the 1999 election occurred. 
 
If you use what was promised versus where we are now over a 
year ago, we’re 43,000 . . . or 1999, we’re 43,000 jobs behind 
target. If you move back farther, we’re . . . to the high point in 
job creation, we have even more jobs to make to hit their target 
of approximately 525,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a government . . . an NDP government loses 
credibility when it makes plans that not only can it not reach but 
has no plan to reach at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the Crown boondoggles over the past 
year and over the past few years. We look at the potato fiasco. 
And now that the numbers are starting to be finalized, we see 
that the NDP lost $28 million over their foolish investment in 
the potato industry, thinking that they could farm better than the 
farmers; thinking that they could belong in an industry better 
than the industry players themselves. And of course their 
argument was that it will create jobs. 
 
So we looked at the jobs that were created. And guess what, Mr. 
Speaker. Nine jobs. Nine jobs created with a loss of $28 
million. Plus a few part-time jobs that just sort of come and go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned, in welcoming the new member to the 
Assembly, the problem that the Information Services 
Corporation has experienced. Mr. Speaker, the ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) was 
supposed to be a state of the art computerization of land titles. 
A computerized system of course is a wise thing to do; other 
provinces were far ahead of Saskatchewan. Under the NDP, we 
had lagged behind. 
 
But the NDP decided it wasn’t good enough to spend $1 million 
or $2 million to buy a program off the shelf from Manitoba or 
Alberta or British Columbia. They had to design their own 
program; they had to start from scratch. You know, perhaps 
they can make a rounder wheel than the wheel that was already 
in place somewhere else. They were going to try to invent the 
perfect round wheel, Mr. Speaker, and in fact what we got was 
a lump. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we got a Crown corporation that has gone way 
over budget; caused the resignation of Janice MacKinnon; has 
not yet functioned properly. And the Agriculture minister 
laughs, but he knows it’s true. I think the laugh is just an 
indication that he’s caught up short on this one, that this has 
been a fiasco, and he’s trying to decide how he can cover it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ISC is not only working, it’s not marketable to 
other jurisdictions. It’s been a huge boondoggle. 
 
Not only are the Crowns in trouble with some of the wild 
adventures that they’ve tried to pursue, but as a whole there’s 
growing debt in the Crowns. And of course, who holds the 
mortgage on all these debts? Well when it’s a Crown 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

corporation it’s the people of Saskatchewan who are left 
holding the mortgage on these huge debts because they are not 
managed well by the NDP. 
 
Speaking of finance, Mr. Speaker, it became so clear in 
question period today, so clear, that Saskatchewan is 
experiencing deficit financing again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Roy Romanow prided himself on balancing the 
budget. And Roy Romanow and I disagreed on many, many 
things, but you couldn’t argue with the man on the importance 
of balancing the budget. It’s something that the Saskatchewan 
Party heartily concurs with. 
 
It’s important to balance the budget. We need to be fiscally 
responsible. We need to make sure that our expenses are in line 
with our revenues. Mr. Speaker, we do that in our households; 
we do that in our community organizations. Local 
municipalities are very cautious and careful to balance their 
budgets. 
 
But lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, we changed premiers in 
Saskatchewan and as my colleague, the member for 
Canora-Pelly so wonderfully illustrated in question period 
today, the Dominion Bond Rating agency last year said that we 
have, we have a surplus; this year they say we have a huge, 
huge deficit. Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister could not 
counteract that. These are the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I could spend a lot of time — I want my colleagues also to 
have an opportunity to speak so I won’t go into detail — but the 
NDP government has failed in health care. We have waiting 
lists now of more than 30,000 people; we’ve lost 1,200 nurses 
from the nursing profession. Mr. Speaker, health care has never 
been in more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It seems that there are several 
members that want to get in on the act here. I’m wondering if 
you would allow at this time the Leader of the Opposition to 
make his remarks. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems like the 
member from Prince Albert, the Economic Development 
minister, just can’t wait his turn. But we’ll be patient and we’ll 
stay here until we have a chance to explain very clearly the 
shortcomings of his NDP government. 
 
I talked about the failures in health, and it’s horrendous. We 
have conditions, working conditions in our hospitals that are 
comparable to many Third World situations, with people being 
treated on gurneys in hallways, with people in pain because 
they are denied the health care that they need and need in an 
expedient fashion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we could also look at education. The NDP 
government and the Minister of Education has said that he 
expects that there will be 35,000 fewer students in 
Saskatchewan by the year 2010, the end of this decade. And he 
accepts that as a fact; he accepts that as being something that 
can’t be changed. He just says we are going to have to manage 
the decline of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not satisfied with seeing Saskatchewan 

continue to lose people, including the loss of students, including 
the loss of schoolteachers, including the loss of a tax base that 
this province so desperately needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And I’ll talk a little later about our plan to 
turn that around. I’ll tell the minister from P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Northcote our plan if he will just be a little bit patient, if he’ll 
stay seated in his seat. If he’ll settle down, keep his emotions 
under control, I’ll get to my plan in a few minutes. 
 
But first of all we have to paint the landscape so that those 
members over there see how bad a situation they have created. 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that is prepared to see 
the loss of 35 students from our . . . 35,000 students from our 
education system. No fight, no plan to quell it. Just accept it as 
fait accompli. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could talk about agriculture and I could 
talk about the Minister of Agriculture’s failure when it comes to 
dealing with our safety net programs — the fact that we now 
have a weaker crop insurance program promised for the coming 
year, at a time when producers need a stronger crop insurance 
program; a crop insurance program that has just deleted 
spot-loss hail; a crop insurance program that has just removed 
variable rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture minister should be ashamed of his 
performance. Mr. Speaker, if he can’t do better than that he 
should step aside. Perhaps one of his colleagues could do better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, in question period today the 
Justice critic for the Saskatchewan Party, the hon. member for 
Rosthern, pointed out that this government has failed to keep its 
commitments to provide safe streets for the province and the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has 
failed to keep its promise of hiring 200 police officers. They’re 
so far behind that it appears — and we heard no commitment 
from the Minister of Justice that would correct that impression 
— that they’re not going to be able to meet their target of hiring 
200 police officers from the time they made the promise in the 
1999 election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is yipping and 
yelling at me, the Minister of Economic Development can 
hardly stay in his seat he’s so upset by the truth, and other 
members are chatting as well over there and making some 
uncomplimentary remarks. So perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I should 
let the press do some of the talking for me. Perhaps they’ll 
listen to the press instead. 
 
And I quote from Randy Burton, who wrote in — maybe it’s 
today’s StarPhoenix, yes, no, Saturday, March the 16, Mr. 
Speaker. And the headline over his column, Straight Talk, is 
“Bright future optical illusion — call an election”. So this is 
what Randy Burton has to say. And by the way, he has a very 
interesting picture of the Premier here in very, very dark 
sunglasses, very dark sunglasses and apparently he is not seeing 
things very clearly, Mr. Speaker, but we won’t get into that. 
 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me quote from Randy Burton: 
 

The future in Saskatchewan is so bright we should all be 
wearing shades, if you can believe the malarkey coming out 
of Regina. 

 
He goes on, farther down to say: 
 

Of course, there is another . . . 
 
He talks about statistics that the Premier placed in the Speech 
from the Throne, which he recognizes as being absolutely 
foolish, and then he goes on to say and I quote: 
 

Of course, there is another side to those statistics. Our 
economic growth is forecast to lag behind the national 
average in the coming year. And while we turn out a lot of 
well-qualified university graduates, most of them plan to 
use their education somewhere else. A survey conducted 
last year by the Canada West Foundation showed that fully 
70 per cent of this province’s university graduates intend to 
seek careers outside the province. 
 
Nearly half . . . 

 
And I’m still quoting Mr. Speaker: 
 

Nearly half of that 18 to 24 year old age group that the 
province is so proud of enrolling in university intends to 
leave Saskatchewan the first chance it gets. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Randy Burton goes on to say: 
 

Saskatchewan (or he says) the . . . government boasts that 
“Saskatchewan is quickly becoming Canada’s province of 
opportunity,” . . . 

 
But he says: 
 

far too many people see it only as a land of memories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Randy Burton, and I’m . . . and I think Randy 
Burton has sensed very well what the people of Saskatchewan 
are saying. He says: 
 

Saskatchewan people are voting with their feet. They have 
lost confidence in the province’s ability to provide them 
with a future and they don’t see any sense of direction 
coming from the provincial government. 

 
Randy Burton says, and I quote: 
 

Rather than taking advantage of a short-term windfall in oil 
and gas revenues to reduce debt and cut taxes, Calvert 
chose to jack up spending by some 7.5 per cent in last 
year’s provincial budget. 
 
Even at that inflated level, he missed his budget targets by 
$450 million. No government in this province has 
miscalculated so wildly since the mid-’80s. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know you’ll want to read the entire article. 
I don’t have time, so I’ll skip down a few paragraphs. And 

again I quote: 
 

Calvert and his cabinet ministers have done everything they 
can to reduce public expectations of government. They 
have put out the message that the economy is in such awful 
shape that lavish settlements with public servants are out of 
the question and that municipalities can forget big increases 
in their grants. 
 
At the same time, the government argues the only real 
problem with the economy is the media and Saskatchewan 
people themselves have a negative attitude. 

 
Randy Burton closes at the end of his column by saying: 
 

What Saskatchewan needs is an agenda for recovery. 
 
What it needs is an election. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the members for 
listening to Randy Burton’s comments over the weekend. 
Perhaps they’ll reflect and do much better when it’s time to 
deliver the budget. And I hope the Minister of Finance was 
listening and will reverse the trend through a better budget than 
we’ve been led to believe will occur. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I came to the legislature on Thursday, the day of 
the Speech from the Throne, looking for a change in direction. 
Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed when I read the Speech from 
the Throne. It contains no plan. It contains no apologies. In fact, 
it just contains more of the same. 
 
People of Saskatchewan, when they read that Speech from the 
Throne, realize there’s no hope coming from this government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at the time . . . during all of this period when 
the NDP have been bankrupt of ideas and have been running 
Saskatchewan in the wrong direction, the Saskatchewan Party 
has been busy talking to Saskatchewan people and developing a 
plan to turn this province around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a plan to grow 
Saskatchewan by 100,000 people over the next 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now I know, Mr. Speaker, because that 
party over there has governed Saskatchewan for most of the last 
67 years, that they just do not believe Saskatchewan can grow 
beyond a million people. They think Saskatchewan is doomed 
to stay at a million people or less. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the rest of Canada can grow, Manitoba can 
grow, Alberta can grow, British Columbia can grow, Ontario is 
growing, the Maritimes are growing. Why is Saskatchewan the 
only province in Canada that’s not growing, along with perhaps 
Newfoundland? Why are we the only two provinces that seem 
to be perennially losing people? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is 
because the government doesn’t think we can grow and so they 
haven’t bothered to put a plan together that would allow us to 
grow. 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has to grow. If we’re going to 
provide health care, if we’re going to provide education so that 
we can care for the Minister of Economic Development in his 
old age when he needs health care, we’re going to have to grow 
this province. 
 
This is our plan to grow Saskatchewan. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, we need lower income taxes in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, a family of four in Saskatchewan — and I hope the 
Agriculture minister is paying attention — a family of four in 
Saskatchewan begins to pay provincial income tax when their 
combined income reaches $20,000. That same family, if they 
were to move west across the border into Alberta, would not 
pay provincial income tax until their income reaches $33,500 
because they have higher basic personal exemptions in Alberta 
than they have in Saskatchewan. 
 
If it’s a single, Mr. Speaker, a single, the basic personal 
exemption in Saskatchewan is $8,000 and for that same single 
person in Alberta it’s $12,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a son 
. . . And I hope the Minister of Finance pays attention, maybe 
he doesn’t care about me but perhaps he’ll care about my son. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my son is trying to get an education and he takes a 
summer job and he goes and he plants trees. He makes 
approximately $10,000, $11,000 of taxable income planting 
trees. Now because he lives in Saskatchewan this youngster — 
he’s 20 years old — he has to pay provincial income tax and 
he’s barely making enough to pursue an education. And yet if 
he lived in Alberta he could make $12,000 before he began to 
pay provincial income tax. That’s the penalty that the NDP 
government is putting on young people in Saskatchewan. That 
has to change. The gap is too big. It must be smaller. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP decided that they had to do 
something for low-income earners. So they decided — surprise, 
surprise — to increase the minimum wage. Now that’s nice to 
have the luxury to increase the minimum wage but of course 
that doesn’t do anything for someone who is making $7 an hour 
or $7.25 an hour or $8 an hour. 
 
It does help the government; they get more deductions. Now the 
government gets more tax revenue if they raise the minimum 
wage but for the majority of workers it does nothing whatsoever 
to help them. All it helps is the very bottom, the very level of 
people that are right on minimum, minimum wage. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, this government could have increased the basic 
personal exemption and helped all taxpayers, including the 
employees, the workers who are making $7, 7.50 an hour, or $8 
an hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that would have been, that would have been too 
sensible for the NDP. It just doesn’t fit their way of doing 
things in Saskatchewan and as a result our province doesn’t 
grow. Our plan, which would increase the basic personal 
exemption, would cause Saskatchewan to grow, would cause 
our population to grow, and would cause our tax base to grow. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we also in our plan call for lower taxes on 
productivity and growth. And this includes helping small 
business. Now this government doesn’t recognize the 

importance of productivity and I don’t think they even know 
what the word productivity means, by looking at the actions 
from this government. We have some of the highest taxes on 
productivity and growth in the country, and it shows. When it’s 
time to establish a new industry, a new job, a new business in 
Canada, they are established outside of Saskatchewan rather 
than inside Saskatchewan because those who invest and grow 
and establish businesses look at the environment and they see in 
Saskatchewan an environment that’s not competitive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a Saskatchewan Party government would reduce 
and eliminate the small-business income tax — a tax which is 
generating so little revenue that it’s in danger of falling below 
$50 million simply because this government is unfriendly to 
small business. We would also reduce the capital tax, which is a 
big sign to industries throughout Canada that they shouldn’t 
invest in Saskatchewan because they can’t afford to have 
employees in a province with the highest capital tax in western 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, part of Saskatchewan Party’s plan to grow this 
province by 100,000 people over the next 10 years is to 
eliminate government waste. We don’t believe in growing the 
public service when the province is shrinking in size. I haven’t 
heard one NDP member on the other side explain to me why, 
when the province is losing thousands of people, we needed to 
increase the public service by over 5 per cent in one year. Mr. 
Speaker, that does not make any sense. But of course many 
things that they’ve done do not make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t need to continually overburden both 
individuals, businesses, and municipal government with 
excessive red tape. Smaller, smarter government is one key step 
to growing Saskatchewan by 100,000 people over the next 10 
years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to go to a sensitive area, a very 
touchy area for the NDP — particularly sensitive for the 
Minister of Labour because her election funding comes from 
labour. But, Mr. Speaker, we need balanced labour laws in 
Saskatchewan. We don’t need to swing the pendulum to the 
extreme side of labour or to the extreme side of business. We 
need the pendulum stuck in the middle, where it’s fair to both 
sides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to grow the workforce in Saskatchewan. 
We need to grow both the unionized workforce and the 
non-unionized workforce. But both are shrinking under the 
NDP government. The NDP government, Mr. Speaker, is no 
friend of labour. They too are showing their disapproval of this 
government’s policies by leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need democracy in the workplace, we need 
freedom of speech in the workplace, and we need a labour 
relations board that is fair and impartial when dealing with the 
challenges between management and labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker — and I would address these comments in 
particular to the minister responsible for the Crown 
corporations — we need to pull the Crown corporations out of 
private sector involvement. Mr. Speaker, this government has 
allowed the Crowns to unfairly compete against the providers of 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

 

security systems, the growers of potatoes, the founders of 
dot-com and IT (information technology) ventures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has no idea of the damage they’re 
causing Saskatchewan by preventing private sector investment 
— from both inside Saskatchewan and outside Saskatchewan 
— finding a home here because they feel the only way that they 
can grow the province is by growing the government including 
the Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, we need to grow the 
private sector, not the public sector, not the Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP do not recognize the strengths that 
Saskatchewan has. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a rich 
province with huge potential. Mr. Speaker, if this province was 
governed right, it would not be behind Manitoba and Alberta 
and British Columbia in population; well BC (British 
Columbia), perhaps you could argue, but definitely not behind 
Alberta and Manitoba. But it’s been under successive CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP 
governments that we have lost ground to Alberta and we have 
seen Manitoba pass us. And if the census numbers keep on 
moving in the direction they are, Nova Scotia may eventually 
pass Saskatchewan in population. 
 
But we have the potential to expand our manufacturing sector. 
You know, if this government would do something about the 
capital tax, if they do something about the labour laws, if they 
would provide a business climate in Saskatchewan where 
Maple Leaf Foods would invest in a meat-packing plant in 
Saskatchewan instead of in Brandon, Manitoba, we’d see the 
growth in our economy, we’d see the jobs created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to agriculture, nothing makes me 
angrier than to see the NDP blame all of the Saskatchewan’s 
woes on the agriculture sector. And I don’t even hear the 
Minister of Agriculture defending that sector, which is very, 
very disappointing to the people in that industry throughout the 
province. He seems to be looking at glee with all the problems 
facing agriculture and saying: it’s not my fault, you know; I’m 
not the creator of the drought; not my fault that there’s low 
prices, you know; just too bad about, too bad about agriculture, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s productivity on a per acre 
basis is the lowest in Canada. I don’t know if the minister 
knows that, but he seems to accept it. Mr. Speaker, the average 
return per acre in Saskatchewan for agriculture production is 
$85 an acre — lowest in all of Canada. 
 
We have this huge resource — almost half of all of the arable 
land in Canada — and we get the lowest production value per 
acre from that land. That’s an indictment on NDP governments 
that don’t recognize the importance of diversification; 
value-added; food processing; the establishment of an ethanol 
industry without doing a Sask ethanol project, another Crown 
corporation to accomplish it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture has been a mainstay in Saskatchewan 
and I believe it will be a key component in our economy to 
grow the province out of the doldrums that it’s been in under 
the NDP. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is underdeveloped in the area of 
tourism. Saskatchewan’s one of the larger provinces in Canada 
with some of the cleanest air, some of the cleanest water, some 
of the most beautiful lakes and forests, some of the most 
beautiful river valleys, some of the richest history in Canada 
and this government has not created an environment that 
tourism can flourish and grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has no vision of the potential of 
tourism in Saskatchewan. They’re afraid that somebody 
actually might make a dollar at the expense of tourists. Well I 
say, God bless the tourism industry if they can make a buck at 
the expense of tourists. That’s exactly what this province needs. 
 
But yes, as my colleague from Estevan points out, tourists can 
hardly navigate our roads. How are we going to entice them to 
spend money here when the word out there in the United States 
and in Eastern Canada and Central Canada and to the west of us 
is: don’t drive into Saskatchewan, you may do damage to your 
vehicle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the information technology sector of the economy 
is one of the fastest-growing sectors of the economy. The 
potential to grow that sector of our economy is not hampered by 
geography, is not hampered by the, by the sparsity of our 
population; IT is an area where we can move forward. 
 
But again, what does this government do? Well they expand the 
PST (provincial sales tax) and they put it on to the information 
technology sector, so it’s the only sector in North America that 
suffers the sales tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has squelched the information 
technology sector by having SaskTel compete directly against it 
whenever it could. The message to the people who are willing 
to invest dollars and grow businesses in the information 
technology sector is: don’t do it in Saskatchewan, the 
government is your enemy, they’ll bring you down one way or 
another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the whole area of natural resources. Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to oil and gas, Saskatchewan is the last place that 
the industry invests and it’s the first place they move out of 
because this government places barriers of red tape, regulation, 
and high taxes in the way of the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, forestry’s another area where we have huge 
potential, as in the mining sector, but this government has failed 
to recognize the potential that we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the time to grow Saskatchewan is now. We can’t 
wait for years and years and years more time before we begin to 
grow. 
 
Education is another key to growing Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, we need our education system to meet the 
occupational opportunities of the 21st century. And believe me 
there are many, many opportunities for young people in 
Saskatchewan and for older citizens of Saskatchewan to be 
trained in the areas that will provide them not only employment, 
but good employment, in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many skills and many industries that are 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

having trouble attracting the workers that they need today. Even 
in my own constituency, I spoke with an industry that needs 15 
employees today and they can’t find those people because 
we’ve not put in place the education that . . . system that would 
provide the resources for the people that need jobs and are 
leaving this province to find those jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to education we must do much 
more to increase the educational standards and the educational 
program for our Aboriginal young people. Aboriginal young 
people provide one of the richest resources to build upon and to 
grow this province upon. And, Mr. Speaker, they, at the current 
time, have lower levels of education than is the norm; they have 
higher unemployment rates as a result. And they, in a sense, 
hold the key to whether Saskatchewan falls on the wrong side 
of the ledger or the right side of the ledger. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I looked in the Speech from the Throne I 
did not see a plan that would improve the educational 
opportunities of our Aboriginal young people and that would 
provide them with the skilled training they need to properly 
access the opportunities of the 21st century. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, as a final plan . . . point in our plan, to 
grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 in 10 years. And by the way, 
Mr. Speaker, as I look at their faces over there, I see that they 
don’t believe we can do it. They have no confidence or faith in 
Saskatchewan. All they can do is heckle. All they can do is 
shout insults. They don’t believe that Saskatchewan has the 
potential to grow and that, of course, without faith in this 
province will certainly not permit our province to grow the way 
it should. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party believes that if we’re going to grow 
this province by 100,000 people in 10 years we need to bring 
the key players of this province together at the same table to 
hammer out the details of the plan. A Saskatchewan Party 
government would initiate this process by putting together a 
social partnership. And we would invite labour, and we would 
invite business, we would invite the First Nations, we would 
invite municipalities to sit down at the table with us and agree 
on a plan to move Saskatchewan forward in the 21st century. 
 
Now in closing I want to talk a little bit about the Saskatchewan 
Party’s Grow Saskatchewan tour, because the NDP have done a 
fairly good job of splitting the media, that the attendance was 
low. Somehow the attendance was not as high as it should be. 
 
I want the Minister of Crown Corporations, the member for 
Meadow Lake, to listen very closely to what I say. Mr. Speaker, 
when the NDP criticized the Grow Saskatchewan meetings, 
they were criticizing members of the Rosetown school board, 
the Elrose school board, the Outlook school board. They are 
criticizing people from the rural municipalities in the 
Rosetown-Biggar constituency. They are criticizing people 
from economic development; the member from the Kyle 
economic development committee attended our meetings. And 
they are criticizing the mayors of Kyle and of Biggar and of 
other communities that attended the Grow Saskatchewan 
meeting, and Rosetown alone, I’m only talking about one 
meeting where about 30 people attended the meeting because 

they were opinion leaders and decision makers. 
 
Now if the NDP would have held these meetings I know what 
they would have done. They would have . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . they would have called all of their supporters, 
all the partisan people in Saskatchewan, and they would have 
got their crowd of 20 or 30 people out. Mr. Speaker, I could 
have had a crowd of 100 people in Rosetown if I would have 
wanted to make it a partisan venture; but I didn’t want to make 
this a partisan venture, I wanted to hear the viewpoints of the 
people in Saskatchewan that make important decisions and have 
important responsibilities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that the folks on the other side 
tone down a little bit and listen to this. If they’re going to 
criticize the Grow Saskatchewan meetings, then they are 
criticizing the member . . . the representative from CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) who attended a Grow 
Saskatchewan meeting. Mr. Speaker, they are criticizing the 
representative from the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) that attended our Grow Saskatchewan meeting. Mr. 
Speaker, they are criticizing the health care workers that 
attended our Grow Saskatchewan meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are attacking municipal leaders who attended 
our Grow Saskatchewan meetings, including, Mr. Speaker, the 
mayor of Melville, a former NDP candidate; the mayor of 
Yorkton; the mayor of Saskatoon; and SREDA (Saskatoon 
Regional Economic Development Authority). Whoa, kind of 
quiet over there now, isn’t it, Mr. Speaker? The chamber of 
commerce representatives; the Saskatchewan Real Estate Board 
— they’re really excited about your plan to grow 
Saskatchewan, I can tell you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Speaker is always willing 
to help members with the language of the legislature. I remind 
the member to make remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the members on the other 
side weren’t there to hear, but I’ll be happy to tell them what 
the members of the Saskatchewan Real Estate Board think 
about their plan to grow Saskatchewan — which is really 
chasing people out; it’s not growing at all. They’re pretty 
excited about the potential of growing Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me also tell you that we met with the anti . . . an 
anti-poverty association and with FSIN. Now despite some of 
the comments from senator David Ahenakew, who again was a 
former NDP candidate, we received a lot of support from FSIN 
for our Grow Saskatchewan plan because they realize that if 
Saskatchewan grows, the life of First Nations people of 
Saskatchewan will be better, it will be stronger. Their quality of 
living will be better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a plan. That’s the first 
advantage we have on the NDP. They have no plan. We have a 
plan. Now, Mr. Speaker, not only do we have a plan but we 
took it out to the people of Saskatchewan and said look at it, 
judge it, give us your comments. And overwhelmingly the 
response to our plan was positive — positive from some of the 
people that I mentioned just a minute ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan is ready. Mr. Speaker, we have a 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

 

Saskatchewan Party team here that’s ready to implement the 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, a team of quality, a team of 
dedication, a team that loves Saskatchewan. The NDP don’t 
have a clue, less a plan. Grow Saskatchewan by 100,000 people 
in 10 years — it can be done; you bet it can be done. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe the Saskatchewan Party will soon have a 
chance to deliver on our promises, which we will keep. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the 
amendment to the Speech from the Throne as submitted by my 
colleague, the member from Moosomin. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to be able to rise today and speak in support of the 
Speech from the Throne. 
 
I’d like to congratulate my colleagues, my good friend the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone for his insightful and 
sometimes challenging remarks in moving the Speech from the 
Throne. And I’d also like to congratulate my colleague, the 
newest member of the Assembly from Saskatoon Idylwyld, for 
his thoughtful, inspiring, and sometimes very humorous 
remarks in seconding the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I have to say, Mr. Speaker, it is 
wonderful to be working with a caucus with such competent 
and dedicated elected members, and with a government with 
such competent and dedicated civil servants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin my comments directly on the 
Throne Speech, I would like to take this opportunity to express 
my gratitude to some of the key people in my life. I would like 
to thank my wife, Gail, and our children, Alaina and Daniel, for 
their encouragement, their love, support, and understanding. 
 
As most of my colleagues in this House will well know, our 
families pay a significant price so that we can make the public 
commitments we are called to make. And so I am thankful that 
through all the times of stress, all the times away, my family is 
there giving me all kinds of support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my parents, Bruce and 
Frances Wartman, for their encouragement, for their love and 
support throughout the years. I want to thank them for the 
wonderful example they set for me. Their lives have 
exemplified and continue to exemplify what it means to serve 
God by loving and serving others. I hope and I pray that I will 
be able to follow their example throughout my life. 
 
They taught me to work hard and to persevere. They helped me 
to understand how important it is to get involved and to work 
for positive change. Above all, Mr. Speaker, they shared their 
faith with me and helped me develop a faith of my own. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank them and all my family for their 
ongoing support and encouragement. I would also like to thank 
all my friends from around this province and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the constituents of 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley for the trust that they have placed in 
me and the support they continue to give. 
 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is a wonderful and very mixed 
constituency. It is a mix of urban and rural, city, small town, 
village — a mix of residential, commercial, farming, and 
industrial. Its boundaries run up the northeast side of No. 6 
Highway to the south side of the Qu’Appelle valley. They 
follow that south side of the valley all the way over almost to 
the Lumsden Beach/Regina Beach intersection. And from there 
they cut down between Pense and Grand Coulee, including 
Grand Coulee. 
 
They include most of the Northwest of the city of Regina, 
including Westhill, McCarthy Boulevard . . . and everything 
north of 9th Avenue North to McCarthy Boulevard, everything 
north of the gas line over to the Lewvan, Mr. Speaker, and this 
includes the town of Lumsden and the village of Grand Coulee. 
 
It continues to be my privilege to serve the people of this 
wonderfully diverse constituency and so I would like to thank 
them and I would like to thank my constituency executive for 
all their hard work and support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege of serving this House as 
Minister of Highways and Transportation for the past six 
months. It has been a wonderful experience and I want to thank 
the Premier for appointing me and I want to thank Deputy 
Minister Harvey Brooks and all the department officials and 
staff for their commitment, for their continuing good work and 
support. I look forward to working with them as our 
government continues to build and maintain the transportation 
infrastructure of this province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all my staff. Donna From, 
my constituency assistant; Dave Degenstien, my chief of staff; 
Tyler Lloyd, ministerial assistants; Florence Matthies, senior 
secretary and all around organizer of my life these days; and 
Gina Mitchell, secretary and provider of some of the best candy 
and office decorations in the building. And, Mr. Speaker, just in 
case she is watching, I would like to convey wishes of many of 
us here today to Florence Matthies for healing and for a speedy 
recovery. We look forward to having her back in the office as 
soon as she is able. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one other thing I would like to say before I 
begin directly speaking on the Speech from the Throne. I would 
like to offer my congratulations to Scott Bitz, former 
parishioner and friend, and to his rink from the Regina 
Caledonian Curling Club on their gallant showing at this year’s 
Brier. And I’d like to specially offer recognition to the 
Saskatchewan team’s lead, Kelly Moskowy, who was selected 
as the first team all-star lead at this year’s Brier. I’m proud to 
say that Kelly is one of the valued employees of the Department 
of Highways and Transportation of Saskatchewan. 
 
With those preliminary comments, Mr. Speaker, I would now 
like to comment on the Speech of the Throne . . . Speech to the 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

Throne. From the Throne. I’ll try that again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne sets the tone of our 
government for the session ahead. It sets out our vision and our 
commitment to that vision. It sets out a plan of action for 
Saskatchewan through investment in our families, our economy, 
our education system, our environment, and our infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition and their buddies under a 
variety of names out in the community try to say our 
government has no plan. We’ve just heard a diatribe about that. 
They are simply wrong. However, as my mother used to quote, 
there are “none so blind as those who will not see.” And I can 
only guess that you choose not to see on the other side of the 
House. 
 
As has been reported on a number of fronts, despite all the odds 
our economy has been growing. With the work that we have 
done to reduce personal income tax and small business taxes, 
with all the progressive initiatives we have taken in education 
and health, with the work that has been done to build a solid 
foundation of dependable infrastructure, we have made and are 
continuing to make this province one of the best, most 
competitive places in the G-8 to do business. KPMG made that 
very clear in their recent study. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is 
very clear that it is one of the best places in this world to live. 
 
I will admit, Mr. Speaker, that more needs to be done to stem 
the tide of population loss. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe we are 
on the right track and though we experienced a population 
decline last year — largely due to the drought and the downturn 
in the farm economy — we will see this turn around. 
 
Our government is providing a stable environment in which 
business can build and thrive and produce jobs. And if there is 
one thing that business wants and desires, it is stability so they 
know how to plan for the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our graduates are finding good jobs here 
in this province, and it will get even better. Over 75 per cent of 
college graduates finding good jobs here, over 90 per cent of 
the graduates of our technical schools finding good jobs here. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will get better. 
 
Some may ask: will an NDP government be able to match or 
beat the opposition SP’s (Saskatchewan Party) promise to 
increase the population by at least 100,000 over 10 years? First 
of all, Mr. Speaker, as one of their supporters, I believe from 
the opposition leader’s own constituency said, well there really 
isn’t much substance in their plan. Considering the fact that 
even their own party members don’t believe there is much 
substance in the Grow Saskatchewan plan, I can’t imagine it 
will have much success anywhere else. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that whole plan is not much more than a 
bag of hot air. Given their open, or was it closed, or sometimes 
open and sometimes closed, meetings to explain that program, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that that Sask Party opposition 
are trying to sell the people of this province a pig in a poke. 
 
That is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re trying to sell something in 

a bag that they claim is a pig. But, Mr. Speaker, given the smell 
from that particular bag, I think it’s more likely they’re trying to 
sell a skunk instead of a pig. And I don’t think the people of this 
province will buy it. They will not buy any tricky sales pitch; 
they will not buy any hot air and empty words from the 
opposition SPs. 
 
Cutting taxes, cutting the services, and all of the things that they 
said they would do, including freezing health, freezing 
education, in their past . . . in the past election, will do one 
thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It will grow one thing in this 
province. What will it grow? It will grow the debt, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that’s all that’s in that Grow Saskatchewan bag, 
that growing debt. That’s all their plan would do, Mr. Speaker, 
and I tell you, it stinks to high heaven. 
 
The question remains, can the Calvert government build this 
province, and increase the population? And the answer is yes, 
we can, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yes, we can. If anyone can enable 
Saskatchewan’s population to grow, we can. If anyone can 
enable Saskatchewan’s population to increase, and our 
economy to grow, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a New Democratic 
Party government can, and will. 
 
The New Democratic Party have done it before, and we will do 
it again. We will do it by building a solid and sustainable 
foundation. We will do it by building on that foundation. We 
have a vision for the future. We have a plan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that steadily builds and diversifies the economy year 
upon year. We don’t have to come up with a new plan every 
year, because we have a solid plan that builds year upon year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m convinced that our vision, and our plan, 
will provide jobs in this province, and will provide a very 
successful future for Saskatchewan young people, for 
businesses, for workers alike. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan will be a destiny for 
workers from across this country and around the world as it 
grows. And when we get beyond the effects of this drought and 
downturn in agricultural employment, I have no doubt — no 
doubt — that our population will increase substantially. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — So what is our vision, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? In the past generations, we might have called our 
vision a vision of the new Jerusalem, a biblical image which is 
still relevant today. 
 
We envision Saskatchewan as a strong, progressive, prosperous, 
and compassionate community, a province to which people are 
drawn from all corners of the world — a community where 
racism and hatred do not show their ugly faces, and a province 
with an education system that is second to none and accessible 
to all. 
 
This is a vision of a community where all have access to the 
best possible highest-quality, publicly funded, affordable health 
care — a community where people work together for the good 
of all. 
 
Our vision is of a province where success and initiative are 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

 

encouraged and celebrated. It is a vision of a province where 
people are encouraged and enabled to invest their money, and to 
develop and use their talents and abilities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a clear vision that is well grounded, 
a courageous vision — a vision that will enable us to meet the 
immediate needs of our people and to expand our economy and 
our population so we can meet the needs of the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have spent significant time in this past year 
meeting with the people of this province, listening to their 
concerns, their ideas, their hopes, and their dreams. We had a 
very challenging and very successful bus tour this summer. We 
heard the concerns of many, many people in this province. And 
I travelled the province and consulted extensively as I worked 
on developing a greenprint for ethanol. 
 
We have the action community on the rural economy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy) — a group of dedicated citizens who have been 
working hard to put together recommendations to help us build 
the rural economy of this province. 
 
We have a workable and sustainable plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and we are already implementing some of the wonderful ideas 
that have been recommended. We see this in CommunityNet 
and in its ongoing development. We see it on a number of 
fronts. The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talks 
about our investment in infrastructure as being both . . . being 
important to both the economy and to the quality of life in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m proud that our government has made a long-term 
commitment to building, repairing, and improving the 
transportation infrastructure of Saskatchewan. We’re moving 
into the second year of a $900 million, three-year plan to 
improve our roads and highways — a plan that is part of a 
longer term commitment of $2.5 billion over 10 years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see that the members opposite 
support that level of financial commitment to our highway 
system. I note that the member from Cypress Hills is quoted in 
the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, March 7, saying the current $300 
million budget can do the job over a longer term. I appreciate 
that member’s support for our highway budget and I look 
forward to his support for our government’s 2002-2003 
provincial budget as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government makes a commitment, 
when it makes a commitment it does everything within reason 
to keep that commitment. And our commitment to improve our 
transportation infrastructure is a prime example of promises 
made, promises kept. We are fixing the roads in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past year we completed the busiest, 
most productive highway construction season in our province’s 
history, thanks to our almost $312 million budget, the highest 
ever for the Department of Highways and Transportation. We 
focused on highway work that provides real benefits to the 
travelling public. We focused on rebuilding our rural highways 
that have seen severe pressure from changing haul patterns. We 
focused on repaving our major provincial highways to 
accommodate our growing economy. We are working with 

innovators to find new, better, and less expensive ways of 
building and repairing our roads. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we focused on the continuing 
twinning of the Saskatchewan portion of our national highways 
— the Trans-Canada Highway and the Yellowhead highway. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last season our government invested more 
than $25 million in these major twinning projects and as a 
result, we were able to open more than 70 kilometres of new 
four-lane highway. 
 
And we have committed to completing the twinning of the 
Highway No. 1 West corridor between Gull Lake and the 
Alberta border in the year 2004, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a good 
four years ahead of the schedule. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
thanks to our multi-year funding commitment we expect to 
invest more than $23 million on continued twinning projects on 
Highway No. 1 and 16 this coming construction year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last season we completed major work on 
more than 800 kilometres of highway in Saskatchewan. Without 
the dedicated work of our civil service and the dedicated work 
of our road-building contractors in this province we would not 
have been able to accomplish so much. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
were able to work almost to the end of November in completing 
some of those roads. Good work by our building contractors 
and by the department staff. 
 
In this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have about 90 per 
cent of the traffic running on 7 per cent of the roads. And yet, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we still make a commitment to trying to 
maintain much of that whole network in top shape. That work 
takes pulling together with people from a variety of different 
communities. And to that end we are working with the rural 
municipalities on various strategies to manage heavy truck 
traffic on our thin membrane surface highways. 
 
And we are working with the area transportation planning 
committees all across this province as they help identify the 
changing transportation patterns in their local areas and make 
recommendations for setting the improvement priorities. 
 
In this unique model of co-operation and consultation, I am 
proud to say that our government is very impressed with the 
work these committees have done. We have a plan for building, 
repairing, and maintaining our transportation infrastructure that 
is second to none. This is a prime example of what can be 
accomplished when groups have a positive attitude and work 
together, with sometimes differing views and differing politics, 
but work together towards a common goal. And this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have seen in spades in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I mentioned earlier in 2001 we 
employed a co-operative model as we worked with various 
RMs (rural municipality) to manage the heavy truck traffic. 
And I’m proud to say that we worked with more than 50 
different partners on projects that addressed over 500 
kilometres of lower volume rural highways. And I’m looking 
forward to continuing co-operation and success in the coming 
construction year. 
 
There is much more to say about the good work that is being 
done and the good work planned in our transportation 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

infrastructure programs. But I’d like to highlight some of the 
other positive aspects of the Throne Speech, by spending a few 
moments on the topic of Saskatchewan as a place to live and 
work and raise our families. 
 
In the past year we heard little but gloom and doom from the 
members opposite, and I think they’re going to continue that if 
they have shown any signs so far. They wore their Alberta envy 
on their sleeves as if it was some strange badge of honour. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite should be ashamed 
of the negative attitudes that they’ve pushed out in 
Saskatchewan and their constant griping. Griping about how 
much better things would be if we were just like Alberta. 
Maybe given the recent news on tax increases and unrest in 
Alberta, maybe they will change their tune. I for one truly hope 
they do. 
 
On the other hand, they may not and that’s attested in this rather 
pathetic little story that I heard the other day. Apparently there 
was a group hosting one of the open or closed meetings 
happening out in rural Saskatchewan, and they were trying to 
figure out what they should get for their Sask Party MLAs who 
arrived there. One of them went down to the liquor store and he 
was asking someone what’s the Sask Party MLA’s favourite 
wine? Somebody overheard them and said, we should be more 
like Alberta. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that pathetic little story 
just illustrates the way the people out there have seen those 
members opposite — pretty tragic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, and indeed some of the 
media and perhaps even StatsCanada, would like people to 
somehow believe that the population decline in Saskatchewan is 
some new phenomenon created by the NDP government 
policies. They seem to forget or to ignore the facts: population 
decline is not something new in Saskatchewan; it has been 
cyclical. And certainly population growth in Alberta is not 
something new; it too has been rather cyclical. 
 
It doesn’t take a brilliant researcher to do a bit of digging and 
find that the alarmist headlines and editorials that are seen in 
papers lately could have been reprints of articles that were 
printed somewhere back in the ’30s, the ’40s, the ’50s, or the 
’60s. And if change in Saskatchewan is anything, it is a 
constant. However, a change in population now and then is 
certainly less than a crisis. However, with the past Conservative 
government we did see dips that were beyond any that we’ve 
seen for decades. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as Doug Elliott, the publisher of the Sask 
Trends Monitor said of the new StatsCanada figures quoted in 
The Leader-Post, it’s making too much of what is effectively a 
straight line, about one million population since the 1930s. 
 
So let’s not get too wound up about this straight line, and let’s 
continue building this province on a solid foundation, the kind 
of solid foundation that will draw people in from around the 
world, that will produce jobs, that will draw businesses here. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is on that foundation that this province 
will grow and prosper, and provide jobs for people in . . . who 
come into the province, and will provide a good place, a 

continuing good place to raise families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Not to make light of this admittedly 
worrisome trend, but I really think that Friday’s National Post 
columnist by . . . column by columnist Roy MacGregor kind of 
put things in perspective. 
 
Mr. MacGregor’s article is entitled, “Saskatchewan; not the 
biggest, just the best”. Why did he claim that? It is not the 
biggest. Why would he claim it’s the best? 
 
The article speaks of the recent StatsCanada figures. It mentions 
how high Saskatchewan rates in all measurable areas of civic 
participation — specifically, charitable giving, volunteering, 
and community involvement. The article points out that 
Saskatchewan residents give just about three times as much to 
charities as do residents of other provinces; that 45 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents do volunteer work; that 60 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents participate in community or association 
activities. 
 
The article goes on. Saskatchewan residents are four times as 
likely to be involved in a church, twice as likely to be engaged 
in sport or cultural events, and nearly three times as likely to get 
involved at the civic, community or school level. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very important 
comment on the structure and the culture of Saskatchewan 
society. A society and the culture no doubt moulded by more 
than 30 years of social democratic government. This is the kind 
of society to which people come and visit, and they say what a 
wonderful place that is. It’s the kind of society that welcomes 
tourists, and helps those tourists feel that this is a place they 
want to return to. 
 
It’s the kind of society that welcomes new people in with their 
ideas, and their innovations and encourages them to build here 
and to become a part of a society that is caring and responsible. 
 
Mr. MacGregor’s article concludes by pointing out that civic 
participation is a form of social glue. And that in Saskatchewan 
so much social glue can only improve the quality of life here. 
That Saskatchewan people have a deep-rooted sense of the 
collective good and tend to have a history of thinking of the 
bigger picture. 

 
Why aren’t we like Alberta? Because we are uniquely and 
wonderfully Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Premier, and I am 
proud . . . or, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I am proud of that. 
Uniquely and wonderfully Saskatchewan. 
 
And that brings me back to the topic at hand. The government’s 
Speech from the Throne — a document that speaks of the 
dedication of this government to the collective good of the 
people as we work together to build this province of 
opportunity. A document that speaks of this government’s 
willingness and ability to listen to and learn from the wonderful 
people of this province. 
 
Listening and learning through activities such as the Premier’s 
bus tour, and through the action committee on the rural 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

 

economy, and through our area transportation planning 
committees, and through our public review of the health care 
services system. And we listen and we learn and we implement 
those ideas that will help to build this province and make it 
successful. 
 
This is a Speech from the Throne that emphasizes the fact that 
Saskatchewan is a province of opportunity. Our partnership for 
prosperity document makes clear that there are tremendous 
opportunities in diversification and in value-added processing. 
 
Opportunities are here to develop an ethanol industry as part of 
renewable fuels and overall renewable fuels industry. There are 
opportunities in diamonds and other minerals. And when we 
look we find that we are now the second largest producer of 
minerals and oil and gas in this nation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are building this province of 
opportunity. We are finding tremendous success here. We see 
that there are opportunities in energy development with 
environmentally responsible energy alternatives such as wind 
generation and new conservation initiatives. We see that there 
are opportunities in forestry and in manufacturing. 
 
Opportunities in research and development. What can we do in 
this area with the new synchrotron in Saskatoon is beyond most 
of our imaginations; but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are people 
with imaginations that encompass those possibilities who will 
be setting up an institute for that synchrotron. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there are people in this province who are working on 
new and innovative ways to build this province, and they are 
getting the support of this government to build on those 
initiatives. 
 
There are opportunities in forestry and manufacturing that will 
be successful, that will help to grow the economy. There are 
opportunities in cultural industries and tourism where we have 
so many wonderful untapped or at least to this point, 
underdeveloped resources. Tourism, cultural industries, 
industries that draw people to the province — industries that 
help them want to stay here. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these opportunities in our economy and 
the quality of our public services, the spirit of our people, and 
indeed the quality of life in Saskatchewan all combine to ensure 
that Saskatchewan will remain one of the very best places in the 
world to live and to set up business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
Canada’s province of opportunity and as the Speech from the 
Throne makes clear, our government will continue to encourage 
and enable the people of Saskatchewan to work together with 
the interested parties from across Canada and from around the 
world so that together we will be able to seize those 
opportunities and build a thriving and prosperous province for 
all of Saskatchewan’s people. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the vision that I see 
before this province, for the potential to build this province 
successfully, I would speak against the amendment. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am thankful for this opportunity to speak in 

support of the Speech from the Throne, and would like to 
advise you that I will be voting in favour of the motion. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s certainly a pleasure 
for me to enter into the debate on the Throne Speech. And at 
this point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to welcome 
the new member from Saskatoon Idylwyld to our fold. He’s 
certainly going to be contributing a huge amount — there’s no 
question about that. 
 
It’s sort of a tradition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Throne 
Speech is . . . the reply to the Throne Speech is started out by a 
few comments on the constituency so I would like to take this 
opportunity to say a few things about the constituency of 
Regina Northeast. It’s certainly a pleasure to represent that 
constituency and it’s made up of the areas in the city of Regina 
of Uplands, Churchill Downs, and part of the core area. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, it’s a good cross-section of the community. 
 
And I’ve had the opportunity in the last number of weeks, 
particularly last summer and the summer before that, of getting 
out and door knocking and visiting with many of my 
constituents. And I really appreciate doing that because they’re 
warm, friendly, and responsive; and at times, yes, stimulate a 
fair amount of interesting debate at the doorstep. But it’s always 
such an enlightening experience to get out and talk to the real 
people who live in the real world in my constituency. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituency comprises of a 
large section of the business community here in Regina. I 
believe that I have more business places in my constituency 
than in any other constituency in Regina. And along with that I 
would dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I probably have the 
most eating places of anywhere in the city of Regina. And many 
of my colleagues have commented on the fact that they believe 
that I participate in visiting those eating places quite often. 
 
But it is truly a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to take part in this 
Throne Speech that was so well delivered by Her Honour. 
 
And first of all, I just want to . . . through you to the Speaker, I 
want to offer a personal thank you to the Speaker for providing 
me the opportunity to accompany him and his wife to Inuvik 
earlier on . . . or late last year, in fact, to be part of the 
delegation that presented the gift from Saskatchewan to 
Nunavut as it became a territory. And having the privilege of 
accompanying us was Linda Spence from the Speaker’s office 
and Margaret Woods from the Clerk’s office, along with, of 
course, myself and the member from Humboldt. 
 
And of course, accompanying us was Jackie Berting, the artist, 
and her husband and assistant, James Clark, from Cupar, 
Saskatchewan. And I’m sure that many of the members had the 
opportunity of seeing the gift. It was a glass wall. That glass 
wall was on display here in the Legislative Assembly for a 
number of weeks before it was sent up to Nunavut. And it 
certainly does us proud to be on display in their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And I also want to comment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when 
we did arrive in Nunavut, it was not warm. In fact this was the 
first part of December and it was quite cold up there. I think it 
was something like minus 20, 25, 30 below. But the warmth of 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

our reception certainly made up for the temperature outside and 
Speaker O’Neil and his staff was just very accommodating. 
And they welcomed us with open arms, and very hospitable, 
and they welcomed us with open arms and showed us a great 
time while we were there. 
 
And Nunavut just becoming a territory on April 1 of 2001 . . . 
or 2000, I believe it was, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker, it’s 
interesting makeup when you compare their legislative process 
and their Legislative Assembly to that of ours here in 
Saskatchewan and other provincial legislatures. 
 
Nunavut has 19 MLAs. In this case they were elected in 
February 1999, just a few short weeks before the creation of the 
territory on April 1. And this Assembly is one of two such 
bodies in Canada that works on a non . . . consensus basis. 
Among the many differences, I guess you could say in the 
Legislative Assembly, that their members are elected as 
individuals; their members do not represent political parties. 
 
And it’s interesting that after the 19 MLAs are elected, they 
then select the Speaker as we do. They also select from their 
midst the Premier and then the cabinet ministers. And the 
non-cabinet ministers then sit in opposition to the cabinet 
ministers. And there’s a fair amount of debate goes back and 
forth; and although they don’t represent various political parties 
— they’re individuals — they do participate in some very 
interesting exchanges, and I would say even heated debate. 
 
Something that I personally found quite interesting there was 
something that is only available in the House of Commons, and 
I believe in the two territories now — the Northwest Territories 
and the territory of Nunavut — is, unlike the provincial 
legislatures, they offer translation services. In Nunavut the two 
official languages are Nunavut and English. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to be provided the translation 
opportunity to experience that because it’s something that we’re 
not used to and something we certainly don’t have here in 
Saskatchewan. Although after that experience, Mr. Speaker, I 
have come to the belief that it may be something we would 
want to consider establishing in the legislature here in 
Saskatchewan — that is a translation services. I believe that 
translation services in this legislature would help the 
government members understand what the opposition is trying 
to say. 
 
(16:15) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, getting on to the Throne Speech, it was an 
excellent Throne Speech that clearly outlines a vision for the 
future for this province; clearly outlines a vision of prosperity 
for Saskatchewan; clearly outlines Saskatchewan will be the 
province of opportunity. 
 
This came about, Mr. Speaker, as many experiences do; but this 
summer having had the opportunity of taking part in the 
Premier’s bus tour for some two weeks, I found that very, very 
interesting. I had the opportunity of visiting a number of 
communities across Saskatchewan: Watrous, Lanigan, 
Wynyard, Foam Lake, Canora, Yorkton, Kamsack — and the 
list goes on. 
 

But in all of these communities, Mr. Speaker, when we met 
with community leaders we found a desire to grow the province 
of Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen examples of that. One that 
comes to mind is at Lanigan and the Pound-Maker feedlot there, 
for example. That is a very prosperous, community-driven 
operation that has added value-added agriculture and has added 
a great deal to that community and surrounding area. 
 
The same can be said for Lilydale poultry at Wynyard, which is 
also a very active and very prosperous, and a growing and 
expanding operation which provides many benefits to the local 
people as well as the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The strawboard plant at Kamsack is under construction . . . a 
community group there who have been labouring for a few 
years now to create an industry, a strawboard industry there, 
which will simply pick up the straw from farmers and process it 
into a product that will be available in the commercial 
marketplace and provide opportunities not only to the farming 
public there but provide opportunities in jobs and investment 
returns to the local citizenship. 
 
So there’s just a tremendous amount of positive things 
happening right across our great province. Saskatchewan truly 
is a province of opportunity. And opportunities abound in many 
sectors of our economy. Diversification and value-added 
processing in agriculture; and I think that there is many 
examples, and I just related some of them. 
 
But there’s many more examples right across Saskatchewan 
where local people are getting involved in their economy, 
making the investment on the strength and the knowledge and 
the security that they know that those investments will pay 
dividends not only to themselves and as individuals, but to their 
communities and to the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
Increased development of energy resources and including a 
green plan. Mr. Speaker, as we know, as the world develops and 
our economy here in Saskatchewan develops, there is a thirst 
and a hunger for more energy sources. And those, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re meeting with the expansion of our development and 
resource energies, but we’re doing it in a careful manner, 
including a green plan to ensure that we have a sustainable 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are . . . Opportunities abound in 
Saskatchewan. We’re seeing that opportunities in the growth of 
our forest production, in the forest industry; in manufacturing; 
growth in our cultural industries; growth in tourism and 
services; and growth in our mining and our base metals, such as 
diamonds and other mineral deposits. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is standing on the 
threshold of opportunity and prosperity. That opportunity and 
prosperity is only limited by our attitude and our imagination. 
There are many examples of very positive things happening 
right across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A commitment to the . . . in times of uncertainty and I’d like . . . 
The province of Saskatchewan and the economy here is no 
different than running one’s own life or running one’s own 
home budget. You have good times and you have bad times. 
And any careful manager will recognize that, and in the good 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

 

times you put a little away to cushion the bad times that you 
know will come. And I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that since 
1991 this government has done that. 
 
During the past eight years, the people of Saskatchewan have 
paid down the debt — the provincial debt that we inherited 
from those people over there or their country cousins or their 
former namesake. We’ve paid down that debt. The people of 
Saskatchewan paid down that debt by $3.7 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tax-supported debt has fallen from 49 per cent to 
23 per cent of our gross national product — a commitment that 
has been made by the people of Saskatchewan that has, that has 
. . . I’m mind-boggled when I think a lot of people around, not 
only in Saskatchewan and across Canada but around the world, 
of how Saskatchewan citizens have rallied to the cause, to 
address the indebtedness that was plaguing this province. Have 
we got a ways to go? Yes we have. But we have a firm 
commitment from this government and the people of 
Saskatchewan to work to that end. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to verify what . . . the strides that 
we have made in addressing the debt. The Provincial Auditor, 
in a recent public accounts meeting said, and I quote: 
 

The government is doing a good job of cash management. 
 
Clearly indicating, Mr. Speaker, that it is a wise decision that 
was taken by the members of this government in the past, that 
in the good years to put some money away to carry us through 
the bad years. And that’s exactly what we’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker, and quite frankly I’m very proud of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government does have a plan of action for 
Saskatchewan. The government’s plan to expand our economy 
and create new opportunities for our young people is based on 
four pillars. 
 
Number one, investment in the economy and the environment. 
Investment in the infrastructure, quality education, and healthy 
and self-reliant families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anybody who has built anything knows that the 
strengths of the building is only as good as its foundation. Mr. 
Speaker, we have built a good solid foundation in this province 
and now we are able to place the pillars on a solid foundation 
that will support a growing economy in a growing province of 
prosperity and opportunity. 
 
The growth in Saskatchewan will continue to be led by the 
private sector and private investment. However, public policy 
and government initiatives can serve as a catalyst to that 
investment. And there are many, many positive examples of 
that, Mr. Speaker. Those examples have led the way in the 
economic development of this province. And recent polls have 
shown that the businesses in Saskatchewan are very optimistic 
about the future and many expand . . . many plan to expand and 
hire more staff. 
 
The leading indicator of the prosperity and the strength of our 
economy, Mr. Speaker, is that of housing sales in Saskatchewan 
— in Regina and Saskatoon. Housing sales is at an all-time 
high. 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has a resource-based economy. 
Saskatchewan has for many years had the development of those 
resources in the best interest of Saskatchewan people. 
Saskatchewan’s known oil resources are estimated about 35 
billion barrels, much of it in a form of heavy oil. 
 
The government will present a comprehensive energy 
development and conservation strategy that will build on 
increasing heavy oil production and expand on our natural gas 
sector. To meet the needs, as we recognized in the past, the 
economies — not only in Saskatchewan but around the world 
— are growing. And with that growth comes a hunger and a 
desire for the energy to feed those economic growths and part 
of that will be the heavy oil production from this province, and 
the natural gas production from this province; creating not only 
the investment opportunities here but the jobs that go with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Saskatchewan people recognize the importance 
of climate change and the environment and economic issues. 
Initiatives will continue to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in 
our province. And an office, a new office, of energy 
conservation will be established. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I want to acknowledge 
the work done by the member from Saskatoon Greystone on 
this very issue. He has worked very, very hard on developing 
those plans and putting forward suggestions. And I know that as 
a Co-Chair of the Saskatchewan Construction Panel we had . . . 
the panel had the opportunity of having the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone at our recent meeting where he made the 
presentations of his report. And it was very, very well-received 
by all the members there. And it . . . something that I’m very 
proud of that this government, along with the member leading 
the way, has taken an initiative on developing that type of plan 
to conserve the energy and find ways and means that we can 
ensure that we have the ability to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province’s cultural community has also played 
an important role and has . . . contributed to the economic 
growth. Saskatchewan writers, artists, performers, producers, 
and technicians give form and voice to the values that define us 
as a people. Increasingly they attract world-wide audiences and 
acclaim. 
 
And I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that during this session the 
government together with Sask Film and Video Development 
Corporation will open a new $11.5 million state-of-the-art film 
and video sound stage here in Regina. That, Mr. Speaker, will 
not only facilitate and aid the film companies and video 
companies here in Saskatchewan, but it will attract investment. 
It will attract firms from outside of Saskatchewan to come here 
and do their work, bring with them the dollars and cents that is 
going to be a very major contributor to our economy. 
 
And as the member from . . . that spoke before me, the Minister 
of Highways has already indicated our strong and solid 
commitment over three years to the financing and investment in 
our infrastructure that is so very, very important as we grow the 
economy. We need to create thoroughfares of commerce so that 
the communities and the organizations and companies 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

throughout the province have a mechanism to move their 
product to market. 
 
Some of that infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, is our highway 
system. And as the minister has already indicated, the 
government has a firm commitment of $900 million over three 
years to improve our highway system. And this year the 
Legislative Assembly will be asked to approve some several 
hundred kilometres of highway reconstruction paving. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is very interesting. Because a few . . . many 
of us realize that over the last few years there’s been some 
dramatic announcements in regards to elevator closures. And 
with those announcements, Mr. Speaker, comes the need for our 
farm industry, agricultural industry, to move its farm products 
further, longer distances, and bigger loads, and that’s going to 
put increased pressure on our highway system. 
 
So I’m pleased to see that the Department of Highways under 
the minister’s guidance is working on a designated road system 
for heavy-haul roads — for heavy-haul loads rather — so that 
we can ensure that we maintain a good infrastructure system 
across this great province of ours. 
 
But infrastructure is a lot more than just a highway system. It is 
also providing the opportunity to take advantage of the latest 
technology. The CommunityNet program will expand the 
high-speed Internet services to a further 460 health, education, 
community, and government centres across this province, 
ensuring Saskatchewan residents, organizations, and businesses 
have access modern Internet services. As well, SaskTel will 
expand the high-speed Internet to homes and businesses in 191 
more communities in the year 2003. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, we’re giving the opportunity for 
businesses, residents, institutions right across Saskatchewan to 
take advantage of the latest technology. And this has got to be 
one more element of strengthening our economy. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is something that we can be assure of would 
never, ever happen under a Sask Party government. We know 
that, Mr. Speaker, because they have already said, clearly, that 
if they were the government, they would sell off the Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Friday the member from Humboldt, and today 
the Leader of the Opposition, said that if there was a Sask Party 
government in Saskatchewan, they would grow Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, after giving it much thought, I agree with 
the member from Humboldt and I agree with the Leader of the 
Opposition. I can see things grow in Saskatchewan under a Sask 
Party government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under a Sask Party government in Saskatchewan, I 
can see the unemployment lines grow. Under a Sask Party 
government, I can see the food bank lines grow. I can see, under 
a Sask Party government, the debt of this province grow. I can 
see, under a Sask Party government, hopelessness and despair 
grow. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Not the things Saskatchewan people want to see grow. Not the 

things that this government will grow, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s just one more indicator of why that group over 
there, the Sask Party members, will never, never be government 
of this province. 
 
I think it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan 
know full well that a coyote might change its coat, but 
underneath it’s still a coyote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the past four years, provincial funding for 
K to 12 education has increased by 24 per cent. This 
government is proud of having responded to the innovative and 
dedication of our educators and the long-term needs of our 
youth. 
 
We live in a changing world. We live in a world that’s different 
today than it was 20 years ago or 30 years ago when 
competition was something that was next door. But today 
competition is not only national but it’s international. And with 
that in mind, Mr. Speaker, to meet those challenges of change, 
we have to give our youth the . . . the youth, our children of 
today, the tools to meet those changes with. 
 
No longer is grade 12 enough. At one time grade 12 opened the 
door to many positive opportunities, but today it doesn’t. Today 
our youth need education beyond grade 12. They need the 
opportunity of university or post-secondary training of some 
type that will provide them the opportunity to meet those 
challenges and to continue to grow our economy and to be an 
active part of our economy to ensure that we have a strong 
economy to enjoy in the future. 
 
Well over 50,000 Saskatchewan students will participate in 
classes and training programs this year through the province’s 
universities, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology), regional colleges, private vocational schools, 
as well as on-the-job training programs; and the work of 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission will continue to be the key instruments in meeting 
our training needs. 
 
Of particular significance is the growing number of First 
Nations and Métis students who participate in the provincial 
education and training opportunities. Saskatchewan is a national 
leader in providing training geared to Aboriginal students, often 
delivered through Aboriginal and First Nation . . . and northern 
and First Nations training institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would also like to commend our 
Minister of Labour for her announcement that the minimum 
wage will rise to $6.35 an hour on May 1 and $6.65 an hour on 
November 1. I want to compliment the Minister of Labour on 
that announcement. I think it was wonderful. 
 
And if you look at the combining the minimum wage increases 
with the government’s continuing program of tax reduction, we 
see the opportunity to benefit the less fortunate in our society, 
the people on a lower income that will . . . that work in our 
society. And some 50,000 people are coming off of tax rolls, 
and these two measures clearly benefit those in our society who 
are less fortunate. So I want to commend the minister one more 
time on that, because I think that is a very progressive and 
positive step forward. 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s action plan for Saskatchewan 
recognizes that good health and good housing are fundamentals 
to the quality of life. Our government is both determined that 
the opportunities to participate in the economy will be extended 
to all citizens. 
 
And on that point, Mr. Speaker, I think that we recognize that 
affordable housing is something that is needed by all citizens in 
our province and in our country. Affordable housing is essential 
for all people in our society — the young people, young 
families, and seniors. And I believe all three levels of 
government — federal, provincial, and local — have to be 
aware that we have a growing senior population, a population 
that needs to have access to affordable housing to meet their 
needs. 
 
There’s a group in my constituency that is working to just such 
an end on such a project. The group is called the ASH 
committee. The ASH stands for affordable senior housing. 
Bernice Fjoser, who is chairperson of that group, tells me that 
they have already received over a hundred applications and 
more are coming in almost every day. 
 
And we are experiencing, Mr. Speaker, a population that is 
growing older and in many cases we’re finding individuals who 
have lived their life in their own home, but simply looking after 
and maintaining that home is getting to be a bit of a burden to 
them and they are looking at other opportunities. 
 
And I believe that we as a society, Mr. Speaker, have an 
obligation to those seniors who have built this province and 
have built this country. We have an obligation to them to ensure 
that they have adequate, safe, proper housing for their golden 
years. And in some cases, living — in some cases alone — in a 
house that’s getting to be just too much of a burden for some 
people to look after. 
 
So I think that there’s a need, Mr. Speaker, for us as a society to 
look at innovative ways that we can ensure, not only adequate 
housing for young people, not only adequate housing for young 
families, but we also have to be aware of the senior population 
and provide them with an adequate, safe housing in their golden 
years. After all, Mr. Speaker, it was those folks who really built 
this country, built this province; they did so through their 
commitment and dedication and in many cases, sacrifice. 
 
So I think we as a society have an obligation to ensure that 
when seniors reach their golden years and find living in their 
own homes and some cases, perhaps, by themselves, their 
partner has passed on, that looking after that home is too much 
of a burden and we have to ensure that there is some 
mechanism so that they can be . . . they can have access to 
affordable housing that meets their needs in a safe and friendly 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s highest priority in this action 
plan for Saskatchewan is the provision and renewal of a 
sustainable, publicly administrated health care system. 
 
Last December the government released the action plan for 
Saskatchewan health care, a long-term plan to improve and 
secure health care for all of Saskatchewan people. And I think 
this is very important, Mr. Speaker, because if you look at the 

options — and the options are fairly limited — we can either 
have a publicly funded, publicly administrated health care 
system in this province or we can have the alternative. The 
alternative quite frankly is private medicine. 
 
And over the last few weeks, I have intentionally talked to a 
number of constituents with one particular reason, and that is to 
contact them and ask them what issues that they thought should 
be brought before this legislature in this sitting. And I’m 
surprised, Mr. Speaker, that nearly 85 per cent of the people I 
talked to, the first issue that was most important to them was 
having the discussion on the preservation of medicare. That’s 
something that Saskatchewan people hold near and dear to their 
hearts. And it’s something that Saskatchewan people believe in. 
 
And I’m proud to say that our government is moving in that 
direction, Mr. Speaker, in that we have looked at the various 
possibilities of providing a most efficient health care system. 
And with that, the government will be introducing legislation to 
establish 12 new regional health authorities and Canada’s first 
health quality council — an independent advisory board that 
will be encouraged to look for excellence throughout the health 
care system and report publicly on the health care quality 
issues. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the Minister of 
Health and the Premier for taking that initiative because that is 
very progressive and forward-looking. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the government is no doubt committed to a 
publicly funded, publicly administrated health care system. And 
we know full well, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party opposite 
would rather Americanize our system. If they were to 
Americanize our health care system, we know from examples of 
what has gone on down there what the results would be. The 
results would be quite simple, Mr. Speaker. We would have 
health care for the rich and nothing for the rest of us. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, upon the request of the constituents of 
Regina Northeast, I will not be voting for the amendment but I 
will be voting for the Throne Speech. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — It’s always a pleasure for me to rise with the 
opportunity to talk about my constituency of Arm River. Since 
my election in ’99, I’ve travelled extensively throughout Arm 
River to touch base with my many constituents. Mr. Speaker, 
without exception, these farmers and business people, 
employees, and families are the most hardworking and honest 
Saskatchewan residents I know. They tell me how proud they 
are to live in this great province, despite this government. 
 
Over and over I hear about the value of close communities, of 
caring people, of courtesy and friendship to all. Family values 
are treasured here in rural Saskatchewan, as well as deeply 
traditional work ethnic and a healthy respect of authority. 
 
They believe that the provincial government should be truly 
responsible for the hard-earned tax dollars; to put them to the 
best use to benefit their families and their neighbours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve once again received a Throne Speech that 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

promised better times ahead for my constituents. This is the 
third Throne Speech I’ve heard and it seems to promise this 
each and every time but I’ve never . . . I don’t think it’s 
delivered on any of them. Less work, less workers, less jobs, 
less people. A long-range farm plan they’ve tried to bring out, 
Mr. Speaker, every time in the Throne Speech. I’ve heard that 
three times now and still have not put it together. 
 
The year 2001 with few exceptions was a very difficult year, 
Mr. Speaker, at least for the biggest industry in my constituency 
and around the province, and that of course being agriculture. 
Drought conditions persisted throughout the 2001 growing 
season, adding more problems to an industry already in trouble 
when the year began. 
 
Across the province grain farmers and cattle producers alike felt 
the heavy impact of hot, dry conditions. Crop yields were well 
below average, while water for cattle and green pastures were in 
short supply. 
 
Businesses that support agriculture meanwhile were struggling 
to remain afloat. As a farmer and a rancher myself, I can realize 
just how difficult the 2001 year was for the industry basically 
with no help from this government or no long-range plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a responsible member of this Assembly, I 
firmly believe, then as now, that the present government must 
come to the assistance of farmers and their related businesses. 
Indeed as part of the official opposition, we’ve demanded that 
the Premier take action during this critical time. Farmers and 
ranchers need action from this government to address water and 
rainfall shortages . . . keep them viable, but little has been done 
to help this vital and the most important industry of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Repeatedly we hear that this government is concerned, and yet 
repeatedly they pass the buck to Ottawa saying it’s all up to 
them to help the farmers. No new initiatives, even modest ones, 
are being attempted by this provincial government. Or I . . . the 
only new initiative maybe they brought out to talk about is crop 
insurance, where they cut out the spot . . . spot loss hail and plus 
a 7 per cent increase to premiums. 
 
Even when the federal government offered matching funds for 
more water resources through the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) early in August, they said no. 
This government only had to put up $5 million then but they 
dragged their heels and waited until December to sign when 
basically then the offer is down to $3 million. And producers 
needed to know in October and September when they could 
have dug them dugouts and them wells, instead of November 
and December, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We get . . . first we get the Premier and his agriculture first 
saying one thing, and then saying the reverse. First we had a 
drought to be concerned with. Then the Agriculture minister 
had discussions with his federal counterpart; tell Saskatchewan 
farmers that there really was no problem in 2001. However, 
when asked to account for the loss of 15,000 jobs in our 
province, the government immediately blames these jobs on 
agriculture. 
 
Do you think that if it was an important industry that lost these 

5,000 jobs . . . 15,000 jobs, they would be doing some 
initiatives to keep that in the Throne Speech instead of barely, 
hardly even mentioning agriculture in there. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, it was revealed earlier this year that 
Saskatchewan has suffered a net loss as I said of 15,000 jobs 
over the last two years and yet this government . . . the jobs 
were lost basically in the farm sector or from the many spinoff 
service industries in the agriculture industry. Yet this 
government that touts itself as a listening government, one that 
cares about jobs, and the people, and the families, but do they 
give any support in the Throne Speech to agriculture? See, no, 
they just cut the spud loss sale that we know of and raised the 7 
per cent premiums so that farmers are facing additional costs 
this spring. 
 
You know when it comes to agriculture, I don’t believe for a 
minute this government listens to anybody but their own 
advisors — advisors who are no more in touch with the real 
issues out there in rural Saskatchewan than the cabinet ministers 
who employ them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have a government who cannot get 
drought recognition correct. Finally admitting that they can’t, 
that they are, as well, not qualified to grow potatoes. They can’t 
get drought recognition right; they can’t grow potatoes. This is 
a positive proof that the government should not engage in the 
private enterprise out there dealing with the Crowns. 
 
Another issue that just came up was I had a letter from a 
constituent on SaskTel. They’re starting a business out there 
and he wanted SaskTel to put in five lines. And the price was 
$4,200 per line, totalling $20,000, which was pretty steep for a 
business; so he thought he would contact me and in return we 
contacted the office and they did do some adjustment. 
 
The argument was, if he hadn’t come to us he would be paying 
close to $20,000 for them lines. Now I can see the first line 
costing $4,200 but the other four lines that were going in could 
have been ploughed in at the same time which SaskTel finally 
acknowledged, yes they can do that. You know if that hadn’t 
been brought here the government . . . or that person would 
have paid $20,000. 
 
You wonder why with things like that happening out there in 
rural Saskatchewan, people are increasingly having trouble with 
the Crowns and then wanting competition when instances like 
that come up. 
 
Another one was a meeting in Morse I was at about two weeks 
ago. A gentleman was talking about there was a small wind 
farm up there, a private enterprise for SaskPower. They 
generate some power and they would like to sell some to 
SaskPower. SaskPower absolutely refuses to buy from them 
without any good reason of it, you know. With reasons like that 
it’s a wonder why there’s people are getting dissatisfied with 
the Crowns more and more in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all this clearly reminds all of us our responsibility 
as MLAs in the House to represent our constituencies as fairly 
as possible. The Premier needs to lead this government on a 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

 

path back to this most democratic and fundamental process. 
They must respect the resources made available to them while 
making sure that the people of Saskatchewan benefit directly 
from the government’s actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t stress enough during this present economic 
downturn that Saskatchewan’s viability is at stake. We need to 
take bold new initiatives to attract business and investment into 
Saskatchewan without interference from the government, with 
tax incentives and less red tape. We also need to ensure that the 
Saskatchewan business sector is served in the best way 
possible. 
 
This means that a provincial economy must try to keep up with 
the latest in high technology communications. But first we need 
to catch up with other provinces, especially in the area of 
cellular phone service. Presently many areas in my constituency 
lack reliable cell phone coverage — coverage that the other 
areas of our province, notably the urban areas, have had for 
many years now. We must get service. These people need the 
safety, security, and the business communications that they 
deserve. 
 
Another one is high-speed Internet . . . (inaudible) . . . out. In 
Australia, they’re willing to do that; the Crown is willing to go 
there and do that in six months. Here it’s going to take probably 
six years before they’re done. Why won’t they invest here more 
in Saskatchewan and the jobs that spin off from it. 
 
Rural businesses must not face an unfair burden when starting 
up their new ventures here in Saskatchewan. In addition to high 
taxation, new enterprises such as intensive livestock operations 
face enormous environmental licensing hurdles. And while all 
agree that protecting our environment is very important, I don’t 
think we’ve seen a level playing field between 
government-endorsed livestock operations and the 
private-sector livestock operations. 
 
To even this situation, we need to look at a one-window 
licensing approach to better facilitate new livestock enterprises 
quickly and efficiently. We need to take down these kinds of 
barriers to new businesses in Saskatchewan. We do not need a 
government which continues to form new Crown corporations 
each time a new idea for growing our province comes around. 
There simply needs to be a plan to grow our province; and 
today, this government so far has no plan or no vision. 
 
As a recent census shows us, people are continuing to leave our 
province in large numbers for opportunity elsewhere. This 
means that families continue to bid farewell to their sons and 
daughters that leave Saskatchewan for a chance of viable 
employment and a brighter future. 
 
It doesn’t need to be this way, Mr. Speaker. Families should 
have the opportunity to have their children living, working, and 
succeeding in their home province — not eight-hour drive away 
in another province. We need to bring people back home, attract 
new businesses and investment into Saskatchewan. And most 
would agree that Saskatchewan has potential here. 
 
It just has . . . Under this present government it just hasn’t 
grown at all. And this present government has had 10 to 12 
years to do that. This isn’t like a government on their first term. 

This is a government that has 12 years of steadily lost jobs, has 
not grown this province right from the time they first got in. 
And if they’re kept here any longer, there won’t be anybody left 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the ways we could begin is by allowing our fellow 
citizens of Canada the option to invest in land in our province. 
This would go a long way towards bringing back the equality of 
our agriculture land base, which has been so severely eroded by 
the continuing farm income crisis and drought conditions. 
Indeed, capital investment from across Canada should be 
encouraged as a way to bring more new industry and businesses 
into Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve had several of my constituents talk with me about their new 
business ideas. In most cases the stumbling block was always 
start-up capital. Simply put, lending institutions across 
Saskatchewan are hesitant to risk capital in an economic 
environment which has seen soaring levels of out-migration and 
small-business closures. Coupled with this government’s policy 
of high taxes and Crown competition, we basically have a 
situation which frustrates individual business people. 
 
The results basically, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, are all too 
obvious: government revenues are down, especially corporate 
tax revenues, and we could be in a serious budget deficit 
situation this year. In short, Mr. Speaker, people and businesses 
are leaving Saskatchewan, and this government is also in full 
retreat behind them. 
 
Of course these economic conditions only show the failing 
policies of this government in the key areas of health and 
education. We continue to lose doctors, nurses, and specialists 
to other provinces and the US. They are seeking better wages 
and working conditions. Those health care professionals who 
remain are faced with the worsening spectre of record high 
surgical waiting lists and even longer hours on shift. 
 
To all those people, from the health care providers to the 
patients they serve, there are increasing levels of stress to which 
this government seems to have no solution. All we have seen in 
the way of action by government officials is to once again 
reorganize health care administration to bigger and, 
unfortunately, probably even more inefficient administrative 
system. 
 
This new system has removed the elected board members, with 
fully appointed officers responsible only to the government that 
hired them, but not to the Saskatchewan electorate. This is no 
solution to the ongoing crisis in our health care system or the 
ongoing crisis out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We must approach these problems with an action plan to renew 
our health care system, restore confidence, and treat people on 
all sides with the understanding and compassion they deserve. 
If Saskatchewan is to remain Canada’s model of health care 
delivery, then we need to work harder at its renewal in today’s 
world. 
 
If we are to see a bright future from the people of Saskatchewan 
we need to ensure that we lay the groundwork to build new 
professionals to serve our province. Today we see our college 
graduates lured by out-of-province financial incentives, which 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

in most cases are too tempting to ignore. To most students 
today, tuition fees, book costs, and living expenses are pushing 
up student loan requirements so students must consider every 
choice available to them. 
 
In every case, but most importantly, in our health care 
graduates, we must find more practical ways to encourage 
Saskatchewan educated graduates to stay and serve 
Saskatchewan, the province they proudly call home for all of 
their lives. If there is a way to keep our graduates at home then 
Saskatchewan’s future is assured. Seeing Saskatchewan’s new 
professionals depart for greener pastures is something our 
province can no longer ignore. 
 
Educational equality in our K to 12 system, both in the cities 
and rural areas, must be put under the microscope to ensure that 
rural students have access to all the educational resources 
afforded to larger centres. Distance education, by means of 
Internet communication, are closing the gap between what can 
be offered to rural students economically so more work must be 
done to ensure that this progress grows with the demands 
placed upon it. 
 
As we have seen this past winter, high levels of property theft 
continue to be a problem in Saskatchewan, in particular the rash 
of car thefts here in Regina an ongoing issue and must be dealt 
with more firmly than we have seen to date. It is bad enough 
that this government cannot keep its election promise to provide 
200 more police officers to protect Saskatchewan residents. 
Perhaps they believe that social workers can do the job of police 
officers, but the reality is that tougher solution is needed if we 
are to deal with the youth here in Regina. 
 
Basically I think last year there was 3,800 vehicles stolen in 
Regina; and to deter these crimes we must find a way to make 
these youths realize that there are consequences to their actions, 
that they must . . . and basically they need to . . . I think they 
need more than just a social worker’s phone call at 10 o’clock 
at night to see if they’re home. 
 
And of course, this government has already dismissed the 
successful Ontario model of boot camps, or as they’re fondly 
known, but . . . disciplinary detention centres as they’re more 
called, where the focus is on work, and discipline, and respect, 
and honour. If we don’t somehow teach our kids to respect 
others, we cannot expect them to become model citizens 
contributing to the health of our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also I want to take a closer look . . . this 
government should take a closer look at the problem deficit this 
province will face and the impact it will have on 2002. When 
we take a close look at what the Premier plans to do to address 
this problem, we once again see more show than substance. 
 
The only . . . it looks like they may be cutting ministers which is 
the slate he’s got there. It would be a hard job cause I think they 
are all equally weak so I’m not sure which one I would pick. 
But if it’s clear that if the Premier had not chosen to hire over 
500 more civil servants in 2001, then they would not be in as 
much trouble as they find themselves in in 2002. 
 
What is also clear is that this government’s action in the current 
fiscal mess are purely reactionary knee-jerk responses geared to 

deflecting blame away from themselves and their own 
mismanagement of public resources. You know they blame the 
federal government for not sending enough money. Well they 
have utterly failed at growing the provincial economy which 
results in less dependence on cash from the federal coffers. 
 
D-Day. The blame they cast away from themselves goes even 
further, Mr. Speaker. They blame the corporations for the 50 
per cent drop in corporate revenue. They blame the farm 
economy, then the drought, and finally they blame the farmers 
themselves for falling on hard times. And, of course, as usual, 
they blame us, the official opposition. They also blame the 
press. Who will they blame next, Mr. Speaker? We have seen 
that they will go further, we have seen that they will go further 
to deflect responsibility for their own mismanagement. 
 
Borders do not contain the blame, Mr. Speaker. This 
government blames the policies, our neighbours to the south. 
Then they blame also the tragic events of September 11 for their 
own economic failures back here in Saskatchewan. It is time 
this government began taking responsibility for the situation 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to know if this government really cares 
about our province’s future especially regarding rural 
communities across Saskatchewan. We need to listen to our 
residents when they tell us that things need to change quickly, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re telling us how they want things changed, 
the meetings that we held across this province. These forums 
worked very well, Mr. Speaker. There was a very great amount, 
a very important input and ideas that resulted from these 
meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to conclude my address here today by 
mentioning some of the suggestions that I have gathered from 
my constituents as I have travelled extensively around my 
constituency of Arm River this past winter. Most recently at the 
recent Grow Saskatchewan economic development meeting that 
I hosted for elected officials on March 18 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It now being past the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House will stand recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


