















































Hansard: December 10, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2887 
 December 10, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Kyoto Protocol 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before the recess I was talking about a number of the very 
progressive things that we’ve been engaged in in this province 
as a government and as a people, and I think it speaks well to 
the recognition of the realities that global warming is a fact that 
we must deal with. 
 
I think that from what I was hearing earlier in the presentation 
of some of the members opposite, there still seems to be in their 
mind some doubt about the reality of global warming, and I 
know that there are scientists around the world that can be 
dredged up that would hold that position as well. 
 
But I think overall we’ve seen that there have been some 
significant changes that really do give clear evidence and I think 
we see enough . . . around the world we see enough scientists 
who are world’s leading climate experts who have given this 
. . . just to quote from a paper: 
 

It became harder and harder to scrounge up respectable 
scientists to argue the “It’s just a coincidence” case, 
especially after the UN brought together 2,500 (2,500) of 
the world’s leading climate experts who concluded the 
global warming problem was largely man-made and 
required urgent worldwide action. 

 
So, yes, there are scientists who would say, you know, it’s just a 
coincidence; really it’s just a small thing in geological time. But 
the overwhelming evidence says that global warming is a reality 
that we must deal with. We recognize that. I think Alberta and 
the US (United States), who the members opposite like to 
quote, recognize that as well because of the actions that they’re 
taking. 
 
So we continue to try and develop based on the realities of this 
world. We have a plan that we’re engaging in and, Mr. Speaker, 
I think I hear the members opposite say they have a plan over 
and over again, but I’m afraid that when I try and get any . . . 
hear any substance or see if there is any substance in that plan, 
it comes out hot air. And about the only thing that they’re going 
to grow in this province, Mr. Speaker, is maybe a balloon and 
one of these days it’s going to burst in their face because you 
have to have substance and you have to plan around the reality. 
It can’t just be cheap sloganeering which we’re hearing from 
the members opposite as they try and posture as the government 
in waiting. 
 
What we really need is real work based on real evidence that’s 
building towards a successful future, and that’s what this 
government has been doing. And we can see that evidence in an 
economy that is growing and is leading throughout this last 
decade for much of the decade. So enough of the nonsense from 
the other side. Let’s get down to the real world where we have 
to do something. 
 

The federal government had the power to make the decision that 
they made this afternoon and what we need to do is make sure, 
along with the other provinces and with the territories, that we 
get the best deal that can possibly be got so that it will be fair to 
all the people of this country, to every region of this country. 
That’s what our motion is about. It’s about getting the best deal 
possible. 
 
And these 12 principles that are laid out here have the potential 
to do that. To put it in negative terms, as the members opposite 
have done in their amendment, I think is just destructive. That’s 
not where we need to go. We need to defeat that amendment, 
and then they need to get on board and pass this motion that we 
have put before the legislature, and then together we need to 
work in this province to make sure that we get tremendous 
benefit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I think there are some 
other things that we have to look at. We have to get beyond the 
parochial view that so often is held by members opposite. We 
have to look at a world where we are a small part of the 
population, where our footprint may not be that big. But we are 
also industrial leaders in this world. We have one of the highest 
standards of living in this world, and we have some 
responsibility, given the level of knowledge that we have in this 
world, and so we must act. 
 
And the Kyoto accord, at its best, calls upon the industrialized 
countries that have that knowledge and have that ability to act 
to lead the way to develop the technologies so that those 
countries which are in a position as developing countries will 
have the advantage of the work that we’ve done. 
 
So we can do this not just for ourselves, but to make a better 
world, to provide a pathway for others to follow. And that’s 
what this is about. It’s about doing the right thing for ourselves 
in this province, for our nation, and for this world. And we’ve 
got the ability to do that. I talked earlier about the progressive 
nature of some of our developments in agriculture, about zero 
tillage and the industry . . . the implement industry that is built 
up around that, that we export worldwide on that front. We 
export the knowledge as well as the technology. And Mr. 
Speaker, this is making a difference in the world. It’s making a 
difference in this province and throughout the world. 
 
We will be leaders in the development of biofuels, and when we 
are into biofuels as fully as we can be, both ethanol and some of 
the bio-diesels, Mr. Speaker, we will see a level of . . . the level 
and the nature of cropping in this province change as well. 
 
We will see hybrid poplars which are also good for carbon 
sequestration. We’ll see a change of cropping so that we’re 
growing crops like . . . probably hemp will be one of the crops 
that is grown widely because it has both oils and the kind of 
cellulose base that you need to produce really good ethanol. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are developing the technologies. We are 
developing the cropping methods. And we are moving into a 
future that will help the farmers of this province, that will help 
industry in this province, and that will provide a pathway for 



2888 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

people across the nation and throughout the world. And it’s far 
from the negative doom and gloom atmosphere that those 
members across the other side put out continually. 
 
So let’s pass this, these 12 principles here, and then let’s get on 
working with the other provinces to make sure that this is the 
best deal that it can possibly be for all the people of this 
province. We’ve had enough of the empty rhetoric from the 
other side. Let’s get down to doing some good work. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak in favour of 
the amendment. There’s a great deal of concern with the 
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol in its present form for 
our country, our province, and the constituency of Kindersley. 
 
As this is my maiden speech, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that I be 
allowed to speak in the last few minutes of my speech just 
about my constituency, and I’ll try to keep that brief. Thank 
you. 
 
The problems of the Kyoto Protocol are many and varied in 
complexity, and I’d like to speak to seven areas of concern. The 
first is the economic damage that signing on to Kyoto will have 
for our province. The second is the limited effect the Protocol 
will have from Canada’s participation on global greenhouse gas 
emissions. The third point is the validity of the science 
surrounding the measurement and, more importantly, 
projections of climate change relative to greenhouse gas 
emissions caused by human beings. 
 
The fourth point is the environmental concerns of a local nature 
which will not be addressed because of resources being 
allocated to deal with greenhouse gases. The fifth point — we 
will discuss the flawed logic of the projected increase of 
human-caused greenhouse gases relative to Third World 
countries industrializing over the next 100 years, relative to the 
growth rate of the advancement of technologies over the past 20 
years. 
 
The sixth point will deal with the moral implications concerning 
the movement of Canadian monies via the international trading 
emissions. 
 
And the last point is the fact that regardless of all these 
problems, if the Protocol ratification is rammed down our 
throats without provincial consent, it will not be binding 
relative to the lack of participation by the international 
community via the target set within the Kyoto accord for the 
Protocol to meet. 
 
On the first point the economic damage signing on to Kyoto 
will have for our province, earlier this morning the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote alluded to — or rather the 
member from Athabasca said 6,000 permanent jobs would be 
lost by 2010. This is something that we can’t afford. Local 
experts in the petroleum industry from the Kindersley riding 

have told me that it will affect the riding to the amount of 15 
per cent of the gross revenue for the constituency as a whole. 
 
As many members on this side of the House and opposite know, 
the Kindersley constituency has been plagued by drought now, 
in some areas for three years ongoing. The oil patch is very, 
very important to our overall economy. It’s also important to 
farm families that get second incomes in the patch, often during 
the winter. The implementation of the Kyoto Protocol could 
have serious damage to the local Kindersley economy, taking 
millions of dollars out of it, and we just can’t afford this right 
now. 
 
Further, we’re in a situation right now economically across the 
province where we’ve deficit budgeted, possibly two years in a 
row here. The local constituents of Kindersley whom I 
represent . . . I can’t in good conscience say to them that I 
would be in favour of implementation of the Kyoto Protocol if 
it’s going to take all this money out of the riding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol could 
have the effect of draining jobs and draining money from our 
province which I could really see just adding to our province’s 
debt load. Our province doesn’t need more debt. We’ve been in 
a deficit budget for some time. The people of Kindersley are 
tired of crisis management to the economy of this province by 
the members opposite for the past number of years. 
 
We don’t want to see our oil and gas industry suffer 
significantly and then in a year’s time, the Finance minister 
getting a look at the books and seeing that there’s no money 
left, seeing that panic is on the rise and looking for solutions, 
and the only thing he can come up with is picking up the phone 
and saying, operator, what’s the number for 911? That’s not 
going to fix our economy. Being in touch with the international 
community with regards to why the United States has not 
signed on . . . it will affect our productivity. It will hurt us. 
 
The second point is the limited effect the Protocol would have 
from Canada’s participation, on global greenhouse gas 
emissions. I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to meet with 
some experts at the University of Saskatchewan who brought up 
clearly that Canada’s overall emissions globally for greenhouse 
gas amount to around 2 per cent. Two per cent globally is a 
very insignificant amount and the reductions of that 2 per cent 
to 1990 levels will be miniscule. Virtually nothing will be done 
by our signing on to this to help greenhouse gas emissions be 
reduced on the global scale. It’s just . . . the fact of the matter is 
it’s the attempt of the Prime Minister —a lame-duck prime 
minister — to have a legacy on the way out, and it won’t do 
anything to help our environment. 
 
The third point focuses around the validity of the sciences, and 
this the scientific community is split on. Geologists do know 
that there has been a fluctuation up and down in how much 
greenhouse gases have been in the atmosphere over the 
centuries . . . or over the millenniums rather. It’s been 
postulated that volcanic eruption alone can emit more CO2 into 
the atmosphere than the entirety of what human beings have 
done since the industrial revolution. 
 
This fact was also put forth by the experts that they are not 
exactly sure about this, but again the importance of having this 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2889 

 

put through to make a statement that Canada is on board and 
takes this claim seriously. 
 
We’d all like to see a good and clean environment for our 
country and for our province, but it has to be in balance. I’ve 
heard people opposite on the other side of the House say exactly 
that today. It cannot be in balance if it is going to penalize us 
economically. And again, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Taxpayers 
Association has stated that $2,700 per family would be lost due 
to the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol in Canada — more 
for Alberta and Saskatchewan. There is no way in Kindersley, 
in the riding of Kindersley, after three years of drought, that we 
can afford — any of our families — a reduction of $2,700 a 
year from our families’ incomes. 
 
It’s just not feasible right now, and that’s the reason that, 
regardless of the principles which we all seem to be in favour 
of, we should be sending a clear statement that we reject the 
implementation of the Kyoto accord in its present form. 
 
The fourth point that I would like to raise deals with the 
allocations of resources with regards to greenhouse gas 
emissions. There’s going to be hundreds of millions of dollars 
set aside to implement the Kyoto Protocol at the federal level. 
We don’t know how that’s going to affect us provincially, but 
the fact of the matter is we do have environmental concerns in 
the province which are of an important nature. In the North, we 
have dirty sites from old uranium mines. We also have 
problems with diminished habitat for our wildlife. And as we 
have many rural constituencies on this side of the House, and 
many farmers, this is something that we don’t want to see left 
unattended to. 
 
I think that we have a responsibility to be sharing this province 
with the creatures that were here before we were. And the 
giving only money or allocating resources to greenhouse gas 
emissions and taking away from things that we can see that are 
more tangible and actually dealing with environmental concerns 
is a mistake. There is another reason that we should be sending 
a strong message not to ratify the Protocol. 
 
There is a . . . The fifth point speaks of a logic used by the 
negotiators in why they want to implement the Kyoto accord as 
a whole. And it’s flawed, I believe, in the fact that it wants to 
address greenhouse gas emissions but the models that they’ve 
been looking at have to do with how industrialized countries 
have increased their greenhouse gas emissions up to this point, 
and they’ve used historical models. As most of us know from 
our history lessons, the Industrial Revolution only really started 
150 years ago. There was a lot of pollution when it started with 
coal. It’s moved on to oil. 
 
There are cleaner energy forms coming on every 50 to 100 
years. And we now have options of natural gas, nuclear energy. 
And these are important things, Mr. Speaker, that I think we’ll 
see adopted globally at a faster rate than were ever implemented 
in what are now the G-8 countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fact, I think in a global environment, is sort of 
proven out by something called Moore’s Law which has to do 
more specifically with technology but it has to do with . . . 
Moore’s Law has to do with computer chips which basically 
states that computer chips will double in capacity and half in 

cost every 18 months. And this has proven to be more than true. 
 
More or less, Mr. Speaker, if we take this law and we look at 
how technology is applied across the board in all industries and 
we look at how advancements are going to be made in 
industrializing countries — which are currently Third World 
countries — it’s a fallacy to believe that they’re going to 
progress on the exact same rate as say Great Britain or the 
United States did when they were early participants in the 
Industrial Revolution. 
 
I think if we look at a country like Korea, which has seen a 
great leap forward, post the Korean War, it hasn’t taken them as 
long to come up to standards which maybe are not ideal, but 
they’re definitely not comparable to what existed in, say, 1890 
in London. 
 
And the fact is as India and China become more and more 
industrial . . . they have a lot of problems now. I believe that 
over time the global environment — and this is the economic 
environment — will force them to be competitive, will force 
them to have cleaner use of energy, which will force them to 
use cleaner forms of energy. And that being said, I think the 
premise of the Kyoto Protocol estimating that the greenhouse 
gas emissions from developing economies is going to be the 
same as it was historically for the now-developed economies is 
wrong. 
 
The sixth point that I had wished to make discussed the moral 
implications concerning the movements of Canadian monies 
vis-à-vis international emissions trading. This morning the 
member from Prince Albert Northcote alluded to emission 
purchases happening from Russia. And this bothers me quite a 
bit because I don’t think that the political structures are 
necessarily in place in some of these countries where we would 
possibly be buying emissions or our industries would be buying 
emissions. I would feel it is not responsible for us to be saying 
anything but that we reject the Protocol which would see 
monies going from Canada into Russia, possibly funding wars 
in Chechnya. I don’t think that this is the right avenue and this 
is just one of the possibilities which does exist. 
 
The fact of how wealth should be traded around the world I 
think has been proven and it’s been proven very well over the 
past 50 years with two competing ideologies of how economies 
work: a centrally run economy which has failed — it’s failed in 
numerous countries; the members across, on the other side of 
the Assembly, haven’t quite caught on fully to this — and the 
other one that has been successful has been the free enterprise 
system. And what has happened in the countries that have 
adopted that is that they don’t keep it only in their country. 
They go out and they look for new markets and they look for 
new resources and they look for new production. And there is a 
clear correlation between this and the movement of democracy 
as a whole. And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is a good and 
responsible thing. 
 
Trying to pass monies on to irresponsible countries for goals 
that are set on emission standards on a kind of ad hoc basis I 
don’t think is the right thing for the Saskatchewan taxpayers or 
for Canada. And I do think that there are moral implications 
that we should be aware of and that we should be conscious of 
wanting to speak out against this. 



2890 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

The last point had to do with the fact that for the Protocol to 
meet its own internal standards, there was a certain number of 
countries had to sign on that had a certain number that, as a 
group, had a number of emissions as a total. And the lack of 
participation in the United States and the lack of participation of 
China have failed to make this a reality. 
 
So when the original accord was set out with the Protocol to 
meet these certain documents and yet we’re going to go forward 
with it even though the goal as a whole is not going to be met, I 
don’t think that that’s . . . the statement from the experts is, 
well, the UN (United Nations) will just amend it down. 
 
So it again brings into question, Mr. Speaker, the real impact 
that the Kyoto Protocol is going to have on this, on the 
reduction globally of greenhouse gases. Are we just being set 
up to be an example for a legacy of a lame-duck prime 
minister? I think that’s a pretty poor reason for going forward, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like now, if I may, to speak very briefly about 
the Kindersley constituency. It’s with honour that I’m here 
today representing these good folk. My family has lived there 
since the foundation of our province. We have deep roots there. 
We really appreciate the communities, all of them in the north 
and the south. We appreciate their good works, the church 
communities, the local civic groups, and I look forward to 
representing them to the best of my ability in the future. 
 
And incidentally, as it was Kyoto today that we were speaking 
of, it was a large campaign issue and I’ve been asked personally 
to speak against it and I hope that I’ve done my duty to that 
effect tonight. And I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to speak today on this very important topic. And 
before I start I want to welcome and acknowledge the new 
member from Kindersley. He displaces me as the newest 
member and now I guess I’d move up to the junior ranks or 
whatever. But I do want to welcome him and congratulate him 
on his first speech, his maiden speech. 
 
Now I guess the customary greeting is we wish you a great 
time, a wonderful time — your time is rewarding — but not a 
long time. The next few months we hope is, is one of your best. 
So thank you very much. 
 
And I also want to thank the Minister of Industry and Resources 
and the Minister of Environment for their leadership and 
stewardship on this challenging, challenging issue before us. I 
think and I believe that this is an important opportunity here to 
show real leadership on this global issue. 
 
I support fully the main motion, but certainly not the 
amendment, because I think it’s truly ill thought out and frankly 
out of touch, particularly with all the good economic news our 
province is having. Our future is wide open, not closed down if 
you were to listen to the naysayers across the way. I think 
there’s a lot of opportunity here, a real win-win situation. 
 
I believe the motion here today has vision, is pragmatic, and has 

clear vision, and it demonstrates clear, pragmatic principles. 
This is an important, timely debate. The Kyoto Protocol has 
been passed today in the House of Commons and we must get 
on with some very serious negotiations. And this calls for 
strong, balanced leadership for this national strategy. 
 
But before I get too far into this, I want to talk about a story. At 
the Premier’s dinner in Saskatoon we had the good fortune of 
sitting with four engineers. And someone at our table thought 
we’d take advantage of the opportunity to ask these engineers 
what they thought of the Kyoto Protocol, and this is what they 
said. They replied, what do you think of public education? And 
we thought, what do we think of public education? What’s that 
got to do with Kyoto? 
 
And it became clear after a while they were talking about the 
shift in thinking that had to take place in the early 1800s when 
we were faced with the challenges of the Industrial Revolution 
and child labour. We had to think in a different way. Those 
were challenging times, I’m sure, just like they are now. But we 
had to think in a different way and we had to take some risks. 
We had to have some solid plans. 
 
Now I want to . . . This spurred me on to do a little research, but 
there’s some parallels here between that time and the 
challenging times we face now with the environment. It was not 
until 1833 that factory laws were passed protecting children. 
This legislation required compulsory schooling — the 
beginning of public education as we know it today. It also 
included the cleanliness of the workplace. Fourteen years later, 
the Ten-Hour Act was passed, limiting the number of hours 
worked by 13- to 18-year-olds to 10 hours a day. And it was not 
until 1867 that these laws were extended to cover small factories 
and workshops. 
 
Now I found very interesting a passage in the Hansard from 
London . . . London, England, dated April 4, 1879. And you could 
almost transfer what was . . . this discussion, especially from the 
other side, when they talk about scientists and the environment. 
But in that time, they were talking about work, and is work hard 
or is it light— what’s work like for children and whether or not 
we should actually be serious about that issue. And here today 
we’re talking about environment and whether or not we should 
be serious about that. And here’s the quote from Hansard, April 
4, 1879: 
 

The other is the old, often repeated and often refuted 
argument that work is light. Light. Why no doubt much of 
it is light if measured by the endurance of three or four 
minutes. But what say you, my Lords, to a continuing of 
toil in a standing posture and a poisonous atmosphere for 
13 hours with 15 minutes of rest? What say you then of 
children, children of the tenderest years, why they become 
stunted, crippled, deformed, useless. I speak what I know. I 
state what I’ve seen. 
 
When I visited Bradford in Yorkshire in 1838, being 
desirous to see the condition of the children for I knew that 
they were employed at very early ages in the worst 
business, I asked for a collection of cripples and 
deformities. And in a short time, 80 were gathered in the 
large courtyard. And when I visited Bradford under the 
limitation of hours that was passed, the Ten-Hour Act that 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2891 

 

was passed some years afterwards, I called for a similar 
extradition of cripples. But — God be praised! — there was 
not one to be found in that vast city, yet the work of these 
poor sufferers had been light if measured by minutes, but 
terrific if measured by hours. 

 
Now I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, if we’ll have the same 
privilege to see, because we passed . . . the Kyoto Protocol was 
passed in the House of Commons today, in 10 years the 
difference in the environment. And I hope that we can see that, 
but this is the kind of action that takes many years to see the 
outcomes. And I think they were visionary in that time, and 
we’re visionary now. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just reiterate that these were 
engineers that were talking. These were people who value 
innovation, who see opportunities. And this is a real win-win 
situation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the plan is real, achievable, 
balanced, not slogans pinched together. 
 
I want to speak tonight on three different parts, three different 
principles. I recognize that all 12 principles are important 
because they speak to different sectors in our communities. And 
added together, the wonderful thing is that the sum of the 12 
parts are greater . . . the whole is greater than the sum of the 12 
parts. 
 
The first principle I think is very, very important. All Canadians 
must have an opportunity for full and informed input into the 
development of the plan, and today is the start of that. This 
debate is very, very critical, and this is where we get to pull out 
some of those ideas, and this is an important start. 
 
Another example is the Saskatchewan Stakeholder Advisory 
Committee. Now, Mr. Speaker, this was not just started this 
year or last year; this was started in 1998 and was set up to 
permit government and stakeholders to exchange information 
on views on climate change issues. Stakeholders on the 
committee represent a variety of agricultural, environmental, 
industry, and community groups. The committee assists 
government officials to determine which climate change 
initiatives should be taken within Saskatchewan. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Now the other one that I think is very, very important is no. 8. 
The plan must support innovation and new technology and I 
want to continue with the lists of illustrations of the innovation 
that’s happened within this, within this province. The first — I 
think was very insightful — was the establishment of the office 
of energy conservation in September 2002. As well, 
Saskatchewan has been working with EnCata Corporation and 
various other interested parties to initiate the Weyburn carbon 
dioxide monitoring project. And Saskatchewan’s contributing 
$2.3 million to this project. 
 
Saskatchewan’s participating in a multi-client project with the 
Alberta Research Council to study the feasibility of injecting 
carbon dioxide into the deep underground coal seams to 
permanently dispose of carbon dioxide and produce natural gas. 
As well, Saskatchewan’s providing $1.8 million out of 
Innovation and Science Fund to assist in the establishment of 
the International Test Centre for Carbon Dioxide Capture at the 

University of Regina. 
 
SaskPower is conducting a series of studies on the feasibility of 
various distributed generation projects reusing, or using 
renewable energy sources such as solar power, wood waste, 
livestock waste, and municipal wastes. As well, Saskatchewan 
Energy, or SaskEnergy, has spent several million dollars over 
the past several years to save energy and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions in a cost-effective manner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw attention as well to 
SaskPower Climate Change Action Plan Progress Report 2001. 
And I think this is very insightful, very good reading here about 
some of the innovation that’s happening here in this province, 
for example, transmission line projects that they’ve taken — the 
Condie and Queen Elizabeth transmission line linking the 
Condie switching station near Regina to the Queen Elizabeth 
power station in Saskatchewan. Completed in ’97, this line was 
designed to improve transmission reliability and efficiency 
between these power stations. As a result, SaskPower saved an 
estimated 120 million kilowatts of electricity in 2001 and the 
CO2 reduction was over 100,000 tonnes in 2001. Another 
example of innovation. 
 
The other principle I want to speak on is the plan must include 
incentives for all citizens, communities, businesses, and 
jurisdictions to make the shift to an economy based on 
renewable and other clean energy, lower emissions, and 
sustainable practices across the sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look to the federal government for real 
leadership here. This is a critical piece. Right across the country 
but most importantly here, the federal government must come 
to the table prepared to support Canadians, Canadian industry, 
to develop a truly sustainable economy. The province is doing 
as much as we can but this is an important piece. 
 
Now I want to end with the idea about the slogans that we’ve 
heard across the floor here, and in the news and the media. And 
some of these I think are pretty important because they get out 
some bad ideas about why we shouldn’t develop a plan that will 
meet the needs of Canadians and people in Saskatchewan here 
as we go along with the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
And the first one is, and we’ve heard this many times today, 
that the science is uncertain. And we know for sure that this is a 
poor slogan. This misleads the people of Saskatchewan and 
damages the intent of the Kyoto Protocol. And you can find 
examples of where people say the science is uncertain, and the 
one that we think of most often is the tobacco companies that 
still find scientists to say that smoking doesn’t cause cancer. 
And we know that that’s true. And so the list goes on with those 
examples where you can find scientists that say things like that. 
 
The other one that I think is important to dispel is the slogan 
that doing nothing costs nothing. And we know that especially, 
and we hear people talk about the drought in Western Canada 
and particularly the area around Kindersley and that area — 
three years of drought. We can’t afford to do nothing. It’s 
important that we take this initiative and develop a solid plan. 
 
And the other issue, the other slogan is, well we only produce 3 
per cent of the global emissions; why should we do anything? 



2892 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

And I think the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Carrot River 
Valley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, my daughter, Carla, who is seated in your gallery. 
Carla is doing her first year of early childhood education here in 
Regina and finding it both challenging and rewarding. This 
evening Carla is accompanied by the grandson of the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena, and that is Tyrell Draude. And 
Tyrell, can I get you to wave to everyone? 
 
I would ask all members to welcome Tyrell and Carla to the 
Assembly this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Coronation 
Park on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asking for leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank all hon. 
colleagues in the Assembly. Tonight it’s my great pleasure to 
introduce someone that most of us don’t need to be introduced 
to, but Bob Lyons, a former MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Regina Rosemont. Bob and I shared an office in 
my first term in this building and I’ve developed a bit of a 
hearing problem and part of it is from Bob Lyons who I swear 
didn’t need a telephone. If he was going to call someone in 
Estevan, he could just open the window and holler and it would 
have the same effect. 
 
Anyway Bob and his wife, Elaine Nystrom, are in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. And I ask all members to welcome them to the 
Assembly tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join my colleague in welcoming Bob and Elaine to the 
legislature. For those people who don’t know, Bob has become 
. . . along with his wife Elaine, has become a very successful 
entrepreneur in our province. They’ve just opened up a new 
restaurant in Saskatoon, the Spadina Free House, selling Roca 
Jack’s coffee, and it is a booming success. So I want to 
welcome Bob and Elaine to the legislature and congratulate 
them on their new business in our fair city of Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
introduce guests, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . 

The Speaker: — Proceed. 
 
Ms. Draude: — . . . join with my colleague from Carrot River 
and to welcome the two people in your gallery to the Assembly 
— my friend, Carla, and my grandson, Tyrell. I have two 
grandsons and this is not the little one that I share with the 
MLA from Melfort-Tisdale. Tyrell lives with me and his 
mother at my place and I’m really glad to see you here tonight, 
Tyrell. 

 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 
Kyoto Protocol 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Forbes: — I’ll conclude by just talking about a couple of 
more slogans that I have a problem with. The one, as I was 
saying about, why act when we only produce 3 per cent of 
global emissions? Well we know in our country we have only 
point five per cent of the world population. And I think it is our 
global responsibility to show leadership on this issue and this is 
what this plan talks about, very much. 
 
As well we talked about the Americans not doing very much. 
Well we know 42 states are acting very . . . have a lot of 
initiatives in this area. California . . . Texas is planning to install 
more than 2,000 megawatts of wind capacity energy there. So 
that, that slogan is full of hot air. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the worst slogan of all is that 
Saskatchewan, no matter how good the plan is, our economy 
will be devastated. And that’s the Saskatchewan Party line. It’s 
doom and gloom. No matter what, we will drag our heels on 
this. And I think this is shameful, and I think that it’s our 
responsibility, moral responsibility, our economic responsibility 
as we go into the 21st century, to show leadership on this issue. 
And I think this motion demonstrates this clearly while the 
amendment acts against it. So I will be standing in favour of the 
motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to rise in the Assembly and speak on behalf of 
the people of the constituency of Estevan who I’m honoured to 
represent. 
 
Before I go on, Mr. Speaker, I would like to, on behalf of my 
constituents, congratulate the member for Kindersley on his 
recent election. And I’m sure he, like the rest of us, will find 
this position very challenging but also very rewarding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure all members of this Assembly are 
aware, the constituency I represent has a very diverse economy, 
with coal-fired power plants, coal mines, oil, natural gas, and of 
course agriculture. 
 
Because of this diverse economy, the people of the Estevan 
constituency feel that this area would be one of the hardest hit 
areas with the ratification of the Kyoto accord. I have talked to 
numerous people, and they, like my colleagues on this side of 
the House, realize that despite the fact that measures have to be 
taken to protect our environment, this accord as it is today fails 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2893 

 

miserably. 
 
And according to recent polls, the more people come to 
understand Kyoto, the more opposition there is to it in its 
present form. Some people, Mr. Speaker, have the 
misconception that if Kyoto is ratified, the smog over large 
cities will magically disappear and all our common pollution 
problems will be a thing of the past. And even the famous 
illusionist, David Copperfield, could not accomplish this. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. Kyoto does not deal 
with pollution. It deals with greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Canada contributes 2 per cent of the world’s greenhouse gas 
emissions. Countries like Russia, China, India, and the United 
States are responsible for approximately 65 per cent of these 
emissions. Many of these countries are not signing on. And if 
they are, they have no targets, as in the case of Russia and 
Mexico. Unlike Canada, the United States realizes the 
devastating effect Kyoto will have on their economy. Here in 
Saskatchewan, SaskPower has predicted astronomical increases 
for energy costs. This burden would of course be passed on to 
the shoulders of the taxpayers. IPSCO has said that they would 
have to relocate in another jurisdiction. The chamber of 
commerce has voiced concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has been very sketchy 
with the details. How will Kyoto affect jobs, taxes, and the 
economy? Why is the government rushing to ratify Kyoto 
without informing and consulting citizens? Has the government 
made an effort to create a made-in-Canada plan to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions while protecting our economic 
prosperity? 
 
The plan is full of words such as consider, work toward, and 
work with. Everything will be painless, as in the plan will not 
affect personal disposable income, cost jobs, or worsen 
industries’ competitive position. The plan will be prudent, 
responsible, and flexible. The government will minimize the 
cost of meeting Canada’s climate change objectives. 
 
And just tonight on the news, Mr. Speaker, it was stated that the 
cost of Kyoto so far is $1.6 billion. And I think we are all quite 
nervous here when we hear the federal government speak 
regarding monetary aspects. This is the same federal 
government that predicted the gun control Bill, Bill C-68, 
would cost $2 million. Now we learn that 1 billion has been 
spent. To say that they are grossly over budget is the biggest 
understatement of the year. This is what happens when you 
cram legislation down the throats of people who are opposed to 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are all aware and want a cleaner environment, 
but I fail to see how an agreement where credits can be bought 
and sold will work. We need a made-in-Canada agreement. We 
know these journeys start with a small step. Under Kyoto in its 
present form, those steps are leading down the wrong road. 
Scientists don’t agree. They can’t assure us that there is a trend 
to global warming. Now they say it could be cyclical. Henry 
Hengeveld, chief science adviser for climate change for 
Environment Canada, appeared before the Senate committee on 
agriculture just this last week and said this, and I quote: 
 

Over the last 2,000 years, we have seen the global cooling 

of approximately 1 degree in terms of the slow, downward 
trend. It has not been quite in the last 2,000 years. The peak 
of the current interglacial was 5 or 6,000 years ago. It was 
about 1 degree warmer than today. 

 
(19:45) 
 
Saskatchewan generates significant amounts of carbon dioxide 
as a result of the use of coal-fired power generation as does 
mining, forestry, oil, and gas. Agriculture would be severely 
affected because of the high consumption of energy products 
whose prices would rise under Kyoto — diesel fuel, natural gas 
for grain drying, and fertilizer. 
 
The provincial Department of Industry and Resources estimates 
Kyoto would cost as much as $2.6 billion in economic output 
by the year 2020. SaskPower estimates Kyoto could cost the 
provincial power utility as much as $250 million per year. Just 
imagine your electricity bill. 
 
IPSCO, one of our largest industrial companies, has said that 
ratification could force the company to move to the United 
States. Saskatchewan’s most important trading partner, the 
United States, is not ratifying and therefore will not incur the 
same new costs as Saskatchewan companies. 
 
The Canadian Taxpayers Federation estimates ratification will 
cost every family in Canada $2,700 per year, and more if you 
live in Saskatchewan. The Canadian exporters and 
manufacturers association estimate Kyoto could kill 450,000 
jobs in Canada. The chamber of commerce, the Canadian 
Chamber of Commerce, estimates Kyoto could cost $30 billion 
in economic output annually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time when we have run out of money to fund 
health care, to support well drilling and dugout digging, at a 
time when we don’t have the money to support our water 
infrastructure programs in communities so that they can have 
clean, safe water, why in the world would we sign up only to 
slow down our economy and send money to Russia for credits? 
 
And think about it. How long will it take for the non-Kyoto 
countries like the United States, China, and India to fully offset 
our small contribution? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is general agreement among all countries 
and in Canada by all provinces that the goal of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions is desirable, but as Ralph Klein, 
Premier of Alberta, said on September 3, and I quote: 
 

It’s like signing a mortgage for property you have never 
seen and for a price that you have never discussed. At the 
very least, the federal government must first evaluate cost, 
create a realistic implementation plan, and then consult 
with the provinces, including a meeting of the first 
ministers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what we need is a made-in-Saskatchewan, 
made-in-Canada approach that balances the need to protect our 
environment and address climate change with the equally 
critical need to get Saskatchewan’s economy growing again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I find it very unfortunate that our provincial 



2894 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

government doesn’t show leadership and they prove this by 
catering to the extreme left of their caucus. They support Kyoto 
to appease their New Democratic agenda despite the fact that 
Kyoto is mostly cosmetic . . . is more cosmetic than a 
meaningful strategy that would be vital to the environment of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion. I will, 
however, support the amendment put forth by the hon. member 
from Thunder Creek. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
member from Saskatoon for yielding. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
your gallery are four . . . five very special people in my life, my 
wife Marlene, who’s been here many times before, and with her 
is our daughter Charmane, and three of our grandchildren, Mr. 
Speaker. Our oldest granddaughter Shelby is with . . . 
accompanying Marlene and Charmane, our grandson, Owen, 
and Charmane’s daughter, Tenaisha who is celebrating a very 
special day, Mr. Speaker. She’s celebrating her sixth birthday. 
 
Grandma took the grandchildren out for a movie and supper, 
and then they came to see Grandpa work, as they refer to the 
legislature, in Grandpa’s big office. So I’d ask all members to 
welcome them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Motion Under Rule 46 
 

Kyoto Protocol 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and a 
warm welcome to our guests in the gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter into this important 
debate this evening on the Kyoto Protocol. And I want to . . . I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, at the outset, that I am pleased that 
the Kyoto Protocol has been ratified by the Government of 
Canada because I’m a supporter of the Kyoto Protocol, and I 
make no bones about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’m also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that our government is 
taking a clear stand on the principles that are required for proper 
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol to ensure that its 
implementation is going to be fair to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s what the motion that we’re debating 
this evening is in large part about. 

But we’re also having a historic debate on the wisdom of 
ratifying Kyoto with the Saskatchewan Party opposition taking 
a strong stand in opposition to the Kyoto Protocol. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that stand by the Saskatchewan Party and by 
their partners in Ottawa, the Canadian Alliance, will go down, 
Mr. Speaker, as a shameful stand — a shameful stand, Mr. 
Speaker — in light of the evidence that currently exists on the 
reality of global warming and the obvious need for the planet to 
act to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
And clearly what the Saskatchewan Party is saying tonight, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they are ignoring the reality of global warming. 
They’re like ostriches putting their heads in the sand, Mr. 
Speaker. And they are saying, Mr. Speaker, they are saying that 
the economy, the economy must come first under all 
circumstances regardless of what’s happening to the 
environment of our planet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Party is ignoring 
the evidence that’s been put forward by thousands of reputable 
climatologists around the world, Mr. Speaker —. not the 
climatologists that are working for the oil industry or the coal 
industry. I’m sure that the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, can 
find a few scientists who are prepared to question whether 
global warming is occurring. But, Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. 
The international scientific community is virtually unanimous 
around the world about the evidence of global warming. And 
the Saskatchewan Party is choosing to ignore that evidence, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that is very telling. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak for a moment about the 
Protocol itself so that there’s clarity about the Protocol and 
about Canada’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions, 
because as the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld said, Canada 
contributes between 2 to 3 per cent of the world’s greenhouse 
gas emissions. And I heard the Saskatchewan Party member for 
Humboldt say, Mr. Speaker, that Canada’s contribution to 
global warming was very insignificant and that therefore it 
didn’t matter what Canada did. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, it matters a great deal what Canada 
and Saskatchewan do. First of all, Mr. Speaker, Canada is the 
ninth largest contributor to greenhouse gas emissions in the 
entire world. So what we do is very important, Mr. Speaker. 
What our nation decides to do is very important. 
 
Secondly, we have an international reputation of setting an 
example for the right course of action to take, Mr. Speaker, in 
the world; and I believe that Canada is taking the right course of 
action. And I believe that Saskatchewan should set an example 
in North America of what can be done in a cost-effective way to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and create new job 
opportunities for people in this province at the same time, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s one of the goals that I hold out as we 
examine this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also want to update the residents of this 
province on where we stand now in terms of countries that are 
signed up for ratification because the Saskatchewan Party likes 
to make it sound like no one else is joining in, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I’m pleased to inform members of the Assembly that as of 
the middle of November — November 13, to be exact — 97 
countries had ratified or acceded to the Kyoto Protocol, Mr. 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2895 

 

Speaker. And in terms of the developed nations that have 
signed, Mr. Speaker, they now account for 37.4 per cent of 
greenhouse gas emissions in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Protocol will effectively kick in and become a legal 
. . . a legally binding treaty when countries that represent 55 per 
cent of the world’s greenhouse emissions sign, Mr. Speaker. So 
at this point, Mr. Speaker, we need another 18 per cent for 
Kyoto to be legally binding. Canada’s 2 per cent will be an 
important contribution to this process, Mr. Speaker. Russia’s 17 
per cent — if Russia ratifies, which I believe it will — will take 
us over the top in terms of what’s needed by the worldwide 
community in terms of nations who represent at least 55 per 
cent of global greenhouse emissions making a commitment to 
the Protocol, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pleased to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we are making progress in terms of nations 
signing up — significant progress. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the next point that I want to address is the 
environmental implications of not signing the Kyoto Protocol 
and the economic implications of not signing the Kyoto 
Protocol, as the members from the Saskatchewan Party are 
suggesting that we ought not to be supporting the Protocol. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin in this regard to say that in 
my mind Kyoto is just a beginning in terms of what we need to 
do on a global basis to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, there should be no substantial 
debate about whether we at least want to get started. Surely we 
ought to all agree that we at least want to get started, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll explain why in a moment. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, that what we’re going to find within 
the next decade is that we don’t need to talk about just reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 25 per cent in a Canadian context 
— which is 6 per cent below 1990 levels — 25 per cent 
reduction by the year 2012. But I think by the time we reach 
2012 we’ll have to be looking at much deeper reductions. 
Many, many scientists around the world are saying that a 50 to 
60 per cent reduction in emissions will be required. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a few of the . . . some of 
the consequences of global warming and why I believe that it is 
imperative that we proceed with the Protocol. 
 
For Saskatchewan many of the costs, Mr. Speaker, are already 
becoming very apparent in the form of severe drought, 
declining crop production, increased forest fires, sharply 
increased forest firefighting expenditures, declining surface 
water levels, and the threat of West Nile virus. These are all 
realities, Mr. Speaker and members of the Assembly, that we 
have experienced in the last three years in Saskatchewan. And 
the Saskatchewan Party member for Rosthern says this is 
fearmongering and, Mr. Speaker, I say this is a reality that 
every Saskatchewan resident knows is happening in 
Saskatchewan right now, Mr. Speaker, right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 
implications of global warming are . . . have very serious 
implications for the future of our farm economy, our northern 
forest, our surface water bodies, and our recreational and 

tourism industry. And these industries could be significantly 
jeopardized if global warming is not checked. These 
consequences are just the beginning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also risk the escalation of tropical diseases into Western 
Canada, unbearably hot summers and the premature deaths that 
will result from those kinds of summers, Mr. Speaker. We risk a 
significant loss of aquatic species in our province and in our 
nation — serious damage to our sports fishing industry. It’s 
very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the scientific community is telling 
Saskatchewan residents and Canadians that global warming will 
result in more tornadoes and other extreme weather events and 
the melting of glaciers in the Canadian Rockies upon which 
Saskatchewan rivers ultimately rely. 
 
Our actions, Mr. Speaker, also impact on the rest of Canada and 
on every other country in the world. The cost of global warming 
will include more typhoons and hurricanes, the loss of habitat 
for thousands of species, the destruction of our coral reefs 
around the world, melting permafrost in Canada and other 
northern regions, rising sea levels, Mr. Speaker, and coastal 
flooding that threatens island states and many of the world’s 
cities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, my question to the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party is, in the face of this evidence being put 
forward by the international scientific community, how can they 
possibly put forward a resolution saying that we should go slow 
in terms of taking action on global warming and oppose Kyoto? 
And I say shame on them, Mr. Speaker, shame on them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, in my judgment the negative 
consequences of global warming are enormous and far 
outweigh costs that will be associated with mitigating it. The 
negative economic impacts of global warming are the primary 
reason the insurance industry worldwide has been solidly on the 
side of those backing Kyoto. 
 
And I say to members of the Saskatchewan Party, if you want to 
see a private business that is adamant about Kyoto, well take a 
look at the insurance industry worldwide, Mr. Speaker, who’ve 
been standing beside Greenpeace saying that Kyoto should just 
be the beginning; we need to do a lot more. That’s been the 
position of the insurance industry. And the members opposite 
are shaking their heads, Mr. Speaker. They should read The 
Globe and Mail more regularly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that while the 
economic issues are very important, I believe the essence of the 
Kyoto debate is around the ethical choices that impact 
enormously on human health and the health of the planet. At the 
heart of the matter is whether we are prepared to take truly 
substantial steps in a cost-effective and creative way to lighten 
our ecological footprint on the planet. And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that more and more Canadians are saying yes to that 
question, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2896 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

Now I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that a strategy in support of 
Kyoto can be a profitable and a cost-effective strategy and one 
that creates many new employment opportunities. I would like 
to provide members of the Assembly with four examples. The 
first two, Mr. Speaker, are outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
The first example is the city of Toronto. It has achieved 
greenhouse gas reductions in its municipal operations of 67 per 
cent. Toronto has set up a revolving fund to facilitate energy 
conservation retrofits and has achieved much of its reduction by 
capturing the methane gas from landfill operations and using it 
as a source of energy. 
 
The second example involves the case of British Petroleum, and 
members opposite should listen to this. This is a major 
transnational energy corporation, Mr. Speaker. British 
Petroleum decided a few years ago to meet the Kyoto target and 
I’m pleased to report it’s already done so. Moreover, it has 
already achieved financial savings which more than offset its 
initial investment. British Petroleum achieved the targets at a 
cost of $150 million and estimates it has achieved savings of 
over $400 million. British Petroleum has no intention of 
stopping. It’s now moving into solar energy in a big way and is 
converting more than 300 service stations around the world to 
solar power. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a third example that I want to give is an 
example that’s already underway in this province in terms of 
what we’re doing in Saskatchewan to promote energy efficiency 
in the home, because our government a year ago introduced the 
prime rate loan program that’s available over a five-year period 
to assist homeowners who want to install an energy-efficient 
furnace in their house. 
 
And interestingly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now had 5,000 people, 
more than 5,000 Saskatchewan residents have taken advantage 
of this program, Mr. Speaker. And on average they’ve each 
saved 2.2 tonnes of carbon dioxide a year in terms of reduced 
emissions from their house by doing this, Mr. Speaker — well 
beyond the target that the Government of Canada has set of a 
1-tonne reduction in emissions for each resident. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, do you know what? The 
average resident has saved $315 a year in their energy bill by 
taking this action, Mr. Speaker. And that’s just a little example 
of how practising good environmental practices is also good 
economics in the household. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s just one 
little example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second example of what we’re doing. We have 
. . . We’ve just installed 17 megawatts of wind power in this 
province in two separate wind power projects down in Gull 
Lake. And, Mr. Speaker, that is going to be the equivalent of 
eliminating the emissions . . . for providing 7,000 homes in this 
province with electricity, Mr. Speaker, 7,000 homes. That’s just 
another practical example of what can be done and 
Saskatchewan residents are excited about it. 
 
And one of the obvious things we can do in Saskatchewan in 
terms of meeting our greenhouse gas emission reduction targets 
is more wind power, Mr. Speaker, a lot more wind power in this 
province. And this government under this Premier has 
announced that it’s now seriously exploring, not just 17 

megawatts of wind power in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but 
150 more megawatts of wind power in this province are now 
under serious exploration. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I only have a short time left but I do want to 
give a couple more examples of practical energy conservation 
and what it can mean in terms of reduced greenhouse gas 
emissions. And my argument, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of the 
capital costs that are needed to meet our Kyoto targets can be 
achieved through practical energy conservation investments 
with the capital costs being paid for by the energy savings, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just as a little example of this, I want to note that our 
government has just finished retrofitting eight schools in the 
North Battleford area for the Catholic school division there. The 
capital costs were $685,000; the savings are $63,000 a year. 
The entire cost of this project including the interest, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to be paid for by the energy savings in just 11 
years. And I believe we can replicate that again and again and 
again around Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve just done it in the city of Regina with seven facilities. 
We’ve just done it in the constituency of the member for 
Rosthern with an investment in the 18 schools in the 
Saskatchewan Valley School Division, and that investment is 
going to pay for itself in energy savings in just a decade and 
will reduce energy consumption in those schools by 25 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s an example of how Kyoto can be achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is up but I just want to say that I’m proud 
of the stand that this government is taking in opposition to the 
Saskatchewan Party’s amendment that Kyoto be opposed. We 
are standing, Mr. Speaker, in support of the principles and 
objectives of the Protocol, and I know, Mr. Speaker, that we 
will also stand firm in terms of negotiating a fair position that 
protects the interests of the Saskatchewan economy and all 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a pleasure to rise in the Assembly and speak on the motion 
today. I want to inform the House that I will be supporting the 
amendment, but cannot support the original motion because it 
does not clearly oppose the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this debate is not a debate about being 
environmentally responsible. It’s not a debate about conserving 
energy. Obviously if that was the debate, we would be in favour 
of any motion. The Saskatchewan Party recognizes that we all, 
as citizens on this globe, have an environmental responsibility. 
We all recognize that we need to be prudent with the resources 
that we have been blessed with. 
 
But the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the Kyoto Protocol, the 
Kyoto accord, is a flawed agreement. It’s an impossible 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. If in fact those countries that sign on 
to the Kyoto Protocol abide by the rules in the Protocol, the 
chances of greenhouse gas emissions increasing is extremely 
large and the globe will be troubled by more greenhouse gases, 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2897 

 

not fewer greenhouse gases, because the whole concept behind 
the Kyoto Protocol is that those countries that aren’t able to 
meet their commitments will have to pay money to those 
countries that have room, that have credit, because they have 
not reached their emission levels. And so they will take that 
money and build up their industries. Countries like Russia will 
build up their industries and in fact produce more greenhouse 
gases while the countries that can’t keep the commitments are 
also above their levels of greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
It’s very clear — Kyoto cannot work. But yet members on the 
other side, including the fanatical presentation by the member 
who preceded me, are heard from that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our own Premier has been weak in dealing with 
the Kyoto Protocol. He has said . . . it is said in the 
Leader-Post: “Kyoto, Calvert says get used to it.” Another 
Leader-Post article, editorial, says the province must speak out. 
And it says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s Industry and Resources minister, Eldon 
Lautermilch, suggests that the federal government’s plan to 
ratify the Kyoto accord by December is effectively dead. 
 
Reacting to the cancellation of next week’s meeting of 
energy and environment officials at which the federal 
government was to reveal its blueprint for Kyoto, 
Lautermilch said, “The December ratification is not on. The 
timeframe is not realistic.” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the ratification occurred today in the 
Parliament of Canada. So the Minister of Industry and 
Resources was wrong. He was absolutely inaccurate in saying 
that the December ratification was not on. So we simply cannot 
trust our key point person in the government on this file. Well 
the editorial goes on to say that: 
 

This week the province released a softly worded position 
paper on Kyoto. Given Ottawa’s recent behaviour, it must 
do more. At the very least it must make it clear that Premier 
Lorne Calvert’s demand last month that Ottawa provide a 
detailed plan for Kyoto before proceeding with ratification 
is not negotiable. Better yet would be an announcement that 
the province will use all of the means at its disposal, 
including a court challenge, to fight any unilateral federal 
attempt to proceed with ratification. 

 
Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, our Premier has not taken a 
strong stand in opposition to the Kyoto Protocol. And that’s 
quite a contrast to the leaders of other provinces who have had 
opportunities to speak on this issue. Of course we all expected 
Premier Klein to take a role in opposition to Kyoto and he’s 
done that very effectively. He’s been a leader in the provinces 
in opposing Kyoto. 
 
But it was interesting to read an editorial in the National Post 
written by the premiers of British Columbia and Newfoundland, 
the far western province and the far eastern province of this 
country, speaking out against the Kyoto Protocol. Now the title 
on the editorial was “Challenging Kyoto From West to East.” 
It’s just unfortunate that that challenge wasn’t throughout the 
country and in fact also challenged here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

But that didn’t happen. The Premier of Ontario has spoken out 
against the Kyoto Protocol, and his province has taken a 
position against Kyoto because obviously the auto industry, 
which employs hundreds of thousands of people, is at risk if 
Kyoto is approved. But here in Saskatchewan, where industries 
like agriculture, our resource-based industries, are hanging in 
the balance, IPSCO is hanging in the balance, where is the 
Premier of Saskatchewan? Mute on the issue. He’s not speaking 
strongly on one side of the fence or the other. At least the 
member for Saskatoon Greystone had an opinion and spoke out 
loud — as misguided and ridiculous as it was. At least we know 
where he stands. 
 
But where’s the Premier of Saskatchewan? Well one day he 
says he’s modestly or slightly predisposed to support Kyoto. 
And the next day, he says, well slightly, maybe a little bit off in 
opposition to Kyoto. No strong position, whatsoever. That kind 
of leadership is not good for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem that the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) have, of course, is that they’re so terribly divided. In fact 
there’s more MLAs, MPs (Member of Parliament), party 
members that strongly support Kyoto than have the common 
sense to oppose the agreement. 
 
I found just an interesting debate from Hansard in the House of 
Commons, and this is a speech given by Mr. Pat Martin, NDP 
MP for Winnipeg Centre, and this is a real beauty, Mr. Speaker. 
He starts out by saying: 
 

We have not been thinking outside the box. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this boy is not thinking outside the box. I 
don’t think he’s even on the planet. This is what he said, and I 
quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I sometimes think the worst thing that happened in western 
Canada was Leduc No. 1, in 1947, when they struck oil in 
Leduc, Alberta. It was regressive. I almost wish the world 
would run out of oil more quickly so that we still have 
some air left to breathe by the time we find alternative fuel 
and energy sources. That would be my first wish. Ban the 
internal combustion engine as a radical idea. 

 
Well, believe me, Mr. Speaker, that is a radical idea. That’s a 
Member of Parliament from the party represented across the 
floor. What would thinking like this do to industry in 
Saskatchewan? What would this do to the agriculture sector? It 
would shut down every farm. They’d be back to the horse and 
buggy days, Mr. Speaker. I cannot believe that their federal 
counterparts would make such ridiculous statements as the one I 
just read. 
 
(20:15) 
 
I have other information that I don’t have time to relay to the 
House, but one of their leadership contenders, Mr. Bill Blaikie, 
is in support of the Kyoto Protocol; in fact, I think all of their 
leadership — federal leadership contenders — are in support of 
the protocol. Here I have a column by Dick Proctor, NDP MP 
here in Saskatchewan, and he’s commenting on Kyoto. He says: 
 

Mr. Chrétien wants to change the agreement unilaterally by 



2898 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

allowing Canada to claim credits for clean natural gas 
exports to the United States. That’s part of our emission 
reduction plan. 
 

Well you know, Mr. Chrétien has not carried the ball very well 
on this but at least that sounds like a little better proposal. But 
what does Mr. Proctor say? He says: 
 

Nice try, except it isn’t allowed under the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our own Saskatchewan NDP MP is supporting the 
Kyoto Protocol agreement even though it would be very 
damaging to our industries and our people of this province. 
 
We’re a cold province; we need heat. I don’t know if the 
members on the other side plan on turning their thermostats 
down below freezing. I’m not sure if they plan on . . . if the 
member from Meadow Lake plans to walk back and forth 
between Regina and Meadow Lake. I haven’t got quite figured 
out what their thinking is, but it certainly isn’t going to work. 
 
As alarming, Mr. Speaker, as the NDP position is on the Kyoto 
Protocol, I guess based on some of their history and some of 
their beliefs, we could expect this kind of a radical response. 
But you would think, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal Party would 
respond in a more responsible fashion, but we have the . . . just 
as alarming a work coming out of the provincial Leader of the 
Liberal Party here in this province, or as I like to call it, the 
Karwacki party, because many of the Liberals have already 
joined the Saskatchewan Party and there aren’t too many left. 
There are at least a couple of Karwackis left in that party. 
 
But Mr. Karwacki is quoted as saying that Kyoto should be 
signed, that the agreement should be signed. He has said that he 
wants to see the Kyoto accord in Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Now this is the guy, Mr. Speaker, that goes out and buys a 
Yukon to drive — a gas guzzler, 12 miles to the gallon, I think, 
is what it gets — and he gets a bad news story, Mr. Speaker; he 
gets a bad news story so what does he do? Well you think he’d 
go and he’d buy a Volkswagen diesel or something. But no. Mr. 
Karwacki goes back to the dealer, trades off his Yukon for 
another Yukon. The only difference is that he has to go to 
Ottawa with his Yukon to fill it up with the right kind of fuel, a 
more environmentally friendly fuel, a higher blend of ethanol. 
 
This is a guy that wants to be . . . put signs up all over 
Saskatchewan saying that, look at me, I’m a leader. And he 
can’t even get the automobile that he drives right? Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP are an embarrassment, but we kind of expect them to 
be an embarrassment to the province. But we expect better of 
the Liberals and the provincial Liberals here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard the Hon. Ralph Goodale, the Liberal 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan, speak in favour of 
Kyoto. And I’ve got to admit that I had thought a bit about the 
old national energy policy when I first heard about Kyoto, but I 
hadn’t quite decided whether the two could be compared until I 
heard Mr. Goodale. And I heard him on a news interview — 
could’ve been an open line show — say about four or five times 
in the space of about two or three minutes that the Kyoto 
Protocol is not another national energy program. You know he 

kept repeating it until I began to believe that he wasn’t telling 
me the truth and in fact it was similar to the national energy 
program — that it would be destructive to the oil and gas 
industry in Western Canada, that it would be harmful to the 
taxpayers in this province, that it would cost even more jobs 
than they’re projecting that it would cost. 
 
Let’s remember that this idea of supporting the Kyoto Protocol 
is being led by a federal party that not only introduced a 
national energy program, but also the gun registry and we know 
what a wreck it’s in right now. Now they are the ones that take 
all of this gas tax revenue out of Saskatchewan and don’t put 
anything back into our highways. 
 
They are the same folks that can’t manage the GST (goods and 
services tax) and we’ve got all this fraudulent, all these 
fraudulent issues surrounding the GST, again hundreds of 
millions, perhaps $1 billion. And they are also the folks that 
said that we would be keeping the Crow and then suddenly 
introduced the end of the Crow rate, the Crow benefit, without 
putting a proper replacement in place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to support the amendment 
because unlike the NDP motion, it clearly opposes the Kyoto 
Protocol. You know, the NDP are not being honest with the 
people of Saskatchewan when they suggest on the one hand you 
can support Kyoto if these 12 principles are adhered to because, 
quite simply, Kyoto and those 12 principles are incompatible. 
You cannot sign the Kyoto Protocol and live up to those 12 
principles. It’s simply impossible. But it hasn’t got into their 
heads yet, because like the member for Saskatoon Greystone, 
they’re just in another world. Like the MP from Winnipeg, they 
haven’t got their act together, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party amendment clearly indicates that we 
must oppose, oppose the Kyoto Protocol. It’s time that we saw 
more resolve on the other side. The Minister of Industry and 
Resources has on occasion been speaking against the Kyoto 
Protocol. He’s the point person, he’s the only person that 
apparently understands the damage that could be caused to our 
province, to our economy, if in fact this agreement is carried 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to be men and women of leadership, men 
and women that put the well-being of the province first. It’s 
time that people in leadership positions, it’s time that MLAs on 
that side of the House began to call a spade a spade. If they’re 
prepared to sacrifice, if they’re prepared to sacrifice this 
province’s national resources industries, if they’re prepared to 
sacrifice agriculture, if they’re prepared to sacrifice our 
standing of . . . our standard of living, let them say so and then 
support the Kyoto Protocol. But we cannot be of two minds. We 
cannot be saying that on one hand we can support Kyoto, and 
on the other hand that our lot in life will be better. That’s 
simply not a tangible, reasonable position to take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that we’re not getting leadership from 
the NDP, both federally and provincially. It’s clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Liberal government in Ottawa has not 
considered the province’s situation. It’s clear that they don’t 
recognize the damage that would be caused to Saskatchewan’s 
economy if the agreement is carried out. 
 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2899 

 

Now, Mr. Karwacki, the leader of the Karwacki party says, let’s 
just sign it and if there’s damage to Saskatchewan’s economy, 
we’ll ask the federal government to compensate us for it. What 
are the chances, Mr. Speaker, of the federal government in 
Ottawa — this Liberal government that won’t put any money, 
invest any money into our roads, won’t invest money into our 
health care and we’ve heard lots about that from the other side 
— what are the chances of the federal Liberal government in 
Ottawa making up the shortfall that we experience if we sign on 
to the Kyoto Protocol and our economy is hurt? Who’s going to 
make up for the jobs that are lost? Can we count on Ottawa to 
do that, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think so. I don’t think we can trust 
Mr. Karwacki on this file. 
 
We obviously can’t trust the member for Saskatoon Greystone 
on this file. The Premier’s not taken a position, he’s waffled on 
this issue terribly, and none of the NDP caucus is listening to 
the Minister of Industry and Resources when he does sound the 
alarm bells, which is not often enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has been clear. We are 
prepared to do our part to be environmentally responsible, but 
we do that, Mr. Speaker, by having a strong economy. We do 
that by having the resources, by having the financial 
wherewithal to provide cleaner . . . a cleaner environment to 
produce less greenhouse gases. Mr. Speaker, what’s going to 
happen if this Protocol is agreed to is that while we are fiscally 
handicapped the Americans are going to steal our business 
because they’re not signing on to the Protocol. They’re going to 
continue to take more of our young people, provide more jobs, 
improve their standard of living, reduce their emission of 
greenhouse gases, and we here in Saskatchewan are going to be 
the sufferers. We are going to be the third-class citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I ask the NDP to have another look 
at the motion and the amendment. Both the motion and the 
amendment adhere to those 12 principles. We agree. The 
Deputy Premier acknowledges that we agree on the 12 
principles. They’re in our amendment; they’re in the NDP 
motion. The only problem is, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP motion 
does not clearly indicate that to keep those 12 principles, to 
hold to those 12 principles, we must oppose the Kyoto accord 
and the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
That is the flaw in their thinking, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party is committed to opposing Kyoto and 
providing a cleaner environment by providing our people of 
Saskatchewan with the resources to take care of themselves. 
That’s a concept that’s alien to the NDP; they just don’t get it. 
Mr. Speaker, we hope that in the next few months, and 
hopefully it will be this spring, the people of Saskatchewan will 
get a chance to express their opinion on the Kyoto Protocol. 
 
Polling shows that three-quarters of Saskatchewan people, or 
two-thirds at least, oppose the Kyoto Protocol. In spite of that, 
this government that’s supposed to be representing the people 
of Saskatchewan have put forward a motion in support of 
Kyoto. That flies in the face of the opinion of Saskatchewan 
people. Mr. Speaker, it’s another reason why when that election 
does occur, the Saskatchewan Party will be elected and we will 
represent the best interests of Saskatchewan people. We will 
grow the province and we will provide a good environment for 

Saskatchewan people. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very pleased to be able to rise in this House. It’s a great honour 
to be able to participate in debate that in hindsight may end up 
being one of the more important debates that we have in this 
legislature in the last three years and perhaps in the years to 
come. So I’m honoured to be able to participate in that. 
 
Now at the outside I will be letting you know that I am going to 
be supporting the government’s motion and be opposing the 
opposition’s motion. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is an undeniable fact that the globe is 
warming. That is an undeniable fact. I don’t think that anybody 
in this legislature or any of the scientists around the world 
would say that it is not. 
 
Now the question is, is whether or not this warming is actually 
natural. Now it has been said that some of the ways that the 
globe has warmed up is the proximity of the earth to the sun, 
that it is natural over the years for the earth to get closer to the 
sun and therefore warm up or get further from the sun and 
therefore cool down. That’s one of the things. 
 
There’s also graphs that I’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, that show that 
the strength of the sun and how hot the sun is, is also reflected 
to whether or not the globe has warmed up over the years and 
whether it has cooled down or not. 
 
A third possibility is that the tilt of the earth has an impact on 
whether or not . . . I mean and that’s basically how our seasons 
occur in northern . . . in Canada basically — that when the earth 
is tilted away from the sun that it’s colder; when the earth is 
tilted towards the sun, then it’s warmer. 
 
Now one of the things though is that it is very clear too in the 
last 150 years, and in particular the last 50 years, that this 
natural warming cycle that we are now in has been exacerbated 
by the addition of CO2 into the atmosphere by humankind. Now 
that is an undeniable fact. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I must as an aside say last week I was able 
to judge a series of debates in Saskatoon. In Walter Murray 
Collegiate there was a debate of grade 12 students and I was 
one of the judges. And the topic that they were debating was 
should Canada support or ratify the Kyoto accord. Now it was 
an interesting debate, especially from my perspective because 
as a judge, I was actually able to give my feedback on what I 
thought of the debates. Usually when I’m sitting in the chair in 
the legislature here, I don’t get to judge the debates. Fortunately 
you’re not able to judge the debate right now, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m quite pleased about that. 
 
So it’s an undeniable fact that the globe is warming. The 
question is, what does that mean? And what are we going to do 
about it? Now some of the things that it does mean is that in 
Canada there will be an impact on agriculture and on forestry. 
 
Now as members know, I’m originally from northern 
Saskatchewan, in Loon Lake, and that’s about two hours north 



2900 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

of North Battleford. I remember growing up, travelling from 
North Battleford to Loon Lake when I was a small child, and 
there was all these signs at each community as you went further 
and further north. And it would always say, gateway to the 
northern forest. And every town that you came along there was 
no northern forest. 
 
(20:30) 
 
And what had happened was that in the settlement of 
Saskatchewan and western Canada that there’d been some 
deforestation. And that is as a result of the agriculture . . . you 
know, Saskatchewan is one of the largest topographical changes 
. . . one of the largest unnatural environments with the advent of 
farming. Where there used to be natural prairie and natural 
forest, that is generally gone. And that’s something most people 
in Saskatchewan who’ve grown up here aren’t aware of. 
 
Now we do have some options. The two extremes are, we can 
ban fossil fuels completely tomorrow; we could say there will 
be no more fossil fuels burning, and that will completely take 
care of the CO2 problem. Very quickly we’ll stabilize the 
planet. Whether or not that will do any good, that’s another 
question. But what we do know is that it will stop the economic 
engine of Canada and of the world. Once that occurs, then the 
standard of living in the population across the world will go 
down quite quickly. 
 
Now if the goal of stopping global warming is to better 
mankind and better the planet, banning fossil fuels tomorrow 
will not solve that because the economic difficulties that will 
create, the health difficulties that will create, will be worse than 
what global warming would have been. We would have been 
better off to take that money and invest it in adapting to global 
warming. 
 
The other extreme is to do absolutely nothing and to adapt to 
what global warming means. And just a short list: we could 
start developing technology to build dikes around North 
America, around some of the low lying areas. We could, in the 
next 50 years, plan to move island populations as their islands 
generally flood. We could also change our farming practices, 
making sure that we plant earlier and handle the drought season, 
and develop different agrarian practices so that we can handle 
the extremes in precipitation. 
 
Now I don’t think that’s very realistic either. I don’t think that’s 
being good stewards of this planet. So I suspect or my position 
is that we should have a balance. We should have a balance of 
either banning fossil fuels or doing nothing. And I think that our 
motion, if the federal government would follow what our plan is 
here in Saskatchewan . . . and we’ve been advocates in a whole 
lot of different areas unrelated to global warming. Medicare is 
probably the one that we’re most famous with, and our former 
premier Romanow has just delivered a package that will 
hopefully improve medicare for the next 50 years. 
 
But if the federal government had listened to Saskatchewan and 
had adapted or had followed what we had suggested, I think 
they would find a balanced, reasonable approach to the problem 
of global warming. 
 
Now so we could reduce what we need to do and adapt 

basically what needs to happen for us to follow through with 
our plan to solve global warming. Now there are different ways 
of approaching it but that’s what our proposal’s talking about, is 
dealing with that. 
 
Now one of the readings that I’ve seen is that the cost of global 
warming in a dollar and cents . . . is approximately $5 trillion. 
And that’s what the cost of global warming would be. Now we 
could take some of that money and instead of just throw it away 
on global warming, we could take that and invest it into some 
new technologies. Now there’s ways of the carrot-and-stick 
approach that you tax the worst offenders and take that money 
and roll it back into new technologies and development. But I 
think we need to start moving fairly quickly. 
 
Now I’m one of those folks that believes that the goals of Kyoto 
are appropriate, that we need to reduce global warming. I don’t 
think we need to wait for the science. I think it’s just the right 
thing to do that we don’t need to change . . . I mean I was raised 
as a Boy Scout and one of the things they say is that the way 
you find a place is the way that you should leave it. If you go 
out camping in the wilderness, you should not be able to tell 
that a person had been there. I think that’s been referred to 
earlier as the human footprint. 
 
Now the member for Greystone has outlined very clearly some 
of the catastrophic possibilities that have happened or that could 
happen with global warming. And I’d just like to say that the 
radical member for Greystone, as the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition said, is in a pretty good company. 
 
And I’d just like to quote something briefly, and this is how the 
quote goes. This is what will happen if we do not change our 
ways. 
 

The polar ice caps will melt more rapidly; sea levels will 
rise; you will have the danger of flooding in places like the 
. . . Florida Everglades . . . the sugarcane fields of 
Louisiana; island nations could literally be buried. The 
whole climate of (North America — I’m paraphrasing here) 
. . . for example, could be changed where you (could) . . . 
have more flooding, more heat waves, more storms, more 
extreme weather events generally. 
 
And then you’ll have some public health consequences. For 
example, (we’ve already seen) . . . in Africa, for example, 
malaria being found at higher and higher altitudes where it 
used to be too cool for the mosquitoes. 

 
So there will be a lot of very bad, more dramatic weather 
events. There will be a shift in the patterns of agricultural 
production. There will be flooding that will be quite bad, 
and there will be more public health crises. 
 

Well now the member for Cannington says that sounds rather 
Biblical, and I think he’ll be laughing when he hears who said 
that. It was former president, Bill Clinton. But I appreciate . . . 
now he may say that they might need a Bible, but we won’t go 
there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I won’t. Anyway, back to 
my prepared remarks. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sorry for distracting you. 
 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2901 

 

Mr. Addley: — That’s no problem, hon. member. 
 
Now CO2 is just one of the many gases that are impacted on 
global warming: methane — laughing gas, which I think we’ve 
seen lots tonight — CFCs (chlorofluorocarbon) and ozone. Now 
mankind is responsible . . . 80 per cent is from burning fuels, 
and 20 per cent is the deforestation of the world. Now 50 per 
cent of that additional CO2 has been absorbed into the oceans 
and into the regrowing of the forest, but 31 per cent has been 
into the atmosphere. 
 
Now I mentioned that we are presently in the Holocene era that 
began 10,000 years ago. Now there have been eight cycles of 
warming and cooling since that time. Now the difficulty is, are 
we in the middle of a warming trend naturally, or is this entirely 
due to global warming that has been caused by mankind? Most 
of the science that I’ve witnessed or that I’ve read indicates that 
it is part of just a natural time of the cycle, but there is an 
additional addition to that natural cycle that is clearly caused by 
mankind and that we need to adapt to that. 
 
Now regardless of whether or not mankind has caused this, we 
will have to adapt or have to deal with the cost of global 
changes and the global warming. Now we’ve all heard about the 
problems with the hole in the ozone layer. Now because of the 
banning of CFCs and all of the changes and the adaptations that 
we’ve done in the last 20 years or so, the ozone layer is 
rebuilding itself, and the hole is shrinking. So we can have a 
positive impact on the climate if we set our mind to it. 
 
Now agriculture, the cost to agriculture currently would be 11 
to 20 per cent reduction in the world’s cereal production. And I 
don’t need to tell the hon. members opposite what kind of 
impact that will have economically to our farming community, 
but as importantly and perhaps more importantly, to feeding the 
people in the world. 
 
Now my position on the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by 
the federal government and why I support our motion and do 
not support the opposition’s amendment, is that the difficulty is 
whether or not the cost to implement will be shared equally. 
 
Now we all know that Canada is . . . one of the important 
components of Canada is agriculture. Saskatchewan accounts 
for almost 50 per cent of agriculture in Canada. We have 30 . . . 
3 per cent of the population. And, unfortunately, the way the 
federal government approaches things is that it’s unfairly 
penalizing Saskatchewan because we have so much agriculture. 
 
So when we need to battle the treasuries of the US and the 
treasuries of Europe, they say Saskatchewan has to pay almost 
50 per cent of the cost. Well, that’s not fair, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s my concern is that the federal government say . . . may 
say, Saskatchewan, you will have to pay your share of the 
global warming price tag. 
 
Now the difficulty is that in Manitoba, they built dams and in 
Quebec as well, and they gain a large amount of their power 
from hydroelectricity. There is no CO2 emissions from that 
generation. In Saskatchewan a large part of our electricity is 
derived from coal burning. 
 
Now is it better to burn coal and put CFCs in the atmosphere 

than to dam a river and completely change an ecosystem? 
That’s for some other experts than me to decide that, but there 
are impacts to the environment that have gone on by having 
hydroelectric power that is different than the . . . than just 
releasing CO2 into the atmosphere . . . (inaudible interjection 
. . . Fifty minutes. Okay. 
 
Now what do we do? Well, I think we have to ask some very 
hard questions. For example — and this is from the sceptical 
environmentalists measuring the real state of the world and I 
think they come across with a fairly balanced approach — how 
much effect does CO2 have on temperature? Could there be 
other causes behind increasing temperature? Are the greenhouse 
gas scenarios reasonable? What are the consequences of a 
possible temperature increase? What are the costs of curbing 
versus not curbing CO2 emissions? And I think that’s an 
important point that members of the opposition haven’t taken to 
account. 
 
They’ve outlined some pretty scary scenarios should we 
implement Kyoto and the cost of implementing Kyoto be borne 
largely by Saskatchewan alone, but we also have to look at the 
cost of doing nothing. And I think that is what hasn’t been 
talked about here tonight by members of the opposition. And 
how should we choose what to do? 
 
I think that the opposition . . . pardon me, the federal Liberal 
government in Ottawa has chosen, rightly so, as pointed out by 
members on this side and members on the other side, that Prime 
Minister Chrétien is looking for a stamp or basically a way to 
show that he’s an environmentalist, and this was a quick and 
easy way to do. But I think what we need to do is to not use this 
as a stepping stone for political projects — either this 
government or members of the opposition or the federal Liberal 
government. I think the issue is too important to be delved into 
or to be utilized just for crass, political gain. 
 
Now there are price tags to adapt to Kyoto. Some of the 
discussions have been that it will cost approximately 2 per cent 
of output for one year. Now that’s important, and that may 
sound like a lot of money, but the way one group words it is 
that in 2051, we will be as well off as a country and as a world 
population as we would have been in 2050. So we delay our 
economic benefits for one year in a 50-year time frame. I don’t 
know about you, Mr. Speaker, but I think that’s affordable, if 
we’re actually going to change the world . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now the member for Cannington points out 
how costly it would be to have this government in for 60 more 
years, but I wonder how costly it would be for the members if 
they were in power for any of those years. 
 
Now I think the most important point from my perspective is 
not to play politics with the issue, but how can we make this 
work. How can we make this work? Now implementing Kyoto 
will help the farming community in Saskatchewan. 
Implementing Kyoto will hurt the oil patch if it’s not done 
correctly, Mr. Speaker. And I think our plan does that. I think 
we need to have a balanced approach, a rational approach. 
 
Members of the opposition said that Y2K was a fraud; it was a 
sham. Well another way to look at it is that by raising the alarm 
bells early and investing the money that needed to, there was no 
impact, thereby proving that we can have an impact on . . . 



2902 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask members to consider 
something else. Imagine, if you will, if the problem wasn’t 
global warming but global cooling. What would we do? We 
would think, now how could we increase the amount of CO2? 
We would have to try to get a global warming effect going. We 
would be trying to reduce vegetation. We would be saying . . . 
but then the members of the opposition would be saying what? 
They’re asking us to burn more fossil fuels; do you know how 
much expense that’ll be to burn fossil fuels? And so I just raised 
that just as a different perspective on how things . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s a different manner; that’s true. 
 
Now I guess to conclude, I want to say that we can handle this, 
Mr. Speaker. There is a problem. Global warming is coming 
down the pipe. But we need to have cooler heads — pardon the 
pun. We have to have cooler heads prevail, and I’m doing my 
part . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I just thought that up, Ken 
. . . pardon me — member. 
 
(20:45) 
 
But I look at the competing motions. We have . . . the 
Government of Saskatchewan is proposing a motion that 
endorses a plan to deal with global warming. It outlines the 12 
points that were unanimously supported by all provinces and all 
territories, and we can have a united front to deal with that. 
 
When you look at the amendment that the opposition has put 
out, it is talking about slogans. It’s talking about made in 
Saskatchewan, made in Canada. Well this is a 
made-in-Saskatchewan, made-in-Canada plan that our 
government is proposing, and we will deal with global warming 
in a balanced, rational, and respectful way, Mr. Speaker, as 
opposed to the radical way and divisive way that some 
members of the opposition have put forward. 
 
So to that end, Mr. Speaker, I see my time is coming to an end, 
and I would like to just go on record as saying it’s been an 
honour to participate in the debate, and I will be supporting the 
government motion and not supporting the amendment put 
forward by the opposition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 
we have been listening in the course of this debate to the 
members of the government speak, I hear the Saskatchewan 
Party saying that we are hearing from the loopy left. And while 
we have been listening to the members from the Saskatchewan 
Party enter the debate, I hear the government call out that we 
are hearing from the extremist right. So I thought all members 
would appreciate a moment to listen to the quiet voice of 
moderation and common sense. 
 
If I may say, Mr. Speaker . . . I say it modestly, Mr. Speaker, 
that I consider myself somewhat of an expert on Kyoto, as I 
believe I am the only MLA who has visited that city. So I do 
consider myself somewhat of an expert on Kyoto. In fact I even 
know how to pronounce it, and I may say to hon. members, it’s 
not kiato, it’s not coyote; it is Kyoto. And it is a beautiful city, 
and it is the cultural capital of Japan and the ancient imperial 
capital. 
 

Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ve not only visited Kyoto; I’ve also 
visited Alberta. I was present in the Alberta legislature for their 
Kyoto debate and I must say that that was very instructive and 
interesting. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, while some of the speakers today have 
portrayed this as a great battle of diametrically opposed 
principles, I think it is fair to say that all of us understand that 
there is no question as to the direction which history is moving. 
And I do not think there is anybody in this House who can 
seriously argue against the need to reduce CO2 emissions, the 
need to move into ethanol, bio-diesel, energy efficient furnaces, 
more energy efficient homes and windows, and the need for 
more fuel-efficient vehicles. 
 
Well most of our reservations though clearly revolve around the 
fact that at present we are the only country in the western 
hemisphere to ratify Kyoto and that, of course, includes our 
major trading partner and closest neighbour, the United States. 
 
And I must admit that I have some concern that we must be 
careful not to destroy our competitive position vis-à-vis United 
States and the rest of the world by virtue of ratifying Kyoto, and 
I think this resolution directly addresses that. 
 
We know that we are responsible for only 2 per cent of the 
world’s CO2 emissions. We also know that the Third World has 
been exempted from following the Kyoto Protocol. Now this 
may be fair in a sense of political correctness or of economic 
fairness. But frankly, it is nonsense in terms of the Kyoto 
Protocol itself because by all projections, China and India will 
be increasing their CO2 emissions in the next 10 years by far 
more than the amount which we will be reducing even if we 
achieve the goals. And if that is the case and that is the 
projections, then we have to wonder how the earth has been 
benefited if our reductions are in fact cancelled out and then 
some by the increases in CO2 by the Third World, no matter 
how fair that may be in the economic sense or no matter that, of 
course as we all know, we in the western world, per capita, 
account for far more emissions than persons living in the Third 
World account for. 
 
I’m also concerned that some of the other great moves that the 
North American hemisphere has taken to combat pollution — 
for instance, the cleanup of the Great Lakes, reducing sulphur 
and acid rain emissions, the move to unleaded gas. We know in 
each of these cases industry was reluctant to come on side. We 
know that there were . . . there was information public that it 
would bankrupt us. In each and every case industry did, in fact, 
conform and comply with no noticeable ill effects. However, 
we also know that those new standards were put in place 
because Canada and the United States made a joint decision. So 
once the continent had decided on a joint course of action, 
industry could and did innovate and conform. 
 
But the resolution before us this evening, Mr. Speaker, contains 
within it the guarantee that compliance with Kyoto will not be 
allowed to compromise the Saskatchewan economy. Also this 
resolution, having been ratified by every province and territory, 
keeps us onside with every other province, including Alberta. 
 
So I say to my friends in the Saskatchewan Party, how can they 
be opposed to something that Premier Klein is in fact in favour 



December 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2903 

 

of because Premier Klein has indicated his support to the 
resolution that is before us today. And Premier Klein has said 
that now the issue is not ratification because after all we have 
ratified, so passing a resolution that we not ratify is pointless 
because in fact we have ratified. The issue now, according to 
Premier Klein, is how we work through an implementation plan 
and that implementation plan must not be allowed to 
compromise the economies of our nation or individual 
provinces. That is good enough for Ralph Klein and I say it 
ought to be good enough for my friends in the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Well I don’t think we need to be more Albertan than the 
Albertans and I say that this is a resolution that every single 
premier has accepted and we should go with it. I also say that 
Kyoto, properly implemented, represents an economic 
opportunity as well as a challenge. 
 
We need to lead the world in environmental technologies into 
the new economy. The great challenge of the 21st century will 
be to de-link energy consumption and economic growth from 
environmental pollution. This is a challenge and this is an 
opportunity. And we can do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can be a leading edge, an energy efficient 
province, a leading way in the production of new energy. We 
can play a leadership role and benefit from the global shift to 
the new technologies and to new industries. We have the 
synchrotron — a tool that will allow Canada to set the standards 
of environmental remediation. Rather than catering to suitcase 
scientists, Saskatchewan could see home-grown environmental 
companies spring up around the synchrotron creating careers, 
not just jobs. 
 
Strategic investments should be made now so that synchrotron 
can achieve us . . . in achieving not just clean technology and 
clean coal technology but also in creating a new economy. Well 
by cleaning up our thermal coal plants we will not just have a 
cleaner environment, we’ll not just reduce the emissions of 
sulphur dioxide, but we will spur whole new industries. 
 
You have to question the leadership of this province when 
Louisiana Coal and not SaskPower ends up being the partner of 
Potash Corporation and Airborne Technologies to pursue clean 
coal technology. 
 
Bio-products, enzymes like those used in ethanol production 
and bio-diesel, all these can be used to increase clean energy 
production. Growth in bio-based products will stimulate 
value-added industry in Saskatchewan and spur economic 
growth. 
 
Iogen Corporation is a company that’s on the leading edge of 
ethanol from wheat straw. But why do they stay away from 
Saskatchewan? Why are we not encouraging Iogen which is 
making ethanol from wheat straw to come to this province 
when CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
is more interested in a side deal with Broe from Denver? 
 
We have the Weyburn miscible flood where the Government of 
Canada and other partners have established an internationally 
recognized test case for CO2 injection and storage. That process 
for enhanced oil recovery is delivering oil that would otherwise 

be unrecoverable. 
 
Why is CO2, I ask, being pumped from North Dakota and not 
being captured right here in Saskatchewan? We need clean coal 
technology at Shand or Boundary or Coronach that would 
create a pure CO2 stream, a pipeline backbone to transport that 
resource to our oil fields and coal/methane beds, and a 
sustainable oil and gas industry that is cleaner and reduces 
pollution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can benefit from increased research 
and economic development and the industrial research program 
area and in the new partnership fund. We need to provide 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan business with the tools 
and the incentives to take a lead in these new opportunities. 
 
We are the place where we can research and develop houses fit 
for climate extremes. We can export those building 
technologies around the world, especially in northern climates, 
because of our high efficiency and expertise in the area of gas 
furnaces, windows, and heat-recovery ventilators. There will be 
a huge industry and a huge market around the world for boilers, 
furnaces, heating and cooling systems, micro-cogeneration, 
energy management control systems, and fuel switching. We 
can be part of that; we should not reject it. 
 
We can begin by switching to the use of more ethanol. We can 
ask for ethanol-blended gasoline at the pumps. The government 
can make a start by equipping all civil service vehicles with E85 
vehicles and ethanol use. We can demand that municipalities 
start using more bio-diesel. Right now as we speak, Mr. 
Speaker, Montreal has 150 buses running on bio-diesel. There 
are only two in the entire province of Saskatchewan. Wouldn’t 
that be wonderful to think of our municipal transit system 
operating on canola? This is not pie in the sky — it’s being 
done right now in Montreal. It should be done here. Ontario has 
exempted bio-diesel from the fuel tax in that province. We 
should do the same. 
 
Another product that will be . . . that will add value for 
Saskatchewan families is — and another market for our canola 
— is bio-diesel. We should be using it; we should be using 
biofuels. And this is another way in which there are 
opportunities. It is not just a deficit for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991 the use of low tillage has increased by 350 per cent 
and summerfallow has decreased by 40 per cent in this 
province. Agriculture alone will generate carbon sink for 
Canada of 10 megatonnes through our efficient farming 
methods. There is no upper limit on Canada’s agricultural sinks. 
As marginal lands are converted to more profitable usage, 
Kyoto will bring about a domestic emissions trading system 
linked to an international carbon market. Carbon will have a 
price and that price can benefit our farmers. Farmers will be 
paid a premium to convert marginal land to perennial cover, to 
protect our water resources by enhancing wildlife habitat, and 
to be paid to integrate shelter belts into the agricultural 
landscape. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment is not in fact an amendment at all. 



2904 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 2002 

 

It simply repeats the resolution. It repeats the 12 points. We are 
moving into a brave new world. We know it is a world we must 
enter whether we want to or not. Our challenge is to make sure 
that these new measures will not impair the economy of 
Saskatchewan and the economy of Canada. It is our duty to 
make sure that Kyoto represents new challenges, not only for a 
cleaner environment and a cleaner world, but also new 
economic opportunities for us. 
 
By working with the implementation plan and by working with 
the 10 points, we can ensure that any possible negative effect is 
minimized, and we can capture the benefits for Saskatchewan, 
its people, and its economy. We should not sit this out. Premier 
Klein does not recommend we sit this out. Premier Klein has 
said, we ratify, then we go on to work with the implementation 
plan. 
 
And so I don’t think it makes any sense to say we shouldn’t 
implement what’s already been implemented; we shouldn’t 
ratify what’s already been ratified. Instead we should say we are 
going to work with our sister provinces, all of whom — 
including Alberta — have adopted a 10-point plan for 
implementation. And we will work within that implementation 
to make sure that Kyoto works for Saskatchewan and works for 
Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would just love to get into the 
debate tonight on Kyoto. And I was listening to some 
commentary by the different speakers, and I noted a comment, a 
word used for example, fanatic — which I’ll make some 
commentary about tomorrow — by the Leader of the 
Opposition. And there’s other few comments I would like to 
make, but seeing that it’s after 9, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:05. 
 


